The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round their mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy.
Me, she had dispensed from joining the group; saying, "She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner--something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were--she really must exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy, little children."
"Jane, I don't like cavillers or questioners; besides, there is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that manner.
Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undeveloped understanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting: as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winter evenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, having brought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit about it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimped her nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry, Earl of Moreland.
"Boh! Madam Mope!" cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: he found the room apparently empty.
"Where the dickens is she!" he continued. "Lizzy!
Georgy! (calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into the rain--bad animal!"
"It is well I drew the curtain," thought I; and I wished fervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reed have found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said at once--
"I want you to come here;" and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by a gesture that I was to approach and stand before him.
John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and large extremities.
He ought now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him home for a month or two, "on account of his delicate health."
Mr. Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother's heart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the more refined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application and, perhaps, to pining after home.
John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy to me.
He bullied and punished me; not two or three times in the week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve I had feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he came near.
There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he inspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offend their young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, more frequently, however, behind her back.
Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spent some three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, and while dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would presently deal it.
I wonder if he read that notion in my face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and strongly.
I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a step or two from his chair.
"That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since," said he, "and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!"
"What were you doing behind the curtain?" he asked.
"You have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg, and not to live here with gentlemen's children like us, and eat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama's expense.
I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I saw him lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, I instinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough, however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my head against the door and cutting it.
"What! what!" he cried. "Did she say that to me?
Did you hear her, Eliza and Georgiana?
Won't I tell mama? but first--" He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: he had closed with a desperate thing.
I don't very well know what I did with my hands, but he called me "Rat!
Aid was near him: Eliza and Georgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now came upon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot.
"Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there."
"Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she's like a mad cat."
"What shocking conduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress's son!
How is he my master?
"Miss Abbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly."
"Mind you don't," said Bessie; and when she had ascertained that I was really subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and Miss Abbot stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, as incredulous of my sanity.
"But it was always in her," was the reply. "I've told Missis often my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me.
She's an underhand little thing: I never saw a girl of her age with so much cover."
Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said--"You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations to Mrs. Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you would have to go to the poorhouse."
"Besides," said Miss Abbot, "God will punish her: He might strike her dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go?
Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn't have her heart for anything.
Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber he breathed his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne by the undertaker's men; and, since that day, a sense of dreary consecration had guarded it from frequent intrusion.
Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour for complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had to stem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to the dismal present.
All John Reed's violent tyrannies, all his sisters' proud indifference, all his mother's aversion, all the servants' partiality, turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.
Her beauty, her pink cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight to all who looked at her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault.
John no one thwarted, much less punished; though he twisted the necks of the pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep, stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants in the conservatory: he called his mother "old girl," too; sometimes reviled her for her dark skin, similar to his own; bluntly disregarded her wishes; not unfrequently tore and spoiled her silk attire; and he was still "her own darling."
I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I had nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosen vassalage.
I know that had I been a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child--though equally dependent and friendless--Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence more complacently; her children would have entertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less prone to make me the scapegoat of the nursery.
In such vault I had been told did Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread.
I could not remember him; but I knew that he was my own uncle--my mother's brother--that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children.
Mrs. Reed probably considered she had kept this promise; and so she had, I dare say, as well as her nature would permit her; but how could she really like an interloper not of her race, and unconnected with her, after her husband's death, by any tie?
It must have been most irksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family group.
I doubted not--never doubted--that if Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; and now, as I sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls--occasionally also turning a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaning mirror--I began to recall what I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by the violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish the perjured and avenge the oppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongs of his sister's child, might quit its abode--whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the departed--and rise before me in this chamber.
I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come." I had now got hold of Bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.
If she had been in great pain one would have excused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know her naughty tricks."
"What is all this?" demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily.
"Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre should be left in the red-room till I came to her myself."
"Let her go," was the only answer.
This violence is all most repulsive:" and so, no doubt, she felt it.
I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely looked on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity.
I heard her sweeping away; and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousness closed the scene.
It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessie stood at the bed- foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near my pillow, leaning over me.
Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to me than that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinised the face of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary, sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing: for herself and the children she employed a physician.
"Well, who am I?" he asked.
I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he took it, smiling and saying, "We shall do very well by-and-by."
Then he laid me down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very careful that I was not disturbed during the night.
Having given some further directions, and intimates that he should call again the next day, he departed; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him, all the room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadness weighed it down.
Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence might be rough. "I will try."
I heard her say--
"Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren't for my life be alone with that poor child to-night: she might die; it's such a strange thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she saw anything.
Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they were whispering together for half-an-hour before they fell asleep.
"Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished"--"A great black dog behind him"--"Three loud raps on the chamber door"--"A light in the churchyard just over his grave," &c. &c.
Yet, I thought, I ought to have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there, they were all gone out in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too, was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she moved hither and thither, putting away toys and arranging drawers, addressed to me every now and then a word of unwonted kindness.
Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up with her a tart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird of paradise, nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had been wont to stir in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; and which plate I had often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto been deemed unworthy of such a privilege.
Bessie asked if I would have a book: the word _book_ acted as a transient stimulus, and I begged her to fetch Gulliver's Travels from the library.
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and having washed her hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendid shreds of silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet for Georgiana's doll.
Meantime she sang: her song was--
But now, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its melody an indescribable sadness.
Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very low, very lingeringly; "A long time ago" came out like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn.
Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing, Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild, God, in His mercy, protection is showing, Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.
"Come, Miss Jane, don't cry," said Bessie as she finished.
She might as well have said to the fire, "don't burn!" but how could she divine the morbid suffering to which I was a prey?
"What, already up!" said he, as he entered the nursery.
"Well, nurse, how is she?"
"Then she ought to look more cheerful.
I daresay she is crying because she could not go out with Missis in the carriage," interposed Bessie.
"Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness."
I was standing before him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were small and grey; not very bright, but I dare say I should think them shrewd now: he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face.
Having considered me at leisure, he said--
"She had a fall," said Bessie, again putting in her word.
Can't she manage to walk at her age?
As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rang for the servants' dinner; he knew what it was.
"That's for you, nurse," said he; "you can go down; I'll give Miss Jane a lecture till you come back."
Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.
"Of Mr. Reed's ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid out there.
"For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters."
Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.
"Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?" asked he. "Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?"
"If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; but I can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman."
"None belonging to your father?"
I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly I might have some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knew nothing about them."
Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessie sometimes spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, wore backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise: John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but John Reed's tastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie's accounts of school-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family where she had lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, her details of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladies were, I thought, equally attractive.
"Well, well! who knows what may happen?" said Mr. Lloyd, as he got up.
"The child ought to have change of air and scene," he added, speaking to himself; "nerves not in a good state."
"I should like to speak to her before I go."
On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from Miss Abbot's communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman; that my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, who considered the match beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was so irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; that after my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent: that my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month of each other.
Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, "Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied, too, Abbot."
"Yes," responded Abbot; "if she were a nice, pretty child, one might compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such a little toad as that."
"Little darling!--with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweet colour as she has; just as if she were painted!--Bessie, I could fancy a Welsh rabbit for supper."
Mrs. Reed surveyed me at times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my illness, she had drawn a more marked line of separation than ever between me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all my time in the nursery, while my cousins were constantly in the drawing-room.
Not a hint, however, did she drop about sending me to school: still I felt an instinctive certainty that she would not long endure me under the same roof with her; for her glance, now more than ever, when turned on me, expressed an insuperable and rooted aversion.
Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders, spoke to me as little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his cheek whenever he saw me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantly turned against him, roused by the same sentiment of deep ire and desperate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought it better to desist, and ran from me tittering execrations, and vowing I had burst his nose.
I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that either that or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination to follow up my advantage to purpose; but he was already with his mama.
I heard him in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how "that nasty Jane Eyre" had flown at him like a mad cat: he was stopped rather harshly--
"Don't talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go near her; she is not worthy of notice; I do not choose that either you or your sisters should associate with her."
Mrs. Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strange and audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge of my crib, dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, or utter one syllable during the remainder of the day.
"What would Uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive?" was my scarcely voluntary demand.
"What?" said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually cold composed grey eye became troubled with a look like fear; she took her hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if she really did not know whether I were child or fiend.
Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly, she boxed both my ears, and then left me without a word.
Bessie supplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour's length, in which she proved beyond a doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under a roof.
I half believed her; for I felt indeed only bad feelings surging in my breast.
To speak truth, I had not the least wish to go into company, for in company I was very rarely noticed; and if Bessie had but been kind and companionable, I should have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings quietly with her, instead of passing them under the formidable eye of Mrs. Reed, in a room full of ladies and gentlemen.
But Bessie, as soon as she had dressed her young ladies, used to take herself off to the lively regions of the kitchen and housekeeper's room, generally bearing the candle along with her.
Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of the company, and listened for the sound of Bessie's step on the stairs: sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper--a bun or a cheese-cake--then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, and when I had finished, she would tuck the clothes round me, and twice she kissed me, and said, "Good night, Miss Jane."
When thus gentle, Bessie seemed to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world; and I wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant and amiable, and never push me about, or scold, or task me unreasonably, as she was too often wont to do.
Bessie Lee must, I think, have been a girl of good natural capacity, for she was smart in all she did, and had a remarkable knack of narrative; so, at least, I judge from the impression made on me by her nursery tales.
She was pretty too, if my recollections of her face and person are correct.
I remember her as a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, very nice features, and good, clear complexion; but she had a capricious and hasty temper, and indifferent ideas of principle or justice: still, such as she was, I preferred her to any one else at Gateshead Hall.
It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o'clock in the morning: Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet been summoned to their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond: and not less so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the money she thus obtained.
As to her money, she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a rag or an old curl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discovered by the housemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valued treasure, consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious rate of interest--fifty or sixty per cent.; which interest she exacted every quarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.
Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass, and interweaving her curls with artificial flowers and faded feathers, of which she had found a store in a drawer in the attic.
I was making my bed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get it arranged before she returned (for Bessie now frequently employed me as a sort of under- nurserymaid, to tidy the room, dust the chairs, &c.).
Having spread the quilt and folded my night-dress, I went to the window-seat to put in order some picture-books and doll's house furniture scattered there; an abrupt command from Georgiana to let her playthings alone (for the tiny chairs and mirrors, the fairy plates and cups, were her property) stopped my proceedings; and then, for lack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowers with which the window was fretted, and thus clearing a space in the glass through which I might look out on the grounds, where all was still and petrified under the influence of a hard frost.
I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in too great a hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to the washstand, inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my head with a bristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurrying me to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I was wanted in the breakfast-room.
"What should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment?--a man or a woman?"
Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made a signal to me to approach; I did so, and she introduced me to the stony stranger with the words: "This is the little girl respecting whom I applied to you."
_He_, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood, and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bass voice, "Her size is small: what is her age?"
"So much?" was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny for some minutes.
Presently he addressed me--"Your name, little girl?"
In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman; but then I was very little; his features were large, and they and all the lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.
"Sorry indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk;" and bending from the perpendicular, he installed his person in the arm-chair opposite Mrs. Reed's.
"Come here," he said.
I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.
What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine! what a great nose! and what a mouth! and what large prominent teeth!
"No sight so sad as that of a naughty child," he began, "especially a naughty little girl.
Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishing myself far enough away.
I have a little boy, younger than you, who knows six Psalms by heart: and when you ask him which he would rather have, a gingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says: 'Oh! the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;' says he, 'I wish to be a little angel here below;' he then gets two nuts in recompense for his infant piety."
I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which that operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when Mrs. Reed interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on the conversation herself.
"Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which I wrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quite the character and disposition I could wish: should you admit her into Lowood school, I should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested to keep a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worst fault, a tendency to deceit.
Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for it was her nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence; however carefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove to please her, my efforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.
Now, uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart; I dimly perceived that she was already obliterating hope from the new phase of existence which she destined me to enter; I felt, though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she was sowing aversion and unkindness along my future path; I saw myself transformed under Mr. Brocklehurst's eye into an artful, noxious child, and what could I do to remedy the injury?
"Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child," said Mr. Brocklehurst; "it is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reed. I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers."
"I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her prospects," continued my benefactress; "to be made useful, to be kept humble: as for the vacations, she will, with your permission, spend them always at Lowood."
My second daughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visit the school, and on her return she exclaimed: 'Oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood look, with their hair combed behind their ears, and their long pinafores, and those little holland pockets outside their frocks--they are almost like poor people's children! and,' said she, 'they looked at my dress and mama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before.'"
"Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child being received as a pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in conformity to her position and prospects?"
"Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege of her election."
"I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst; for, I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that was becoming too irksome."
I shall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, so that there will be no difficulty about receiving her.
Little girl, here is a book entitled the 'Child's Guide,' read it with prayer, especially that part containing 'An account of the awfully sudden death of Martha G---, a naughty child addicted to falsehood and deceit.'"
With these words Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewn in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, he departed.
Mrs. Reed and I were left alone: some minutes passed in silence; she was sewing, I was watching her.
Mrs. Reed might be at that time some six or seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, not obese: she had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being much developed and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large and prominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her light eyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was dark and opaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution was sound as a bell--illness never came near her; she was an exact, clever manager; her household and tenantry were thoroughly under her control; her children only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn; she dressed well, and had a presence and port calculated to set off handsome attire.
Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, I examined her figure; I perused her features.
Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers at the same time suspended their nimble movements.
"Go out of the room; return to the nursery," was her mandate.
My look or something else must have struck her as offensive, for she spoke with extreme though suppressed irritation.
I got up, I went to the door; I came back again; I walked to the window, across the room, then close up to her.
"I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you; but I declare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may give to your girl, Georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not I."
Mrs. Reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine.
"What more have you to say?" she asked, rather in the tone in which a person might address an opponent of adult age than such as is ordinarily used to a child.
Have mercy, Aunt Reed!' And that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me--knocked me down for nothing.
People think you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. _You_ are deceitful!"
Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs. Reed looked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was lifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face as if she would cry.
"I will indeed send her to school soon," murmured Mrs. Reed _sotto voce_; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.
Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon; but I knew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was the way to make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-exciting every turbulent impulse of my nature.
It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her light step came tripping down the path.
"You naughty little thing!" she said. "Why don't you come when you are called?"
Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had been brooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhat cross.
The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed, I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid's transitory anger; and I _was_ disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart.
I just put my two arms round her and said, "Come, Bessie! don't scold."
The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated to indulge in: somehow it pleased her.
"You are a strange child, Miss Jane," she said, as she looked down at me; "a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going to school, I suppose?"
My mother said, when she came to see me last week, that she would not like a little one of her own to be in your place.--Now, come in, and I've some good news for you."
"Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don't be afraid of me.
Bessie stooped; we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quite comforted.
That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in the evening Bessie told me some of her most enchanting stories, and sang me some of her sweetest songs.
I had risen half-an-hour before her entrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrow window near my crib.
Bessie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast.
Few children can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrapping herself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery.
As we passed Mrs. Reed's bedroom, she said, "Will you go in and bid Missis good- bye?"
"No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always been my best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly."
"Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to the wall."
Your Missis has not been my friend: she has been my foe."
There was a light in the porter's lodge: when we reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: my trunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door.
"Is she going by herself?" asked the porter's wife.
I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust her so far alone."
"Be sure and take good care of her," cried she to the guard, as he lifted me into the inside.
I was carried into an inn, where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had no appetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each end, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red gallery high up against the wall filled with musical instruments.
At last the guard returned; once more I was stowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away we rattled over the "stony street" of L-.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the light of the lamps.
"Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?" she asked.
Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimly discerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this door I passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her.
The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale and large forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
"The child is very young to be sent alone," said she, putting her candle down on the table.
"She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are you tired?" she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
"And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goes to bed, Miss Miller.
Is this the first time you have left your parents to come to school, my little girl?"
I explained to her that I had no parents.
She inquired how long they had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether I could read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheek gently with her forefinger, and saying, "She hoped I should be a good child," dismissed me along with Miss Miller.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who went with me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by her voice, look, and air.
Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy in complexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait and action, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: she looked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, an under-teacher.
Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment, from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till, emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading that portion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of many voices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great deal tables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, and seated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age, from nine or ten to twenty.
Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, then walking up to the top of the long room she cried out--
To-night I was to be Miss Miller's bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: when laid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which was quickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light was extinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.
The night passed rapidly. I was too tired even to dream; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fall in torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her place by my side.
Again the bell rang: all formed in file, two and two, and in that order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly lit schoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss Miller; afterwards she called out--
A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered the room, each walked to a table and took her seat.
I looked in vain for her I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: Miss Miller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange, foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwards found, took the corresponding seat at the other board.
The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food and try to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.
I was one of the last to go out, and in passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of the porridge and taste it; she looked at the others; all their countenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the stout one, whispered--
Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the room: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures.
I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but she made no great effort to check the general wrath; doubtless she shared in it.
A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle, and standing in the middle of the room, cried--
She stood at the bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire at each end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.
Miss Miller approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and having received her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud--
I suppose I have a considerable organ of veneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which my eyes traced her steps.
Seen now, in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in their irids, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved the whiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to the fashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringlets were in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; a gold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at her girdle.
Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features; a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct idea of the exterior of Miss Temple--Maria Temple, as I afterwards saw the name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.
The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) having taken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables, summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson on geography; the lower classes were called by the teachers: repetitions in history, grammar, &c., went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by Miss Temple to some of the elder girls.
"I have a word to address to the pupils," said she.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth, but it sank at her voice.
The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.
"It is to be done on my responsibility," she added, in an explanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.
I saw a girl sitting on a stone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of which she seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title--it was "Rasselas;" a name that struck me as strange, and consequently attractive.
In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said to her directly--
"Is your book interesting?" I had already formed the intention of asking her to lend it to me some day.
"I like it," she answered, after a pause of a second or two, during which she examined me.
I hardly know where I found the hardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step was contrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched a chord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of a frivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend the serious or substantial.
"You may look at it," replied the girl, offering me the book.
I returned it to her; she received it quietly, and without saying anything she was about to relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured to disturb her--
I suppose you are an orphan: are not either your father or your mother dead?"
"The lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here."
"Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment."
I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she does.
"Does he live here?"
"Is he a good man?"
"The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to the work, and cuts out--for we make our own clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and everything; the little one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; she teaches history and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions; and the one who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a yellow ribband, is Madame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French."
"Do you like the little black one, and the Madame ---?--I cannot pronounce her name as you do."
"Miss Scatcherd is hasty--you must take care not to offend her; Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person."
"But Miss Temple is the best--isn't she?"
"Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest, because she knows far more than they do."
"My mother is dead."
The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girl with whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by Miss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom.
The punishment seemed to me in a high degree ignominious, especially for so great a girl--she looked thirteen or upwards.
I expected she would show signs of great distress and shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed: composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.
I asked of myself. "Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to open and swallow me up.
She looks as if she were thinking of something beyond her punishment--beyond her situation: of something not round her nor before her.
I have heard of day-dreams--is she in a day-dream now?
Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure they do not see it--her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart: she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what is really present.
I wonder what sort of a girl she is--whether good or naughty."
At that hour most of the others were sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd's chair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the manner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of Miss Scatcherd on the performance.
It was English history: among the readers I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at the commencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of the class, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention to stops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom.
Even in that obscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object of constant notice: she was continually addressing to her such phrases as the following:--
"Burns" (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all called by their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), "Burns, you are standing on the side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately." "Burns, you poke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in."
The lesson had comprised part of the reign of Charles I., and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and ship- money, which most of them appeared unable to answer; still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reached Burns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready with answers on every point.
I kept expecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of that, she suddenly cried out--
"You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nails this morning!"
Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.
"Why," thought I, "does she not explain that she could neither clean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?"
My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold a skein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me from time to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whether I could mark, stitch, knit, &c.; till she dismissed me, I could not pursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements.
When I returned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which I did not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, and going into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned in half a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at one end.
This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with a respectful curtesy; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosed her pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs.
Not a tear rose to Burns' eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinary expression.
"Hardened girl!" exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; "nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits: carry the rod away."
Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.
On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flog her pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables and laughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when I passed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes; putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from the gleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.
Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to one of the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by the companionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers.
"Is it still 'Rasselas'?" I asked, coming behind her.
"Yes," she said, "and I have just finished it."
And in five minutes more she shut it up.
"Now," thought I, "I can perhaps get her to talk." I sat down by her on the floor.
She is severe: she dislikes my faults."
"And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I should resist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from her hand; I should break it under her nose."
"But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent to stand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a great girl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it."
I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine of endurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with the forbearance she expressed for her chastiser.
I suspected she might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matter deeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.
"And cross and cruel," I added; but Helen Burns would not admit my addition: she kept silence.
At the utterance of Miss Temple's name, a soft smile flitted over her grave face.
"Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe to any one, even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tells me of them gently; and, if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives me my meed liberally.
One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is, that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not influence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise, though I value it most highly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight."
Now, mine continually rove away; when I should be listening to Miss Scatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often I lose the very sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream.
This afternoon, instead of dreaming of Deepden, I was wondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly and unwisely as Charles the First sometimes did; and I thought what a pity it was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see no farther than the prerogatives of the crown.
If he had but been able to look to a distance, and see how what they call the spirit of the age was tending!
Yes, his enemies were the worst: they shed blood they had no right to shed.
Helen was talking to herself now: she had forgotten I could not very well understand her--that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of the subject she discussed.
I recalled her to my level.
"No, certainly, not often; because Miss Temple has generally something to say which is newer than my own reflections; her language is singularly agreeable to me, and the information she communicates is often just what I wished to gain."
"You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older: as yet you are but a little untaught girl."
"Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do; I should bless her son John, which is impossible."
In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.
Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then make a remark, but she said nothing.
"Well," I asked impatiently, "is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted, bad woman?"
"She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does mine; but how minutely you remember all she has done and said to you!
What a singularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart!
Would you not be happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with the passionate emotions it excited?
Surely it will never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend? No; I cannot believe that: I hold another creed: which no one ever taught me, and which I seldom mention; but in which I delight, and to which I cling: for it extends hope to all: it makes Eternity a rest--a mighty home, not a terror and an abyss.
Besides, with this creed, I can so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his crime; I can so sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last: with this creed revenge never worries my heart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low: I live in calm, looking to the end."
Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this sentence.
I saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts.
She was not allowed much time for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up, exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent--
Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor without reply as without delay.
I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rapidly along our drooping line, her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered, gathered close about her, and encouraging us, by precept and example, to keep up our spirits, and march forward, as she said, "like stalwart soldiers."
The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart, the Church Catechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St. Matthew; and in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, whose irrepressible yawns attested her weariness.
I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst; and indeed that gentleman was from home during the greater part of the first month after my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend the archdeacon: his absence was a relief to me.
I need not say that I had my own reasons for dreading his coming: but come he did at last.
All along I had been dreading the fulfilment of this promise,--I had been looking out daily for the "Coming Man," whose information respecting my past life and conversation was to brand me as a bad child for ever: now there he was. He stood at Miss Temple's side; he was speaking low in her ear: I did not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and I watched her eye with painful anxiety, expecting every moment to see its dark orb turn on me a glance of repugnance and contempt.
I listened too; and as I happened to be seated quite at the top of the room, I caught most of what he said: its import relieved me from immediate apprehension.
You may tell Miss Smith that I forgot to make a memorandum of the darning needles, but she shall have some papers sent in next week; and she is not, on any account, to give out more than one at a time to each pupil: if they have more, they are apt to be careless and lose them.
"And, ma'am," he continued, "the laundress tells me some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the rules limit them to one."
Mr. Brocklehurst again paused--perhaps overcome by his feelings.
Miss Temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she now gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble, appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of that material; especially her mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor's chisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually into petrified severity.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his hands behind his back, majestically surveyed the whole school.
Suddenly his eye gave a blink, as if it had met something that either dazzled or shocked its pupil; turning, he said in more rapid accents than he had hitherto used--
"Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what--_what_ is that girl with curled hair?
And extending his cane he pointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.
And why has she, or any other, curled hair?
Why, in defiance of every precept and principle of this house, does she conform to the world so openly--here in an evangelical, charitable establishment--as to wear her hair one mass of curls?"
Miss Temple, that girl's hair must be cut off entirely; I will send a barber to-morrow: and I see others who have far too much of the excrescence--that tall girl, tell her to turn round.
Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if to smooth away the involuntary smile that curled them; she gave the order, however, and when the first class could take in what was required of them, they obeyed.
Leaning a little back on my bench, I could see the looks and grimaces with which they commented on this manoeuvre: it was a pity Mr. Brocklehurst could not see them too; he would perhaps have felt that, whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter, the inside was further beyond his interference than he imagined.
"Madam," he pursued, "I have a Master to serve whose kingdom is not of this world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts of the flesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness and sobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of the young persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits which vanity itself might have woven; these, I repeat, must be cut off; think of the time wasted, of--" Mr. Brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors, ladies, now entered the room.
They ought to have come a little sooner to have heard his lecture on dress, for they were splendidly attired in velvet, silk, and furs.
It seems they had come in the carriage with their reverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintendent.
"A careless girl!" said Mr. Brocklehurst, and immediately after--"It is the new pupil, I perceive." And before I could draw breath, "I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her."
"Let the child who broke her slate come forward!"
Of my own accord I could not have stirred; I was paralysed: but the two great girls who sit on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed me towards the dread judge, and then Miss Temple gently assisted me to his very feet, and I caught her whispered counsel--
"Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite," thought I; and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brocklehurst, and Co. bounded in my pulses at the conviction.
And I was placed there, by whom I don't know: I was in no condition to note particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the height of Mr. Brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard of me, and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and a cloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.
Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed. "Ladies," said he, turning to his family, "Miss Temple, teachers, and children, you all see this girl?"
"You see she is yet young; you observe she possesses the ordinary form of childhood; God has graciously given her the shape that He has given to all of us; no signal deformity points her out as a marked character.
Who would think that the Evil One had already found a servant and agent in her?
"My dear children," pursued the black marble clergyman, with pathos, "this is a sad, a melancholy occasion; for it becomes my duty to warn you, that this girl, who might be one of God's own lambs, is a little castaway: not a member of the true flock, but evidently an interloper and an alien.
You must be on your guard against her; you must shun her example; if necessary, avoid her company, exclude her from your sports, and shut her out from your converse.
Teachers, you must watch her: keep your eyes on her movements, weigh well her words, scrutinise her actions, punish her body to save her soul: if, indeed, such salvation be possible, for (my tongue falters while I tell it) this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land, worse than many a little heathen who says its prayers to Brahma and kneels before Juggernaut--this girl is--a liar!"
Now came a pause of ten minutes, during which I, by this time in perfect possession of my wits, observed all the female Brocklehursts produce their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics, while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the two younger ones whispered, "How shocking!"
Mr. Brocklehurst resumed. "This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious and charitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as her own daughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last her excellent patroness was obliged to separate her from her own young ones, fearful lest her vicious example should contaminate their purity: she has sent her here to be healed, even as the Jews of old sent their diseased to the troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers, superintendent, I beg of you not to allow the waters to stagnate round her."
With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the top button of his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose, bowed to Miss Temple, and then all the great people sailed in state from the room.
"Let her stand half-an-hour longer on that stool, and let no one speak to her during the remainder of the day."
What my sensations were no language can describe; but just as they all rose, stifling my breath and constricting my throat, a girl came up and passed me: in passing, she lifted her eyes.
Helen Burns asked some slight question about her work of Miss Smith, was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled at me as she again went by.
I remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect of an angel.
Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm "the untidy badge;" scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she had blotted an exercise in copying it out.
Such is the imperfect nature of man! such spots are there on the disc of the clearest planet; and eyes like Miss Scatcherd's can only see those minute defects, and are blind to the full brightness of the orb.
Already I had made visible progress: that very morning I had reached the head of my class; Miss Miller had praised me warmly; Miss Temple had smiled approbation; she had promised to teach me drawing, and to let me learn French, if I continued to make similar improvement two months longer: and then I was well received by my fellow-pupils; treated as an equal by those of my own age, and not molested by any; now, here I lay again crushed and trodden on; and could I ever rise more?
While sobbing out this wish in broken accents, some one approached: I started up--again Helen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her coming up the long, vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.
"Come, eat something," she said; but I put both away from me, feeling as if a drop or a crumb would have choked me in my present condition.
She sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with her arms, and rested her head upon them; in that attitude she remained silent as an Indian.
"Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be a liar?"
"Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great and admired man: he is little liked here; he never took steps to make himself liked.
Had he treated you as an especial favourite, you would have found enemies, declared or covert, all around you; as it is, the greater number would offer you sympathy if they dared.
"Well, Helen?" said I, putting my hand into hers: she chafed my fingers gently to warm them, and went on--
I was silent; Helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity she imparted there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness.
I felt the impression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence it came; and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed a short cough, I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concern for her.
Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms round her waist; she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence.
Some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming in through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.
"I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre," said she; "I want you in my room; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too."
We went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had to thread some intricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached her apartment; it contained a good fire, and looked cheerful.
Miss Temple told Helen Burns to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of the hearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her side.
"Is it all over?" she asked, looking down at my face. "Have you cried your grief away?"
Continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us."
"You will," said she, passing her arm round me. "And now tell me who is the lady whom Mr. Brocklehurst called your benefactress?"
My uncle is dead, and he left me to her care."
"Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?"
"No, ma'am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as I have often heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died that she would always keep me."
"Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when a criminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.
I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be most moderate--most correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in order to arrange coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story of my sad childhood.
I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence; she then said--
"I know something of Mr. Lloyd; I shall write to him; if his reply agrees with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared from every imputation; to me, Jane, you are clear now."
She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was well contented to stand, for I derived a child's pleasure from the contemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes), she proceeded to address Helen Burns.
Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; then she returned to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard her sigh low.
She was pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she said cheerfully--
She rang her bell.
"Barbara," she said to the servant who answered it, "I have not yet had tea; bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies."
"Barbara," said she, "can you not bring a little more bread and butter?
Barbara went out: she returned soon--
"Madam, Mrs. Harden says she has sent up the usual quantity."
Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper: a woman after Mr. Brocklehurst's own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron.
And as the girl withdrew she added, smiling, "Fortunately, I have it in my power to supply deficiencies for this once."
Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placed before each of us a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel of toast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a parcel wrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sized seed-cake. "I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you," said she, "but as there is so little toast, you must have it now," and she proceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.
We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not the least delight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification with which our hostess regarded us, as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied.
Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire; we sat one on each side of her, and now a conversation followed between her and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.
Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something which chastened the pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her, by a controlling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but as to Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.
The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence and kindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than all these, something in her own unique mind, had roused her powers within her.
They woke, they kindled: first, they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, which till this hour I had never seen but pale and bloodless; then they shone in the liquid lustre of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more singular than that of Miss Temple's--a beauty neither of fine colour nor long eyelash, nor pencilled brow, but of meaning, of movement, of radiance.
Then her soul sat on her lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannot tell.
Has a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough, to hold the swelling spring of pure, full, fervid eloquence? Such was the characteristic of Helen's discourse on that, to me, memorable evening; her spirit seemed hastening to live within a very brief span as much as many live during a protracted existence.
Then they seemed so familiar with French names and French authors: but my amazement reached its climax when Miss Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment to recall the Latin her father had taught her, and taking a book from a shelf, bade her read and construe a page of Virgil; and Helen obeyed, my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line.
She had scarcely finished ere the bell announced bedtime! no delay could be admitted; Miss Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us to her heart--
Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more reluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.
On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd: she was examining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns's, and when we entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow she should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to her shoulder.
The moment Miss Scatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, I ran to Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she was incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.
About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, Miss Temple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his answer: it appeared that what he said went to corroborate my account.
Miss Temple, having assembled the whole school, announced that inquiry had been made into the charges alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was most happy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared from every imputation.
Spring drew on: she was indeed already come; the frosts of winter had ceased; its snows were melted, its cutting winds ameliorated.
My wretched feet, flayed and swollen to lameness by the sharp air of January, began to heal and subside under the gentler breathings of April; the nights and mornings no longer by their Canadian temperature froze the very blood in our veins; we could now endure the play-hour passed in the garden: sometimes on a sunny day it began even to be pleasant and genial, and a greenness grew over those brown beds, which, freshening daily, suggested the thought that Hope traversed them at night, and left each morning brighter traces of her steps.
Miss Temple's whole attention was absorbed by the patients: she lived in the sick-room, never quitting it except to snatch a few hours' rest at night.
Mr. Brocklehurst and his family never came near Lowood now: household matters were not scrutinised into; the cross housekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of infection; her successor, who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary, unused to the ways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality.
Besides, there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; our breakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to prepare a regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a large piece of cold pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this we carried away with us to the wood, where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined sumptuously.
The stone was just broad enough to accommodate, comfortably, another girl and me, at that time my chosen comrade--one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd, observant personage, whose society I took pleasure in, partly because she was witty and original, and partly because she had a manner which set me at my ease.
Some years older than I, she knew more of the world, and could tell me many things I liked to hear: with her my curiosity found gratification: to my faults also she gave ample indulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything I said.
She had a turn for narrative, I for analysis; she liked to inform, I to question; so we got on swimmingly together, deriving much entertainment, if not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.
Why did I not spend these sweet days of liberty with her?
Had I forgotten her? or was I so worthless as to have grown tired of her pure society?
Surely the Mary Ann Wilson I have mentioned was inferior to my first acquaintance: she could only tell me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip I chose to indulge in; while, if I have spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to give those who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of far higher things.
True, reader; and I knew and felt this: and though I am a defective being, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet I never tired of Helen Burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment of attachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that ever animated my heart.
But Helen was ill at present: for some weeks she had been removed from my sight to I knew not what room upstairs.
She was not, I was told, in the hospital portion of the house with the fever patients; for her complaint was consumption, not typhus: and by consumption I, in my ignorance, understood something mild, which time and care would be sure to alleviate.
I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice coming downstairs on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken by Miss Temple into the garden; but, on these occasions, I was not allowed to go and speak to her; I only saw her from the schoolroom window, and then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distance under the verandah.
Mary Ann remarked that she supposed some one must be very ill, as Mr. Bates had been sent for at that time of the evening.
After she had seen him mount his horse and depart, she was about to close the door, but I ran up to her.
"Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see?"
"And what does he say about her?"
"He says she'll not be here long."
This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have only conveyed the notion that she was about to be removed to Northumberland, to her own home. I should not have suspected that it meant she was dying; but I knew instantly now!
It opened clear on my comprehension that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in this world, and that she was going to be taken to the region of spirits, if such region there were.
I experienced a shock of horror, then a strong thrill of grief, then a desire--a necessity to see her; and I asked in what room she lay.
"May I go up and speak to her?"
I dreaded being discovered and sent back; for I _must_ see Helen,--I must embrace her before she died,--I must give her one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.
Miss Temple was not to be seen: I knew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in the fever-room.
She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face, pale, wasted, but quite composed: she looked so little changed that my fear was instantly dissipated.
"Can it be you, Jane?" she asked, in her own gentle voice.
"Oh!" I thought, "she is not going to die; they are mistaken: she could not speak and look so calmly if she were."
I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and her cheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but she smiled as of old.
While I tried to devour my tears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did not, however, wake the nurse; when it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted; then she whispered--
I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.
After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering--
I leave no one to regret me much: I have only a father; and he is lately married, and will not miss me.
God is my father; God is my friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me."
And I clasped my arms closer round Helen; she seemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go; I lay with my face hidden on her neck.
Presently she said, in the sweetest tone--
She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.
When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I looked up; I was in somebody's arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying me through the passage back to the dormitory.
I was not reprimanded for leaving my bed; people had something else to think about; no explanation was afforded then to my many questions; but a day or two afterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room at dawn, had found me laid in the little crib; my face against Helen Burns's shoulder, my arms round her neck.
Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years after her death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marble tablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word "Resurgam."
But this is not to be a regular autobiography. I am only bound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possess some degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight years almost in silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the links of connection.
Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealth and family connections, could not be overlooked, still retained the post of treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his duties by gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: his office of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how to combine reason with strictness, comfort with economy, compassion with uprightness.
In time I rose to be the first girl of the first class; then I was invested with the office of teacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years: but at the end of that time I altered.
Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continued superintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed the best part of my acquirements; her friendship and society had been my continual solace; she had stood me in the stead of mother, governess, and, latterly, companion.
At this period she married, removed with her husband (a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthy of such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.
From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was gone every settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood in some degree a home to me.
I had imbibed from her something of her nature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemed better regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind.
But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came between me and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into a post-chaise, shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaise mount the hill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to my own room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part of the half-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.
My vacations had all been spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me to Gateshead; neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visit me.
How I wished sleep would silence her. It seemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would rise for my relief.
Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welshwoman, and till now her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other light than as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep notes with satisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; my half-effaced thought instantly revived.
She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened a drawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time, so long that my hopes began to falter.
At last, having held a document before her glasses for nearly five minutes, she presented it across the counter, accompanying the act by another inquisitive and mistrustful glance--it was for J.E.
"There are no more," said she; and I put it in my pocket and turned my face homeward: I could not open it then; rules obliged me to be back by eight, and it was already half-past seven.
Even when we finally retired for the night, the inevitable Miss Gryce was still my companion: we had only a short end of candle in our candlestick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was all burnt out; fortunately, however, the heavy supper she had eaten produced a soporific effect: she was already snoring before I had finished undressing.
"If J.E., who advertised in the _---shire Herald_ of last Thursday, possesses the acquirements mentioned, and if she is in a position to give satisfactory references as to character and competency, a situation can be offered her where there is but one pupil, a little girl, under ten years of age; and where the salary is thirty pounds per annum.
I saw her in a black gown and widow's cap; frigid, perhaps, but not uncivil: a model of elderly English respectability.
Thornfield! that, doubtless, was the name of her house: a neat orderly spot, I was sure; though I failed in my efforts to conceive a correct plan of the premises.
Having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendent during the noontide recreation, I told her I had a prospect of getting a new situation where the salary would be double what I now received (for at Lowood I only got 15 pounds per annum); and requested she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, or some of the committee, and ascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.
The next day she laid the affair before Mr. Brocklehurst, who said that Mrs. Reed must be written to, as she was my natural guardian.
A note was accordingly addressed to that lady, who returned for answer, that "I might do as I pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in my affairs."
This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwarded a copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady's reply, stating that she was satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight as the period for my assuming the post of governess in her house.
"It's her, I am sure!--I could have told her anywhere!" cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand.
I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant, matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair and eyes, and lively complexion.
"Well, who is it?" she asked, in a voice and with a smile I half recognised; "you've not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane?"
In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously: "Bessie!
Bessie!" that was all I said; whereat she half laughed, half cried, and we both went into the parlour.
"That is my little boy," said Bessie directly.
"Yes; nearly five years since to Robert Leaven, the coachman; and I've a little girl besides Bobby there, that I've christened Jane."
Tell me everything about them, Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knee, will you?" but Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.
She went up to London last winter with her mama, and there everybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but his relations were against the match; and--what do you think?--he and Miss Georgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.
It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious; and now she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they are always quarrelling--"
"Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish.
He went to college, and he got--plucked, I think they call it: and then his uncles wanted him to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is such a dissipated young man, they will never make much of him, I think."
"What does he look like?"
"He is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man; but he has such thick lips."
"Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I think she's not quite easy in her mind: Mr. John's conduct does not please her--he spends a deal of money."
"Did she send you here, Bessie?"
"A little." There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and then asked me to sit down and give her a tune:
I played a waltz or two, and she was charmed.
"The Miss Reeds could not play as well!" said she exultingly. "I always said you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?"
It was a landscape in water colours, of which I had made a present to the superintendent, in acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf, and which she had framed and glazed.
Have you ever heard anything from your father's kinsfolk, the Eyres?"
He looked quite a gentleman, and I believe he was your father's brother."
"What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?"
"So he went?"
"Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was very high with him; she called him afterwards a 'sneaking tradesman.'
My Robert believes he was a wine-merchant."
Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then she was obliged to leave me: I saw her again for a few minutes the next morning at Lowton, while I was waiting for the coach.
We parted finally at the door of the Brocklehurst Arms there: each went her separate way; she set off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet the conveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead, I mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to new duties and a new life in the unknown environs of Millcote.
I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into the inn-passage: a man was standing by the open door, and in the lamp-lit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.
"This will be your luggage, I suppose?" said the man rather abruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage.
He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car, and then I got in; before he shut me up, I asked him how far it was to Thornfield.
He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and we set off.
I wonder if she lives alone except this little girl; if so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shall surely be able to get on with her; I will do my best; it is a pity that doing one's best does not always answer.
I pray God Mrs. Fairfax may not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does, I am not bound to stay with her! let the worst come to the worst, I can advertise again.
The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let his horse walk all the way, and the hour and a half extended, I verily believe, to two hours; at last he turned in his seat and said--
"Will you walk this way, ma'am?" said the girl; and I followed her across a square hall with high doors all round: she ushered me into a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at first dazzled me, contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyes had been for two hours inured; when I could see, however, a cosy and agreeable picture presented itself to my view.
She was occupied in knitting; a large cat sat demurely at her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete the beau-ideal of domestic comfort.
She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove my shawl and untie my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herself so much trouble.
And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys, and delivered them to the servant.
"Now, then, draw nearer to the fire," she continued.
"I'll see it carried into your room," she said, and bustled out.
She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus and a book or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah now brought, and then herself handed me the refreshments.
I felt rather confused at being the object of more attention than I had ever before received, and, that too, shown by my employer and superior; but as she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything out of her place, I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.
"Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night?" I asked, when I had partaken of what she offered me.
I am a little deaf," returned the good lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.
Then she is not your daughter?"
I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what way Miss Varens was connected with her; but I recollected it was not polite to ask too many questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.
"I am so glad," she continued, as she sat down opposite to me, and took the cat on her knee; "I am so glad you are come; it will be quite pleasant living here now with a companion.
I say alone--Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and John and his wife are very decent people; but then you see they are only servants, and one can't converse with them on terms of equality: one must keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one's authority.
In spring and summer one got on better: sunshine and long days make such a difference; and then, just at the commencement of this autumn, little Adela Varens came and her nurse: a child makes a house alive all at once; and now you are here I shall be quite gay."
My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk; and I drew my chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincere wish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated.
"But I'll not keep you sitting up late to-night," said she; "it is on the stroke of twelve now, and you have been travelling all day: you must feel tired.
I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really felt fatigued with my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire.
She took her candle, and I followed her from the room.
First she went to see if the hall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock, she led the way upstairs.
Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the slippery steps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; I looked at some pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented a grim man in a cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace), at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clock whose case was of oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time and rubbing.
"What! out already?" said she. "I see you are an early riser."
I went up to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of the hand.
"How do you like Thornfield?" she asked.
I told her I liked it very much.
"Yes," she said, "it is a pretty place; but I fear it will be getting out of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into his head to come and reside here permanently; or, at least, visit it rather oftener: great houses and fine grounds require the presence of the proprietor."
"The owner of Thornfield," she responded quietly. "Did you not know he was called Rochester?"
Of course I did not--I had never heard of him before; but the old lady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.
To be sure I am distantly related to the Rochesters by the mother's side, or at least my husband was; he was a clergyman, incumbent of Hay--that little village yonder on the hill--and that church near the gates was his.
The present Mr. Rochester's mother was a Fairfax, and second cousin to my husband: but I never presume on the connection--in fact, it is nothing to me; I consider myself quite in the light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is always civil, and I expect nothing more."
"And the little girl--my pupil!"
"She is Mr. Rochester's ward; he commissioned me to find a governess for her.
He intended to have her brought up in ---shire, I believe.
Here she comes, with her 'bonne,' as she calls her nurse."
I did not like her the worse for that; on the contrary, I felt better pleased than ever.
The equality between her and me was real; not the mere result of condescension on her part: so much the better--my position was all the freer.
As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed by her attendant, came running up the lawn.
I looked at my pupil, who did not at first appear to notice me: she was quite a child, perhaps seven or eight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small-featured face, and a redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.
"Come and speak to the lady who is to teach you, and to make you a clever woman some day."
She approached. "C'est la ma gouverante!" said she, pointing to me, and addressing her nurse; who answered-- "Mais oui, certainement."
When she first came here she could speak no English; now she can make shift to talk it a little: I don't understand her, she mixes it so with French; but you will make out her meaning very well, I dare say."
She came and shook hand with me when she heard that I was her governess; and as I led her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in her own tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we were seated at the table, and she had examined me some ten minutes with her large hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.
"Ah!" cried she, in French, "you speak my language as well as Mr. Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie.
She will be glad: nobody here understands her: Madame Fairfax is all English.
Sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked--how it did smoke!--and I was sick, and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester.
Well, our ship stopped in the morning, before it was quite daylight, at a great city--a huge city, with very dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town I came from; and Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to the land, and Sophie came after, and we all got into a coach, which took us to a beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called an hotel.
"Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?" asked Mrs. Fairfax.
I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluent tongue of Madame Pierrot.
"I wish," continued the good lady, "you would ask her a question or two about her parents: I wonder if she remembers them?"
"I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy Virgin.
She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give a specimen of her accomplishments.
Descending from her chair, she came and placed herself on my knee; then, folding her little hands demurely before her, shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes to the ceiling, she commenced singing a song from some opera.
It was the strain of a forsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy of her lover, calls pride to her aid; desires her attendant to deck her in her brightest jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the false one that night at a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of her demeanour, how little his desertion has affected her.
Adele sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the _naivete_ of her age.
This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said, "Now, Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry." Assuming an attitude, she began, "La Ligue des Rats: fable de La Fontaine."
She then declaimed the little piece with an attention to punctuation and emphasis, a flexibility of voice and an appropriateness of gesture, very unusual indeed at her age, and which proved she had been carefully trained.
"Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: 'Qu' avez vous donc? lui dit un de ces rats; parlez!' She made me lift my hand--so--to remind me to raise my voice at the question.
"With Madame Frederic and her husband: she took care of me, but she is nothing related to me.
I think she is poor, for she had not so fine a house as mama.
Mr. Rochester asked me if I would like to go and live with him in England, and I said yes; for I knew Mr. Rochester before I knew Madame Frederic, and he was always kind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you see he has not kept his word, for he has brought me to England, and now he is gone back again himself, and I never see him."
I suppose he had considered that these were all the governess would require for her private perusal; and, indeed, they contented me amply for the present; compared with the scanty pickings I had now and then been able to glean at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of entertainment and information.
I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined to apply: she had not been used to regular occupation of any kind.
I felt it would be injudicious to confine her too much at first; so, when I had talked to her a great deal, and got her to learn a little, and when the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her to return to her nurse.
I then proposed to occupy myself till dinner-time in drawing some little sketches for her use.
As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs. Fairfax called to me: "Your morning school-hours are over now, I suppose," said she.
She was in a room the folding-doors of which stood open: I went in when she addressed me.
"Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester's visits here are rare, they are always sudden and unexpected; and as I observed that it put him out to find everything swathed up, and to have a bustle of arrangement on his arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms in readiness."
"Is Mr. Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?"
"Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman's tastes and habits, and he expects to have things managed in conformity to them."
Is he generally liked?"
"Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you like him?
Is he liked for himself?"
"I have no cause to do otherwise than like him; and I believe he is considered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants: but he has never lived much amongst them."
"But has he no peculiarities?
What, in short, is his character?"
"Oh! his character is unimpeachable, I suppose.
He is rather peculiar, perhaps: he has travelled a great deal, and seen a great deal of the world, I should think.
I dare say he is clever, but I never had much conversation with him."
"In what way is he peculiar?"
"I don't know--it is not easy to describe--nothing striking, but you feel it when he speaks to you; you cannot be always sure whether he is in jest or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary; you don't thoroughly understand him, in short--at least, I don't: but it is of no consequence, he is a very good master."
This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax of her employer and mine.
There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching a character, or observing and describing salient points, either in persons or things: the good lady evidently belonged to this class; my queries puzzled, but did not draw her out.
Mr. Rochester was Mr. Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor--nothing more: she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a more definite notion of his identity.
When we left the dining-room, she proposed to show me over the rest of the house; and I followed her upstairs and downstairs, admiring as I went; for all was well arranged and handsome.
"Where are you going now, Mrs. Fairfax?" for she was moving away.
"Mrs. Fairfax!" I called out: for I now heard her descending the great stairs.
"Some of the servants, very likely," she answered: "perhaps Grace Poole."
"Yes, plainly: I often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.
Sometimes Leah is with her; they are frequently noisy together."
The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,--a woman of between thirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, and with a hard, plain face: any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived.
"She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her housemaid's work," continued the widow; "not altogether unobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough.
Mrs. Fairfax turned out to be what she appeared, a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, of competent education and average intelligence.
My pupil was a lively child, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimes wayward; but as she was committed entirely to my care, and no injudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans for her improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and became obedient and teachable.
She had no great talents, no marked traits of character, no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raised her one inch above the ordinary level of childhood; but neither had she any deficiency or vice which sunk her below it.
She made reasonable progress, entertained for me a vivacious, though perhaps not very profound, affection; and by her simplicity, gay prattle, and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree of attachment sufficient to make us both content in each other's society.
I felt a conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfare and progress, and a quiet liking for her little self: just as I cherished towards Mrs. Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness, and a pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderation of her mind and character.
Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now and then, when I took a walk by myself in the grounds; when I went down to the gates and looked through them along the road; or when, while Adele played with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom, I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, and having reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field and hill, and along dim sky-line--that then I longed for a power of vision which might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world, towns, regions full of life I had heard of but never seen--that then I desired more of practical experience than I possessed; more of intercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with variety of character, than was here within my reach.
When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's laugh: the same peal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, had thrilled me: I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than her laugh.
There were days when she was quite silent; but there were others when I could not account for the sounds she made.
Sometimes I saw her: she would come out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down to the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearing a pot of porter.
Her appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral oddities: hard-featured and staid, she had no point to which interest could attach.
I made some attempts to draw her into conversation, but she seemed a person of few words: a monosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort.
The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leah the housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but in no respect remarkable; with Sophie I used to talk French, and sometimes I asked her questions about her native country; but she was not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.
One afternoon in January, Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adele, because she had a cold; and, as Adele seconded the request with an ardour that reminded me how precious occasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood, I accorded it, deeming that I did well in showing pliability on the point.
Having seen Adele comfortably seated in her little chair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour fireside, and given her her best wax doll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) to play with, and a story-book for change of amusement; and having replied to her "Revenez bientot, ma bonne amie, ma chere Mdlle. Jeannette," with a kiss I set out.
On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet as a cloud, but brightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, half lost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it was yet a mile distant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmurs of life.
The man, the human being, broke the spell at once.
The dog came bounding back, and seeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan, barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to his magnitude.
He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up to me; it was all he could do,--there was no other help at hand to summon.
I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller, by this time struggling himself free of his steed.
His efforts were so vigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but I asked him the question--
I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to me directly.
"You must just stand on one side," he answered as he rose, first to his knees, and then to his feet.
The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying whether they were sound; apparently something ailed them, for he halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and sat down.
"Thank you: I shall do: I have no broken bones,--only a sprain;" and again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted an involuntary "Ugh!"
He had a dark face, with stern features and a heavy brow; his eyes and gathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now; he was past youth, but had not reached middle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five.
Had he been a handsome, heroic- looking young gentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus questioning him against his will, and offering my services unasked.
If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to me when I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and with thanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt any vocation to renew inquiries: but the frown, the roughness of the traveller, set me at my ease: I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced--
He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyes in my direction before.
"I should think you ought to be at home yourself," said he, "if you have a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?"
"Can you tell me where he is?"
You are--" He stopped, ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple: a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fine enough for a lady's-maid.
"Ah, the governess!" he repeated; "deuce take me, if I had not forgotten!
In two minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when he tried to move.
"I cannot commission you to fetch help," he said; "but you may help me a little yourself, if you will be so kind."
The traveller waited and watched for some time, and at last he laughed.
"I see," he said, "the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet, so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg of you to come here."
"Excuse me," he continued: "necessity compels me to make you useful."
He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on me with some stress, limped to his horse.
Having once caught the bridle, he mastered it directly and sprang to his saddle; grimacing grimly as he made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.
"Now," said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, "just hand me my whip; it lies there under the hedge."
A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear, and then bound away; the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished, "Like heath that, in the wilderness, The wild wind whirls away."
To pass its threshold was to return to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksome staircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet tranquil Mrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, and her only, was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by my walk,--to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetters of an uniform and too still existence; of an existence whose very privileges of security and ease I was becoming incapable of appreciating.
Yes, just as much good as it would do a man tired of sitting still in a "too easy chair" to take a long walk: and just as natural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would be under his.
I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell whence he had come.
"Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining-room, and John is gone for a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell and his ankle is sprained."
Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, who repeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, and was now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give orders about tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.
Mr. Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed early that night; nor did he rise soon next morning.
When he did come down, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of his tenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.
Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she kept running to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she could get a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to go downstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library, where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry, and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her "ami, Monsieur Edouard Fairfax _de_ Rochester," as she dubbed him (I had not before heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he had brought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, that when his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it a little box in whose contents she had an interest.
"Et cela doit signifier," said she, "qu'il y aura la dedans un cadeau pour moi, et peut-etre pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.
In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture I remembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine, when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fiery mosaic I had been piercing together, and scattering too some heavy unwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.
"Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take tea with him in the drawing-room this evening," said she: "he has been so much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before."
"When is his tea-time?" I inquired.
"Oh, at six o'clock: he keeps early hours in the country.
I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and kept in her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch, whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.
Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr. Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking at Adele and the dog: the fire shone full on his face.
I knew my traveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, made squarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair.
I recognised his decisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his full nostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, and jaw--yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake.
His shape, now divested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with his physiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense of the term--broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall nor graceful.
Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs. Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to notice us, for he never lifted his head as we approached.
"Here is Miss Eyre, sir," said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way.
He bowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.
"Let Miss Eyre be seated," said he: and there was something in the forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemed further to express, "What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre be there or not?
At this moment I am not disposed to accost her."
Besides, the eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to see how he would go on.
He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke nor moved.
Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some one should be amiable, and she began to talk.
Kindly, as usual--and, as usual, rather trite--she condoled with him on the pressure of business he had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him with that painful sprain: then she commended his patience and perseverance in going through with it.
"Madam, I should like some tea," was the sole rejoinder she got.
She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceeded to arrange the cups, spoons, &c., with assiduous celerity.
I and Adele went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.
As he took the cup from my hand, Adele, thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour, cried out--
"Who talks of cadeaux?" said he gruffly. "Did you expect a present, Miss Eyre?
Are you fond of presents?" and he searched my face with eyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.
"Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adele: she demands a 'cadeau,' clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about the bush."
"Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adele has: she can prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom; for she says you have always been in the habit of giving her playthings; but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, since I am a stranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledgment."
I have examined Adele, and find you have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she has no talents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement."
"Humph!" said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.
"Come to the fire," said the master, when the tray was taken away, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting; while Adele was leading me by the hand round the room, showing me the beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnieres.
We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adele wanted to take a seat on my knee, but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.
I shook my head. "The men in green all forsook England a hundred years ago," said I, speaking as seriously as he had done.
I don't think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, will ever shine on their revels more." Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows, seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.
"Don't trouble yourself to give her a character," returned Mr. Rochester: "eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself.
"I have to thank her for this sprain."
"You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled in religious forms;--Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, is a parson, is he not?"
What! a novice not worship her priest!
He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off our hair; and for economy's sake bought us bad needles and thread, with which we could hardly sew."
"And was that the head and front of his offending?" demanded Mr. Rochester.
"He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of the provision department, before the committee was appointed; and he bored us with long lectures once a week, and with evening readings from books of his own inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, which made us afraid to go to bed." "What age were you when you went to Lowood?"
I departed, obeying his directions.
"Enough!" he called out in a few minutes. "You play _a little_, I see; like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better than some, but not well."
Mr. Rochester continued--"Adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said were yours.
"Approach the table," said he; and I wheeled it to his couch.
Three he laid aside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.
"Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax," said he, "and look at them with Adele;--you" (glancing at me) "resume your seat, and answer my questions.
While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are: and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful.
Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight: rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk and soft as I could combine.
There! put the drawings away!" I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking at his watch, he said abruptly-- "It is nine o'clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adele sit up so long?
Take her to bed."
Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured the caress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would have done, nor so much. "I wish you all good-night, now," said he, making a movement of the hand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company, and wished to dismiss us.
Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: I took my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow in return, and so withdrew.
"You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax," I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adele to bed.
"Well, is he?"
"I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt."
"True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am so accustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he has peculiarities of temper, allowance should be made."
"Partly because it is his nature--and we can none of us help our nature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, to harass him, and make his spirits unequal."
"Family troubles, for one thing." "But he has no family."
"Not now, but he has had--or, at least, relatives.
He lost his elder brother a few years since."
Was he so very fond of his brother as to be still inconsolable for his loss?"
Mr. Rowland Rochester was not quite just to Mr. Edward; and perhaps he prejudiced his father against him.
He did not like to diminish the property by division, and yet he was anxious that Mr. Edward should have wealth, too, to keep up the consequence of the name; and, soon after he was of age, some steps were taken that were not quite fair, and made a great deal of mischief.
Old Mr. Rochester and Mr. Rowland combined to bring Mr. Edward into what he considered a painful position, for the sake of making his fortune: what the precise nature of that position was I never clearly knew, but his spirit could not brook what he had to suffer in it.
He is not very forgiving: he broke with his family, and now for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life.
I don't think he has ever been resident at Thornfield for a fortnight together, since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place."
"Why should he shun it?"
"Perhaps he thinks it gloomy." The answer was evasive.
She averred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew was chiefly from conjecture.
It was evident, indeed, that she wished me to drop the subject, which I did accordingly.
In the mornings he seemed much engaged with business, and, in the afternoon, gentlemen from Millcote or the neighbourhood called, and sometimes stayed to dine with him.
When his sprain was well enough to admit of horse exercise, he rode out a good deal; probably to return these visits, as he generally did not come back till late at night.
During this interval, even Adele was seldom sent for to his presence, and all my acquaintance with him was confined to an occasional rencontre in the hall, on the stairs, or in the gallery, when he would sometimes pass me haughtily and coldly, just acknowledging my presence by a distant nod or a cool glance, and sometimes bow and smile with gentlemanlike affability.
His changes of mood did not offend me, because I saw that I had nothing to do with their alternation; the ebb and flow depended on causes quite disconnected with me.
One day he had had company to dinner, and had sent for my portfolio; in order, doubtless, to exhibit its contents: the gentlemen went away early, to attend a public meeting at Millcote, as Mrs. Fairfax informed me; but the night being wet and inclement, Mr. Rochester did not accompany them.
Soon after they were gone he rang the bell: a message came that I and Adele were to go downstairs.
I brushed Adele's hair and made her neat, and having ascertained that I was myself in my usual Quaker trim, where there was nothing to retouch--all being too close and plain, braided locks included, to admit of disarrangement--we descended, Adele wondering whether the _petit coffre_ was at length come; for, owing to some mistake, its arrival had hitherto been delayed.
"Ma boite! ma boite!" exclaimed she, running towards it.
"Yes, there is your 'boite' at last: take it into a corner, you genuine daughter of Paris, and amuse yourself with disembowelling it," said the deep and rather sarcastic voice of Mr. Rochester, proceeding from the depths of an immense easy-chair at the fireside.
"And mind," he continued, "don't bother me with any details of the anatomical process, or any notice of the condition of the entrails: let your operation be conducted in silence: tiens-toi tranquille, enfant; comprends-tu?"
Adele seemed scarcely to need the warning--she had already retired to a sofa with her treasure, and was busy untying the cord which secured the lid.
Having removed this impediment, and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue paper, she merely exclaimed--
"Is Miss Eyre there?" now demanded the master, half rising from his seat to look round to the door, near which I still stood.
He drew a chair near his own. "I am not fond of the prattle of children," he continued; "for, old bachelor as I am, I have no pleasant associations connected with their lisp.
By-the-bye, I must have mine in mind; it won't do to neglect her; she is a Fairfax, or wed to one; and blood is said to be thicker than water."
I have forbidden Adele to talk to me about her presents, and she is bursting with repletion: have the goodness to serve her as auditress and interlocutrice; it will be one of the most benevolent acts you ever performed."
Adele, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs. Fairfax, than she summoned her to her sofa, and there quickly filled her lap with the porcelain, the ivory, the waxen contents of her "boite;" pouring out, meantime, explanations and raptures in such broken English as she was mistress of.
Mr. Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair, looked different to what I had seen him look before; not quite so stern--much less gloomy.
There was a smile on his lips, and his eyes sparkled, whether with wine or not, I am not sure; but I think it very probable.
He was, in short, in his after-dinner mood; more expanded and genial, and also more self- indulgent than the frigid and rigid temper of the morning; still he looked preciously grim, cushioning his massive head against the swelling back of his chair, and receiving the light of the fire on his granite- hewn features, and in his great, dark eyes; for he had great, dark eyes, and very fine eyes, too--not without a certain change in their depths sometimes, which, if it was not softness, reminded you, at least, of that feeling.
He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had been looking the same length of time at him, when, turning suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on his physiognomy.
"You examine me, Miss Eyre," said he: "do you think me handsome?"
By my word! there is something singular about you," said he: "you have the air of a little _nonnette_; quaint, quiet, grave, and simple, as you sit with your hands before you, and your eyes generally bent on the carpet (except, by-the-bye, when they are directed piercingly to my face; as just now, for instance); and when one asks you a question, or makes a remark to which you are obliged to reply, you rap out a round rejoinder, which, if not blunt, is at least brusque.
Go on: what fault do you find with me, pray? I suppose I have all my limbs and all my features like any other man?"
He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over his brow, and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs, but an abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should have risen.
Another stick of the penknife, when she pretended to pat my head: and that is because I said I did not like the society of children and old women (low be it spoken!).
No, young lady, I am not a general philanthropist; but I bear a conscience;" and he pointed to the prominences which are said to indicate that faculty, and which, fortunately for him, were sufficiently conspicuous; giving, indeed, a marked breadth to the upper part of his head: "and, besides, I once had a kind of rude tenderness of heart.
When I was as old as you, I was a feeling fellow enough, partial to the unfledged, unfostered, and unlucky; but Fortune has knocked me about since: she has even kneaded me with her knuckles, and now I flatter myself I am hard and tough as an India-rubber ball; pervious, though, through a chink or two still, and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump.
"Decidedly he has had too much wine," I thought; and I did not know what answer to make to his queer question: how could I tell whether he was capable of being re-transformed?
With this announcement he rose from his chair, and stood, leaning his arm on the marble mantelpiece: in that attitude his shape was seen plainly as well as his face; his unusual breadth of chest, disproportionate almost to his length of limb.
I am sure most people would have thought him an ugly man; yet there was so much unconscious pride in his port; so much ease in his demeanour; such a look of complete indifference to his own external appearance; so haughty a reliance on the power of other qualities, intrinsic or adventitious, to atone for the lack of mere personal attractiveness, that, in looking at him, one inevitably shared the indifference, and, even in a blind, imperfect sense, put faith in the confidence.
"I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to-night," he repeated, "and that is why I sent for you: the fire and the chandelier were not sufficient company for me; nor would Pilot have been, for none of these can talk.
"Speak," he urged.
Accordingly I sat and said nothing: "If he expects me to talk for the mere sake of talking and showing off, he will find he has addressed himself to the wrong person," I thought.
He bent his head a little towards me, and with a single hasty glance seemed to dive into my eyes.
"Stubborn?" he said, "and annoyed.
He had deigned an explanation, almost an apology, and I did not feel insensible to his condescension, and would not seem so.
"Then, in the first place, do you agree with me that I have a right to be a little masterful, abrupt, perhaps exacting, sometimes, on the grounds I stated, namely, that I am old enough to be your father, and that I have battled through a varied experience with many men of many nations, and roamed over half the globe, while you have lived quietly with one set of people in one house?"
I smiled: I thought to myself Mr. Rochester _is_ peculiar--he seems to forget that he pays me 30 pounds per annum for receiving his orders.
"The smile is very well," said he, catching instantly the passing expression; "but speak too."
"No, sir, not on that ground; but, on the ground that you did forget it, and that you care whether or not a dependent is comfortable in his dependency, I agree heartily."
My eye met his as the idea crossed my mind: he seemed to read the glance, answering as if its import had been spoken as well as imagined--
"Yes, yes, you are right," said he; "I have plenty of faults of my own: I know it, and I don't wish to palliate them, I assure you.
Little girl, a memory without blot or contamination must be an exquisite treasure--an inexhaustible source of pure refreshment: is it not?"
Nature meant me to be, on the whole, a good man, Miss Eyre; one of the better kind, and you see I am not so.
Now, when any vicious simpleton excites my disgust by his paltry ribaldry, I cannot flatter myself that I am better than he: I am forced to confess that he and I are on a level.
Here, come in, bonny wanderer!" He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye but his own; then, folding his arms, which he had half extended, on his chest, he seemed to enclose in their embrace the invisible being.
"Now," he continued, again addressing me, "I have received the pilgrim--a disguised deity, as I verily believe.
"Where are you going?" "To put Adele to bed: it is past her bedtime."
The Lowood constraint still clings to you somewhat; controlling your features, muffling your voice, and restricting your limbs; and you fear in the presence of a man and a brother--or father, or master, or what you will--to smile too gaily, speak too freely, or move too quickly: but, in time, I think you will learn to be natural with me, as I find it impossible to be conventional with you; and then your looks and movements will have more vivacity and variety than they dare offer now.
My position, Miss Eyre, with my back to the fire, and my face to the room, favours observation. While talking to you, I have also occasionally watched Adele (I have my own reasons for thinking her a curious study,--reasons that I may, nay, that I shall, impart to you some day).
She pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silk frock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry runs in her blood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones.
'Il faut que je l'essaie!' cried she, 'et a l'instant meme!' and she rushed out of the room.
She is now with Sophie, undergoing a robing process: in a few minutes she will re-enter; and I know what I shall see,--a miniature of Celine Varens, as she used to appear on the boards at the rising of--But never mind that.
She entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.
A dress of rose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the skirt as it could be gathered, replaced the brown frock she had previously worn; a wreath of rosebuds circled her forehead; her feet were dressed in silk stockings and small white satin sandals.
"Est-ce que ma robe va bien?" cried she, bounding forwards; "et mes souliers? et mes bas?
And spreading out her dress, she chasseed across the room till, having reached Mr. Rochester, she wheeled lightly round before him on tip-toe, then dropped on one knee at his feet, exclaiming--
"Monsieur, je vous remercie mille fois de votre bonte;" then rising, she added, "C'est comme cela que maman faisait, n'est-ce pas, monsieur?"
"Pre-cise-ly!" was the answer; "and, 'comme cela,' she charmed my English gold out of my British breeches' pocket.
It was one afternoon, when he chanced to meet me and Adele in the grounds: and while she played with Pilot and her shuttlecock, he asked me to walk up and down a long beech avenue within sight of her.
He then said that she was the daughter of a French opera-dancer, Celine Varens, towards whom he had once cherished what he called a "_grande passion_."
He thought himself her idol, ugly as he was: he believed, as he said, that she preferred his "_taille d'athlete_" to the elegance of the Apollo Belvidere.
"And, Miss Eyre, so much was I flattered by this preference of the Gallic sylph for her British gnome, that I installed her in an hotel; gave her a complete establishment of servants, a carriage, cashmeres, diamonds, dentelles, &c.
Happening to call one evening when Celine did not expect me, I found her out; but it was a warm night, and I was tired with strolling through Paris, so I sat down in her boudoir; happy to breathe the air consecrated so lately by her presence.
No,--I exaggerate; I never thought there was any consecrating virtue about her: it was rather a sort of pastille perfume she had left; a scent of musk and amber, than an odour of sanctity.
Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and lighting of a cigar; having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail of Havannah incense on the freezing and sunless air, he went on--
The carriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door; my flame (that is the very word for an opera inamorata) alighted: though muffed in a cloak--an unnecessary encumbrance, by-the-bye, on so warm a June evening--I knew her instantly by her little foot, seen peeping from the skirt of her dress, as she skipped from the carriage-step.
Bending over the balcony, I was about to murmur 'Mon ange'--in a tone, of course, which should be audible to the ear of love alone--when a figure jumped from the carriage after her; cloaked also; but that was a spurred heel which had rung on the pavement, and that was a hatted head which now passed under the arched _porte cochere_ of the hotel.
He ground his teeth and was silent: he arrested his step and struck his boot against the hard ground.
Some hated thought seemed to have him in its grip, and to hold him so tightly that he could not advance.
We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused; the hall was before us.
Lifting his eye to its battlements, he cast over them a glare such as I never saw before or since.
Pain, shame, ire, impatience, disgust, detestation, seemed momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in the large pupil dilating under his ebon eyebrow.
Wild was the wrestle which should be paramount; but another feeling rose and triumphed: something hard and cynical: self-willed and resolute: it settled his passion and petrified his countenance: he went on--
She stood there, by that beech-trunk--a hag like one of those who appeared to Macbeth on the heath of Forres.
'You like Thornfield?' she said, lifting her finger; and then she wrote in the air a memento, which ran in lurid hieroglyphics all along the house-front, between the upper and lower row of windows, 'Like it if you can! Like it if you dare!'
"'I will like it,' said I; 'I dare like it;' and" (he subjoined moodily) "I will keep my word; I will break obstacles to happiness, to goodness--yes, goodness.
I wish to be a better man than I have been, than I am; as Job's leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and the habergeon, hindrances which others count as iron and brass, I will esteem but straw and rotten wood."
Adele here ran before him with her shuttlecock.
"Away!" he cried harshly; "keep at a distance, child; or go in to Sophie!"
Continuing then to pursue his walk in silence, I ventured to recall him to the point whence he had abruptly diverged-- "Did you leave the balcony, sir," I asked, "when Mdlle. Varens entered?"
I almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timed question, but, on the contrary, waking out of his scowling abstraction, he turned his eyes towards me, and the shade seemed to clear off his brow.
Strange!" he exclaimed, suddenly starting again from the point. "Strange that I should choose you for the confidant of all this, young lady; passing strange that you should listen to me quietly, as if it were the most usual thing in the world for a man like me to tell stories of his opera-mistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl like you!
After this digression he proceeded--
'They will come to her boudoir, no doubt,' thought I: 'let me prepare an ambush.' So putting my hand in through the open window, I drew the curtain over it, leaving only an opening through which I could take observations; then I closed the casement, all but a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers' whispered vows: then I stole back to my chair; and as I resumed it the pair came in.
The couple were thus revealed to me clearly: both removed their cloaks, and there was 'the Varens,' shining in satin and jewels,--my gifts of course,--and there was her companion in an officer's uniform; and I knew him for a young roue of a vicomte--a brainless and vicious youth whom I had sometimes met in society, and had never thought of hating because I despised him so absolutely.
A woman who could betray me for such a rival was not worth contending for; she deserved only scorn; less, however, than I, who had been her dupe.
Neither of them possessed energy or wit to belabour me soundly, but they insulted me as coarsely as they could in their little way: especially Celine, who even waxed rather brilliant on my personal defects--deformities she termed them.
Now it had been her custom to launch out into fervent admiration of what she called my '_beaute male_:' wherein she differed diametrically from you, who told me point-blank, at the second interview, that you did not think me handsome.
Opening the window, I walked in upon them; liberated Celine from my protection; gave her notice to vacate her hotel; offered her a purse for immediate exigencies; disregarded screams, hysterics, prayers, protestations, convulsions; made an appointment with the vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de Boulogne.
Next morning I had the pleasure of encountering him; left a bullet in one of his poor etiolated arms, feeble as the wing of a chicken in the pip, and then thought I had done with the whole crew.
But unluckily the Varens, six months before, had given me this filette Adele, who, she affirmed, was my daughter; and perhaps she may be, though I see no proofs of such grim paternity written in her countenance: Pilot is more like me than she.
Some years after I had broken with the mother, she abandoned her child, and ran away to Italy with a musician or singer.
I acknowledged no natural claim on Adele's part to be supported by me, nor do I now acknowledge any, for I am not her father; but hearing that she was quite destitute, I e'en took the poor thing out of the slime and mud of Paris, and transplanted it here, to grow up clean in the wholesome soil of an English country garden.
"No: Adele is not answerable for either her mother's faults or yours: I have a regard for her; and now that I know she is, in a sense, parentless--forsaken by her mother and disowned by you, sir--I shall cling closer to her than before.
How could I possibly prefer the spoilt pet of a wealthy family, who would hate her governess as a nuisance, to a lonely little orphan, who leans towards her as a friend?"
But I stayed out a few minutes longer with Adele and Pilot--ran a race with her, and played a game of battledore and shuttlecock.
When we went in, and I had removed her bonnet and coat, I took her on my knee; kept her there an hour, allowing her to prattle as she liked: not rebuking even some little freedoms and trivialities into which she was apt to stray when much noticed, and which betrayed in her a superficiality of character, inherited probably from her mother, hardly congenial to an English mind.
Still she had her merits; and I was disposed to appreciate all that was good in her to the utmost.
I sought in her countenance and features a likeness to Mr. Rochester, but found none: no trait, no turn of expression announced relationship.
It was a pity: if she could but have been proved to resemble him, he would have thought more of her.
As he had said, there was probably nothing at all extraordinary in the substance of the narrative itself: a wealthy Englishman's passion for a French dancer, and her treachery to him, were every-day matters enough, no doubt, in society; but there was something decidedly strange in the paroxysm of emotion which had suddenly seized him when he was in the act of expressing the present contentment of his mood, and his newly revived pleasure in the old hall and its environs.
The confidence he had thought fit to repose in me seemed a tribute to my discretion: I regarded and accepted it as such.
I never seemed in his way; he did not take fits of chilling hauteur: when he met me unexpectedly, the encounter seemed welcome; he had always a word and sometimes a smile for me: when summoned by formal invitation to his presence, I was honoured by a cordiality of reception that made me feel I really possessed the power to amuse him, and that these evening conferences were sought as much for his pleasure as for my benefit.
It was his nature to be communicative; he liked to open to a mind unacquainted with the world glimpses of its scenes and ways (I do not mean its corrupt scenes and wicked ways, but such as derived their interest from the great scale on which they were acted, the strange novelty by which they were characterised); and I had a keen delight in receiving the new ideas he offered, in imagining the new pictures he portrayed, and following him in thought through the new regions he disclosed, never startled or troubled by one noxious allusion.
The ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint: the friendly frankness, as correct as cordial, with which he treated me, drew me to him.
I felt at times as if he were my relation rather than my master: yet he was imperious sometimes still; but I did not mind that; I saw it was his way.
No, reader: gratitude, and many associations, all pleasurable and genial, made his face the object I best liked to see; his presence in a room was more cheering than the brightest fire.
Yet I had not forgotten his faults; indeed, I could not, for he brought them frequently before me.
He was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every description: in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others.
He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in his library alone, with his head bent on his folded arms; and, when he looked up, a morose, almost a malignant, scowl blackened his features.
But I believed that his moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality (I say _former_, for now he seemed corrected of them) had their source in some cruel cross of fate.
I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles, and purer tastes than such as circumstances had developed, education instilled, or destiny encouraged.
I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief, whatever that was, and would have given much to assuage it.
Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him, and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.
Will he leave it again soon?
Mrs. Fairfax said he seldom stayed here longer than a fortnight at a time; and he has now been resident eight weeks.
If he does go, the change will be doleful. Suppose he should be absent spring, summer, and autumn: how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem!"
All at once I remembered that it might be Pilot, who, when the kitchen- door chanced to be left open, not unfrequently found his way up to the threshold of Mr. Rochester's chamber: I had seen him lying there myself in the mornings.
"Was that Grace Poole? and is she possessed with a devil?" thought I. Impossible now to remain longer by myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax.
I cried. I shook him, but he only murmured and turned: the smoke had stupefied him.
Not a moment could be lost: the very sheets were kindling, I rushed to his basin and ewer; fortunately, one was wide and the other deep, and both were filled with water.
Though it was now dark, I knew he was awake; because I heard him fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water.
"Is there a flood?" he cried.
"In the name of all the elves in Christendom, is that Jane Eyre?" he demanded.
"What is it? and who did it?" he asked.
I briefly related to him what had transpired: the strange laugh I had heard in the gallery: the step ascending to the third storey; the smoke,--the smell of fire which had conducted me to his room; in what state I had found matters there, and how I had deluged him with all the water I could lay hands on.
He listened very gravely; his face, as I went on, expressed more concern than astonishment; he did not immediately speak when I had concluded.
No; what the deuce would you call her for?
What can she do?
Let her sleep unmolested."
"Then I will fetch Leah, and wake John and his wife."
I was on the point of risking Mr. Rochester's displeasure by disobeying his orders, when the light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall, and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting.
"I hope it is he," thought I, "and not something worse." He re-entered, pale and very gloomy.
"I have found it all out," said he, setting his candle down on the washstand; "it is as I thought."
He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.
At the end of a few minutes he inquired in rather a peculiar tone--
"Yes, sir: there is a woman who sews here, called Grace Poole,--she laughs in that way.
He seemed surprised--very inconsistently so, as he had just told me to go.
"What!" he exclaimed, "are you quitting me already, and in that way?"
He held out his hand; I gave him mine: he took it first in one, them in both his own.
He paused; gazed at me: words almost visible trembled on his lips,--but his voice was checked.
"I knew," he continued, "you would do me good in some way, at some time;--I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you: their expression and smile did not"--(again he stopped)--"did not" (he proceeded hastily) "strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing.
Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.
Go, then, Jane; go!" But he still retained my hand, and I could not free it.
"Well, leave me:" he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.
I both wished and feared to see Mr. Rochester on the day which followed this sleepless night: I wanted to hear his voice again, yet feared to meet his eye.
During the early part of the morning, I momentarily expected his coming; he was not in the frequent habit of entering the schoolroom, but he did step in for a few minutes sometimes, and I had the impression that he was sure to visit it that day.
"It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night." "How providential that he had presence of mind to think of the water-jug!"
"I wonder he waked nobody!" "It is to be hoped he will not take cold with sleeping on the library sofa," &c.
I was about to address her, for I wished to know what account had been given of the affair: but, on advancing, I saw a second person in the chamber--a woman sitting on a chair by the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains.
That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap.
She was intent on her work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hard forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have expected to see marking the countenance of a woman who had attempted murder, and whose intended victim had followed her last night to her lair, and (as I believed), charged her with the crime she wished to perpetrate.
She looked up, while I still gazed at her: no start, no increase or failure of colour betrayed emotion, consciousness of guilt, or fear of detection.
She said "Good morning, Miss," in her usual phlegmatic and brief manner; and taking up another ring and more tape, went on with her sewing.
"I will put her to some test," thought I: "such absolute impenetrability is past comprehension."
"Only master had been reading in his bed last night; he fell asleep with his candle lit, and the curtains got on fire; but, fortunately, he awoke before the bed-clothes or the wood-work caught, and contrived to quench the flames with the water in the ewer."
"A strange affair!" I said, in a low voice: then, looking at her fixedly
She again raised her eyes to me, and this time there was something of consciousness in their expression. She seemed to examine me warily; then she answered--
Mrs. Fairfax's room and yours are the nearest to master's; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing: when people get elderly, they often sleep heavy."
She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed, with perfect composure--
"It is hardly likely master would laugh, I should think, Miss, when he was in such danger: You must have been dreaming."
"I was not dreaming," I said, with some warmth, for her brazen coolness provoked me.
Again she looked at me; and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye.
"Have you told master that you heard a laugh?" she inquired.
"You did not think of opening your door and looking out into the gallery?" she further asked.
The idea struck me that if she discovered I knew or suspected her guilt, she would be playing of some of her malignant pranks on me; I thought it advisable to be on my guard.
"Fiend! she wants to know my habits, that she may lay her plans accordingly!"
"It will be wise so to do," was her answer: "this neighbourhood is as quiet as any I know, and I never heard of the hall being attempted by robbers since it was a house; though there are hundreds of pounds' worth of plate in the plate-closet, as is well known.
And you see, for such a large house, there are very few servants, because master has never lived here much; and when he does come, being a bachelor, he needs little waiting on: but I always think it best to err on the safe side; a door is soon fastened, and it is as well to have a drawn bolt between one and any mischief that may be about.
And here she closed her harangue: a long one for her, and uttered with the demureness of a Quakeress.
I still stood absolutely dumfoundered at what appeared to me her miraculous self-possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy, when the cook entered.
"Mrs. Poole," said she, addressing Grace, "the servants' dinner will soon be ready: will you come down?"
I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax's account of the curtain conflagration during dinner, so much was I occupied in puzzling my brains over the enigmatical character of Grace Poole, and still more in pondering the problem of her position at Thornfield and questioning why she had not been given into custody that morning, or, at the very least, dismissed from her master's service.
He had almost as much as declared his conviction of her criminality last night: what mysterious cause withheld him from accusing her?
Why had he enjoined me, too, to secrecy?
It was strange: a bold, vindictive, and haughty gentleman seemed somehow in the power of one of the meanest of his dependants; so much in her power, that even when she lifted her hand against his life, he dared not openly charge her with the attempt, much less punish her for it.
Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have been tempted to think that tenderer feelings than prudence or fear influenced Mr. Rochester in her behalf; but, hard-favoured and matronly as she was, the idea could not be admitted.
"Yet," I reflected, "she has been young once; her youth would be contemporary with her master's: Mrs. Fairfax told me once, she had lived here many years.
I don't think she can ever have been pretty; but, for aught I know, she may possess originality and strength of character to compensate for the want of personal advantages.
What if a former caprice (a freak very possible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as his) has delivered him into her power, and she now exercises over his actions a secret influence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot shake off, and dare not disregard?"
Yet," suggested the secret voice which talks to us in our own hearts, "you are not beautiful either, and perhaps Mr. Rochester approves you: at any rate, you have often felt as if he did; and last night--remember his words; remember his look; remember his voice!"
I was now in the schoolroom; Adele was drawing; I bent over her and directed her pencil.
She looked up with a sort of start. "Qu' avez-vous, mademoiselle?" said she.
I compared myself with her, and found we were different.
Bessie Leaven had said I was quite a lady; and she spoke truth--I was a lady.
Still it was not late; he often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock, and it was yet but six.
I wanted again to introduce the subject of Grace Poole, and to hear what he would answer; I wanted to ask him plainly if he really believed it was she who had made last night's hideous attempt; and if so, why he kept her wickedness a secret.
A tread creaked on the stairs at last. Leah made her appearance; but it was only to intimate that tea was ready in Mrs. Fairfax's room.
"You must want your tea," said the good lady, as I joined her; "you ate so little at dinner.
I am afraid," she continued, "you are not well to- day: you look flushed and feverish."
Having completed her task, she rose to draw down the blind, which she had hitherto kept up, by way, I suppose, of making the most of daylight, though dusk was now fast deepening into total obscurity.
"It is fair to-night," said she, as she looked through the panes, "though not starlight; Mr. Rochester has, on the whole, had a favourable day for his journey."
I did not know he was out."
"Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted! He is gone to the Leas, Mr. Eshton's place, ten miles on the other side Millcote.
"No--nor to-morrow either; I should think he is very likely to stay a week or more: when these fine, fashionable people get together, they are so surrounded by elegance and gaiety, so well provided with all that can please and entertain, they are in no hurry to separate.
Gentlemen especially are often in request on such occasions; and Mr. Rochester is so talented and so lively in society, that I believe he is a general favourite: the ladies are very fond of him; though you would not think his appearance calculated to recommend him particularly in their eyes: but I suppose his acquirements and abilities, perhaps his wealth and good blood, make amends for any little fault of look."
"There are Mrs. Eshton and her three daughters--very elegant young ladies indeed; and there are the Honourable Blanche and Mary Ingram, most beautiful women, I suppose: indeed I have seen Blanche, six or seven years since, when she was a girl of eighteen.
"You saw her, you say, Mrs. Fairfax: what was she like?"
"Yes, I saw her.
"And what was she like?"
"Tall, fine bust, sloping shoulders; long, graceful neck: olive complexion, dark and clear; noble features; eyes rather like Mr. Rochester's: large and black, and as brilliant as her jewels.
And then she had such a fine head of hair; raven-black and so becomingly arranged: a crown of thick plaits behind, and in front the longest, the glossiest curls I ever saw.
She was dressed in pure white; an amber-coloured scarf was passed over her shoulder and across her breast, tied at the side, and descending in long, fringed ends below her knee.
She wore an amber-coloured flower, too, in her hair: it contrasted well with the jetty mass of her curls."
"Yes, indeed: and not only for her beauty, but for her accomplishments.
She was one of the ladies who sang: a gentleman accompanied her on the piano.
I was not aware he could sing."
"Oh! he has a fine bass voice, and an excellent taste for music."
"And Miss Ingram: what sort of a voice had she?"
"A very rich and powerful one: she sang delightfully; it was a treat to listen to her;--and she played afterwards.
I am no judge of music, but Mr. Rochester is; and I heard him say her execution was remarkably good."
"And this beautiful and accomplished lady, she is not yet married?"
"It appears not: I fancy neither she nor her sister have very large fortunes.
Old Lord Ingram's estates were chiefly entailed, and the eldest son came in for everything almost."
"But I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has taken a fancy to her: Mr. Rochester, for instance.
He is rich, is he not?"
But you see there is a considerable difference in age: Mr. Rochester is nearly forty; she is but twenty-five."
Arraigned at my own bar, Memory having given her evidence of the hopes, wishes, sentiments I had been cherishing since last night--of the general state of mind in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight past; Reason having come forward and told, in her own quiet way a plain, unvarnished tale, showing how I had rejected the real, and rabidly devoured the ideal;--I pronounced judgment to this effect:--
And you have derived pleasure from occasional tokens of preference--equivocal tokens shown by a gentleman of family and a man of the world to a dependent and a novice.
He said something in praise of your eyes, did he?
It does good to no woman to be flattered by her superior, who cannot possibly intend to marry her; and it is madness in all women to let a secret love kindle within them, which, if unreturned and unknown, must devour the life that feeds it; and, if discovered and responded to, must lead, _ignis-fatus_-like, into miry wilds whence there is no extrication.
"Whenever, in future, you should chance to fancy Mr. Rochester thinks well of you, take out these two pictures and compare them: say, 'Mr. Rochester might probably win that noble lady's love, if he chose to strive for it; is it likely he would waste a serious thought on this indigent and insignificant plebeian?'"
A week passed, and no news arrived of Mr. Rochester: ten days, and still he did not come.
Mrs. Fairfax said she should not be surprised if he were to go straight from the Leas to London, and thence to the Continent, and not show his face again at Thornfield for a year to come; he had not unfrequently quitted it in a manner quite as abrupt and unexpected.
Not that I humbled myself by a slavish notion of inferiority: on the contrary, I just said-- "You have nothing to do with the master of Thornfield, further than to receive the salary he gives you for teaching his protegee, and to be grateful for such respectful and kind treatment as, if you do your duty, you have a right to expect at his hands.
Be sure that is the only tie he seriously acknowledges between you and him; so don't make him the object of your fine feelings, your raptures, agonies, and so forth. He is not of your order: keep to your caste, and be too self-respecting to lavish the love of the whole heart, soul, and strength, where such a gift is not wanted and would be despised."
Mr. Rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight, when the post brought Mrs. Fairfax a letter. "It is from the master," said she, as she looked at the direction.
And while she broke the seal and perused the document, I went on taking my coffee (we were at breakfast): it was hot, and I attributed to that circumstance a fiery glow which suddenly rose to my face.
"Well, I sometimes think we are too quiet; but we run a chance of being busy enough now: for a little while at least," said Mrs. Fairfax, still holding the note before her spectacles.
Ere I permitted myself to request an explanation, I tied the string of Adele's pinafore, which happened to be loose: having helped her also to another bun and refilled her mug with milk, I said, nonchalantly--
"Indeed he is--in three days, he says: that will be next Thursday; and not alone either.
I don't know how many of the fine people at the Leas are coming with him: he sends directions for all the best bedrooms to be prepared; and the library and drawing-rooms are to be cleaned out; I am to get more kitchen hands from the George Inn, at Millcote, and from wherever else I can; and the ladies will bring their maids and the gentlemen their valets: so we shall have a full house of it."
And Mrs. Fairfax swallowed her breakfast and hastened away to commence operations.
The three days were, as she had foretold, busy enough.
Adele ran quite wild in the midst of it: the preparations for company and the prospect of their arrival, seemed to throw her into ecstasies.
She would have Sophie to look over all her "toilettes," as she called frocks; to furbish up any that were "_passees_," and to air and arrange the new.
For herself, she did nothing but caper about in the front chambers, jump on and off the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses and piled-up bolsters and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in the chimneys.
From school duties she was exonerated: Mrs. Fairfax had pressed me into her service, and I was all day in the storeroom, helping (or hindering) her and the cook; learning to make custards and cheese-cakes and French pastry, to truss game and garnish desert-dishes.
This was when I chanced to see the third-storey staircase door (which of late had always been kept locked) open slowly, and give passage to the form of Grace Poole, in prim cap, white apron, and handkerchief; when I watched her glide along the gallery, her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper; when I saw her look into the bustling, topsy-turvy bedrooms,--just say a word, perhaps, to the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate, or clean a marble mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then pass on.
She would thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat her dinner, smoke a moderate pipe on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot of porter with her, for her private solace, in her own gloomy, upper haunt.
Only one hour in the twenty-four did she pass with her fellow-servants below; all the rest of her time was spent in some low-ceiled, oaken chamber of the second storey: there she sat and sewed--and probably laughed drearily to herself,--as companionless as a prisoner in his dungeon.
The strangest thing of all was, that not a soul in the house, except me, noticed her habits, or seemed to marvel at them: no one discussed her position or employment; no one pitied her solitude or isolation.
And she is laying by: she goes every quarter to the bank at Millcote.
I should not wonder but she has saved enough to keep her independent if she liked to leave; but I suppose she's got used to the place; and then she's not forty yet, and strong and able for anything.
It is too soon for her to give up business."
"Ah!--she understands what she has to do,--nobody better," rejoined Leah significantly; "and it is not every one could fill her shoes--not for all the money she gets."
The charwoman was going on; but here Leah turned and perceived me, and she instantly gave her companion a nudge.
"Doesn't she know?" I heard the woman whisper.
Leah shook her head, and the conversation was of course dropped.
Afternoon arrived: Mrs. Fairfax assumed her best black satin gown, her gloves, and her gold watch; for it was her part to receive the company,--to conduct the ladies to their rooms, &c.
Adele, too, would be dressed: though I thought she had little chance of being introduced to the party that day at least.
However, to please her, I allowed Sophie to apparel her in one of her short, full muslin frocks.
"Here he is!" said she. "Well, John" (leaning out), "any news?"
The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at last wheels were heard; four equestrians galloped up the drive, and after them came two open carriages.
Fluttering veils and waving plumes filled the vehicles; two of the cavaliers were young, dashing-looking gentlemen; the third was Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Mesrour, Pilot bounding before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were the first of the party.
Her purple riding-habit almost swept the ground, her veil streamed long on the breeze; mingling with its transparent folds, and gleaming through them, shone rich raven ringlets.
"Miss Ingram!" exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax, and away she hurried to her post below.
Adele now petitioned to go down; but I took her on my knee, and gave her to understand that she must not on any account think of venturing in sight of the ladies, either now or at any other time, unless expressly sent for: that Mr. Rochester would be very angry, &c.
"Some natural tears she shed" on being told this; but as I began to look very grave, she consented at last to wipe them.
A joyous stir was now audible in the hall: gentlemen's deep tones and ladies' silvery accents blent harmoniously together, and distinguishable above all, though not loud, was the sonorous voice of the master of Thornfield Hall, welcoming his fair and gallant guests under its roof.
"Elles changent de toilettes," said Adele; who, listening attentively, had followed every movement; and she sighed.
"Chez maman," said she, "quand il y avait du monde, je le suivais partout, au salon et a leurs chambres; souvent je regardais les femmes de chambre coiffer et habiller les dames, et c'etait si amusant: comme cela on apprend."
All in that region was fire and commotion; the soup and fish were in the last stage of projection, and the cook hung over her crucibles in a frame of mind and body threatening spontaneous combustion.
I found Adele peeping through the schoolroom door, which she held ajar.
"What beautiful ladies!" cried she in English. "Oh, I wish I might go to them!
She was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to divert her attention for a time.
It was well I secured this forage, or both she, I, and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a share of our repast, would have run a chance of getting no dinner at all: every one downstairs was too much engaged to think of us.
I allowed Adele to sit up much later than usual; for she declared she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and shutting below, and people bustling about.
Besides, she added, a message might possibly come from Mr. Rochester when she was undressed; "et alors quel dommage!"
I told her stories as long as she would listen to them; and then for a change I took her out into the gallery.
The hall lamp was now lit, and it amused her to look over the balustrade and watch the servants passing backwards and forwards.
Presently a voice blent with the rich tones of the instrument; it was a lady who sang, and very sweet her notes were.
I looked at Adele, whose head leant against my shoulder; her eyes were waxing heavy, so I took her up in my arms and carried her off to bed.
They set out early in the forenoon, some on horseback, the rest in carriages; I witnessed both the departure and the return. Miss Ingram, as before, was the only lady equestrian; and, as before, Mr. Rochester galloped at her side; the two rode a little apart from the rest.
"You said it was not likely they should think of being married," said I, "but you see Mr. Rochester evidently prefers her to any of the other ladies."
"Yes, I daresay: no doubt he admires her."
"And she him," I added; "look how she leans her head towards him as if she were conversing confidentially; I wish I could see her face; I have never had a glimpse of it yet."
"You will see her this evening," answered Mrs. Fairfax.
"I happened to remark to Mr. Rochester how much Adele wished to be introduced to the ladies, and he said: 'Oh! let her come into the drawing-room after dinner; and request Miss Eyre to accompany her.'"
"Yes; he said that from mere politeness: I need not go, I am sure," I answered.
"Well, I observed to him that as you were unused to company, I did not think you would like appearing before so gay a party--all strangers; and he replied, in his quick way--'Nonsense!
If she objects, tell her it is my particular wish; and if she resists, say I shall come and fetch her in case of contumacy.'"
"No; I pleaded off, and he admitted my plea.
After the Easter recess, Sir George Lynn, who was lately elected member for Millcote, will have to go up to town and take his seat; I daresay Mr. Rochester will accompany him: it surprises me that he has already made so protracted a stay at Thornfield."
Adele had been in a state of ecstasy all day, after hearing she was to be presented to the ladies in the evening; and it was not till Sophie commenced the operation of dressing her that she sobered down.
Then the importance of the process quickly steadied her, and by the time she had her curls arranged in well-smoothed, drooping clusters, her pink satin frock put on, her long sash tied, and her lace mittens adjusted, she looked as grave as any judge.
No need to warn her not to disarrange her attire: when she was dressed, she sat demurely down in her little chair, taking care previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should crease it, and assured me she would not stir thence till I was ready.
Adele, who appeared to be still under the influence of a most solemnising impression, sat down, without a word, on the footstool I pointed out to her.
Adele brought her stool to my feet; ere long she touched my knee. "What is it, Adele?"
"You think too much of your 'toilette,' Adele: but you may have a flower." And I took a rose from a vase and fastened it in her sash.
She sighed a sigh of ineffable satisfaction, as if her cup of happiness were now full.
First, there was Mrs. Eshton and two of her daughters.
She had evidently been a handsome woman, and was well preserved still.
Of her daughters, the eldest, Amy, was rather little: naive, and child-like in face and manner, and piquant in form; her white muslin dress and blue sash became her well.
Lady Lynn was a large and stout personage of about forty, very erect, very haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin robe of changeful sheen: her dark hair shone glossily under the shade of an azure plume, and within the circlet of a band of gems.
Her black satin dress, her scarf of rich foreign lace, and her pearl ornaments, pleased me better than the rainbow radiance of the titled dame.
But the three most distinguished--partly, perhaps, because the tallest figures of the band--were the Dowager Lady Ingram and her daughters, Blanche and Mary.
The Dowager might be between forty and fifty: her shape was still fine; her hair (by candle-light at least) still black; her teeth, too, were still apparently perfect.
Most people would have termed her a splendid woman of her age: and so she was, no doubt, physically speaking; but then there was an expression of almost insupportable haughtiness in her bearing and countenance.
She had, likewise, a fierce and a hard eye: it reminded me of Mrs. Reed's; she mouthed her words in speaking; her voice was deep, its inflections very pompous, very dogmatical,--very intolerable, in short.
A crimson velvet robe, and a shawl turban of some gold-wrought Indian fabric, invested her (I suppose she thought) with a truly imperial dignity.
Mary was too slim for her height, but Blanche was moulded like a Dian.
I regarded her, of course, with special interest.
First, I wished to see whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax's description; secondly, whether it at all resembled the fancy miniature I had painted of her; and thirdly--it will out!--whether it were such as I should fancy likely to suit Mr. Rochester's taste.
As far as person went, she answered point for point, both to my picture and Mrs. Fairfax's description.
The noble bust, the sloping shoulders, the graceful neck, the dark eyes and black ringlets were all there;--but her face?
Her face was like her mother's; a youthful unfurrowed likeness: the same low brow, the same high features, the same pride. It was not, however, so saturnine a pride! she laughed continually; her laugh was satirical, and so was the habitual expression of her arched and haughty lip.
Genius is said to be self-conscious. I cannot tell whether Miss Ingram was a genius, but she was self-conscious--remarkably self-conscious indeed.
It seemed Mrs. Dent had not studied that science: though, as she said, she liked flowers, "especially wild ones;" Miss Ingram had, and she ran over its vocabulary with an air.
I presently perceived she was (what is vernacularly termed) _trailing_ Mrs. Dent; that is, playing on her ignorance--her _trail_ might be clever, but it was decidedly not good- natured.
She played: her execution was brilliant; she sang: her voice was fine; she talked French apart to her mamma; and she talked it well, with fluency and with a good accent.
Mary had a milder and more open countenance than Blanche; softer features too, and a skin some shades fairer (Miss Ingram was dark as a Spaniard)--but Mary was deficient in life: her face lacked expression, her eye lustre; she had nothing to say, and having once taken her seat, remained fixed like a statue in its niche.
I could not tell--I did not know his taste in female beauty.
If he liked the majestic, she was the very type of majesty: then she was accomplished, sprightly.
Most gentlemen would admire her, I thought; and that he _did_ admire her, I already seemed to have obtained proof: to remove the last shade of doubt, it remained but to see them together.
You are not to suppose, reader, that Adele has all this time been sitting motionless on the stool at my feet: no; when the ladies entered, she rose, advanced to meet them, made a stately reverence, and said with gravity-- "Bon jour, mesdames."
And Miss Ingram had looked down at her with a mocking air, and exclaimed, "Oh, what a little puppet!"
Lady Lynn had remarked, "It is Mr. Rochester's ward, I suppose--the little French girl he was speaking of."
Mrs. Dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a kiss.
And then they had called her to a sofa, where she now sat, ensconced between them, chattering alternately in French and broken English; absorbing not only the young ladies' attention, but that of Mrs. Eshton and Lady Lynn, and getting spoilt to her heart's content.
Henry and Frederick Lynn are very dashing sparks indeed; and Colonel Dent is a fine soldierly man.
Mr. Eshton, the magistrate of the district, is gentleman-like: his hair is quite white, his eyebrows and whiskers still dark, which gives him something of the appearance of a "pere noble de theatre."
Lord Ingram, like his sisters, is very tall; like them, also, he is handsome; but he shares Mary's apathetic and listless look: he seems to have more length of limb than vivacity of blood or vigour of brain.
What had occurred since, calculated to change his and my relative positions?
I did not wonder, when, without looking at me, he took a seat at the other side of the room, and began conversing with some of the ladies.
No sooner did I see that his attention was riveted on them, and that I might gaze without being observed, than my eyes were drawn involuntarily to his face; I could not keep their lids under control: they would rise, and the irids would fix on him.
I looked, and had an acute pleasure in looking,--a precious yet poignant pleasure; pure gold, with a steely point of agony: a pleasure like what the thirst-perishing man might feel who knows the well to which he has crept is poisoned, yet stoops and drinks divine draughts nevertheless.
I compared him with his guests.
What was the gallant grace of the Lynns, the languid elegance of Lord Ingram,--even the military distinction of Colonel Dent, contrasted with his look of native pith and genuine power?
I saw Mr. Rochester smile:--his stern features softened; his eye grew both brilliant and gentle, its ray both searching and sweet.
"He is not to them what he is to me," I thought: "he is not of their kind.
I believe he is of mine;--I am sure he is--I feel akin to him--I understand the language of his countenance and movements: though rank and wealth sever us widely, I have something in my brain and heart, in my blood and nerves, that assimilates me mentally to him.
Did I say, a few days since, that I had nothing to do with him but to receive my salary at his hands?
I know I must conceal my sentiments: I must smother hope; I must remember that he cannot care much for me.
For when I say that I am of his kind, I do not mean that I have his force to influence, and his spell to attract; I mean only that I have certain tastes and feelings in common with him.
Mr. Frederick Lynn has taken a seat beside Mary Ingram, and is showing her the engravings of a splendid volume: she looks, smiles now and then, but apparently says little.
The tall and phlegmatic Lord Ingram leans with folded arms on the chair-back of the little and lively Amy Eshton; she glances up at him, and chatters like a wren: she likes him better than she does Mr. Rochester.
Henry Lynn has taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of Louisa: Adele shares it with him: he is trying to talk French with her, and Louisa laughs at his blunders.
She seems waiting to be sought; but she will not wait too long: she herself selects a mate.
Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshtons, stands on the hearth as solitary as she stands by the table: she confronts him, taking her station on the opposite side of the mantelpiece.
"Then, what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?" (pointing to Adele). "Where did you pick her up?"
"Why, I suppose you have a governess for her: I saw a person with her just now--is she gone?
Oh, no! there she is still, behind the window- curtain.
You pay her, of course; I should think it quite as expensive,--more so; for you have them both to keep in addition."
I feared--or should I say, hoped?--the allusion to me would make Mr. Rochester glance my way; and I involuntarily shrank farther into the shade: but he never turned his eyes.
"I have not considered the subject," said he indifferently, looking straight before him.
You should hear mama on the chapter of governesses: Mary and I have had, I should think, a dozen at least in our day; half of them detestable and the rest ridiculous, and all incubi--were they not, mama?"
The young lady thus claimed as the dowager's special property, reiterated her question with an explanation.
Mrs. Dent here bent over to the pious lady and whispered something in her ear; I suppose, from the answer elicited, it was a reminder that one of the anathematised race was present.
"Tant pis!" said her Ladyship, "I hope it may do her good!"
Then, in a lower tone, but still loud enough for me to hear, "I noticed her; I am a judge of physiognomy, and in hers I see all the faults of her class."
"I will tell you in your private ear," replied she, wagging her turban three times with portentous significancy.
"Ask Blanche; she is nearer you than I."
The best fun was with Madame Joubert: Miss Wilson was a poor sickly thing, lachrymose and low- spirited, not worth the trouble of vanquishing, in short; and Mrs. Grey was coarse and insensible; no blow took effect on her.
I see her yet in her raging passions, when we had driven her to extremities--spilt our tea, crumbled our bread and butter, tossed our books up to the ceiling, and played a charivari with the ruler and desk, the fender and fire-irons.
"Yaas, to be sure I do," drawled Lord Ingram; "and the poor old stick used to cry out 'Oh you villains childs!'--and then we sermonised her on the presumption of attempting to teach such clever blades as we were, when she was herself so ignorant."
Dear mama, there, as soon as she got an inkling of the business, found out that it was of an immoral tendency.
"Then no more need be said: change the subject." Amy Eshton, not hearing or not heeding this dictum, joined in with her soft, infantine tone: "Louisa and I used to quiz our governess too; but she was such a good creature, she would bear anything: nothing put her out.
She was never cross with us; was she, Louisa?"
"No, never: we might do what we pleased; ransack her desk and her workbox, and turn her drawers inside out; and she was so good-natured, she would give us anything we asked for."
"I suppose, now," said Miss Ingram, curling her lip sarcastically, "we shall have an abstract of the memoirs of all the governesses extant: in order to avert such a visitation, I again move the introduction of a new topic.
"A fig for Rizzio!" cried she, tossing her head with all its curls, as she moved to the piano.
"It is my opinion the fiddler David must have been an insipid sort of fellow; I like black Bothwell better: to my mind a man is nothing without a spice of the devil in him; and history may say what it will of James Hepburn, but I have a notion, he was just the sort of wild, fierce, bandit hero whom I could have consented to gift with my hand."
Miss Ingram, who had now seated herself with proud grace at the piano, spreading out her snowy robes in queenly amplitude, commenced a brilliant prelude; talking meantime.
She appeared to be on her high horse to-night; both her words and her air seemed intended to excite not only the admiration, but the amazement of her auditors: she was evidently bent on striking them as something very dashing and daring indeed.
"Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the present day!" exclaimed she, rattling away at the instrument. "Poor, puny things, not fit to stir a step beyond papa's park gates: nor to go even so far without mama's permission and guardianship!
Creatures so absorbed in care about their pretty faces, and their white hands, and their small feet; as if a man had anything to do with beauty!
As if loveliness were not the special prerogative of woman--her legitimate appanage and heritage!
"Whenever I marry," she continued after a pause which none interrupted, "I am resolved my husband shall not be a rival, but a foil to me.
I will suffer no competitor near the throne; I shall exact an undivided homage: his devotions shall not be shared between me and the shape he sees in his mirror.
"Miss Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in her power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance."
"Sing!" said she, and again touching the piano, she commenced an accompaniment in spirited style.
Mrs. Fairfax had said Mr. Rochester possessed a fine voice: he did--a mellow, powerful bass, into which he threw his own feeling, his own force; finding a way through the ear to the heart, and there waking sensation strangely.
"How do you do?" he asked. "I am very well, sir."
"And a little depressed," he said.
Good-night, my--" He stopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.
Meantime, Mr. Rochester had again summoned the ladies round him, and was selecting certain of their number to be of his party.
"Miss Ingram is mine, of course," said he: afterwards he named the two Misses Eshton, and Mrs. Dent.
"Will you play?" he asked.
I shook my head. He did not insist, which I rather feared he would have done; he allowed me to return quietly to my usual seat.
He and his aids now withdrew behind the curtain: the other party, which was headed by Colonel Dent, sat down on the crescent of chairs.
"No," I heard her say: "she looks too stupid for any game of the sort." Ere long a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up.
Within the arch, the bulky figure of Sir George Lynn, whom Mr. Rochester had likewise chosen, was seen enveloped in a white sheet: before him, on a table, lay open a large book; and at his side stood Amy Eshton, draped in Mr. Rochester's cloak, and holding a book in her hand.
Somebody, unseen, rang the bell merrily; then Adele (who had insisted on being one of her guardian's party), bounded forward, scattering round her the contents of a basket of flowers she carried on her arm.
Then appeared the magnificent figure of Miss Ingram, clad in white, a long veil on her head, and a wreath of roses round her brow; by her side walked Mr. Rochester, and together they drew near the table.
At its termination, Colonel Dent and his party consulted in whispers for two minutes, then the Colonel called out--
Seated on the carpet, by the side of this basin, was seen Mr. Rochester, costumed in shawls, with a turban on his head.
His dark eyes and swarthy skin and Paynim features suited the costume exactly: he looked the very model of an Eastern emir, an agent or a victim of the bowstring.
She, too, was attired in oriental fashion: a crimson scarf tied sash-like round the waist: an embroidered handkerchief knotted about her temples; her beautifully-moulded arms bare, one of them upraised in the act of supporting a pitcher, poised gracefully on her head.
Both her cast of form and feature, her complexion and her general air, suggested the idea of some Israelitish princess of the patriarchal days; and such was doubtless the character she intended to represent.
She approached the basin, and bent over it as if to fill her pitcher; she again lifted it to her head.
The personage on the well-brink now seemed to accost her; to make some request:--"She hasted, let down her pitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink."
From the bosom of his robe he then produced a casket, opened it and showed magnificent bracelets and earrings; she acted astonishment and admiration; kneeling, he laid the treasure at her feet; incredulity and delight were expressed by her looks and gestures; the stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms and the rings in her ears.
Amidst this sordid scene, sat a man with his clenched hands resting on his knees, and his eyes bent on the ground.
I knew Mr. Rochester; though the begrimed face, the disordered dress (his coat hanging loose from one arm, as if it had been almost torn from his back in a scuffle), the desperate and scowling countenance, the rough, bristling hair might well have disguised him.
As he moved, a chain clanked; to his wrists were attached fetters.
Mr. Rochester led in Miss Ingram; she was complimenting him on his acting.
"Do you know," said she, "that, of the three characters, I liked you in the last best?
"Is all the soot washed from my face?" he asked, turning it towards her.
She giggled, and her colour rose.
And as the other party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats.
Miss Ingram placed herself at her leader's right hand; the other diviners filled the chairs on each side of him and her.
What charade Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves, I no longer remember; but I still see the consultation which followed each scene: I see Mr. Rochester turn to Miss Ingram, and Miss Ingram to him; I see her incline her head towards him, till the jetty curls almost touch his shoulder and wave against his cheek; I hear their mutual whisperings; I recall their interchanged glances; and something even of the feeling roused by the spectacle returns in memory at this moment.
I have told you, reader, that I had learnt to love Mr. Rochester: I could not unlove him now, merely because I found that he had ceased to notice me--because I might pass hours in his presence, and he would never once turn his eyes in my direction--because I saw all his attentions appropriated by a great lady, who scorned to touch me with the hem of her robes as she passed; who, if ever her dark and imperious eye fell on me by chance, would withdraw it instantly as from an object too mean to merit observation.
I could not unlove him, because I felt sure he would soon marry this very lady--because I read daily in her a proud security in his intentions respecting her--because I witnessed hourly in him a style of courtship which, if careless and choosing rather to be sought than to seek, was yet, in its very carelessness, captivating, and in its very pride, irresistible.
Much too, you will think, reader, to engender jealousy: if a woman, in my position, could presume to be jealous of a woman in Miss Ingram's.
Miss Ingram was a mark beneath jealousy: she was too inferior to excite the feeling.
Pardon the seeming paradox; I mean what I say. She was very showy, but she was not genuine: she had a fine person, many brilliant attainments; but her mind was poor, her heart barren by nature: nothing bloomed spontaneously on that soil; no unforced natural fruit delighted by its freshness.
She was not good; she was not original: she used to repeat sounding phrases from books: she never offered, nor had, an opinion of her own.
She advocated a high tone of sentiment; but she did not know the sensations of sympathy and pity; tenderness and truth were not in her.
Too often she betrayed this, by the undue vent she gave to a spiteful antipathy she had conceived against little Adele: pushing her away with some contumelious epithet if she happened to approach her; sometimes ordering her from the room, and always treating her with coldness and acrimony.
Yes; the future bridegroom, Mr. Rochester himself, exercised over his intended a ceaseless surveillance; and it was from this sagacity--this guardedness of his--this perfect, clear consciousness of his fair one's defects--this obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towards her, that my ever- torturing pain arose.
I saw he was going to marry her, for family, perhaps political reasons, because her rank and connections suited him; I felt he had not given her his love, and that her qualifications were ill adapted to win from him that treasure.
If she had managed the victory at once, and he had yielded and sincerely laid his heart at her feet, I should have covered my face, turned to the wall, and (figuratively) have died to them.
If Miss Ingram had been a good and noble woman, endowed with force, fervour, kindness, sense, I should have had one vital struggle with two tigers--jealousy and despair: then, my heart torn out and devoured, I should have admired her--acknowledged her excellence, and been quiet for the rest of my days: and the more absolute her superiority, the deeper would have been my admiration--the more truly tranquil my quiescence.
Because, when she failed, I saw how she might have succeeded.
Arrows that continually glanced off from Mr. Rochester's breast and fell harmless at his feet, might, I knew, if shot by a surer hand, have quivered keen in his proud heart--have called love into his stern eye, and softness into his sardonic face; or, better still, without weapons a silent conquest might have been won.
"Why can she not influence him more, when she is privileged to draw so near to him?"
I asked myself. "Surely she cannot truly like him, or not like him with true affection!
If she did, she need not coin her smiles so lavishly, flash her glances so unremittingly, manufacture airs so elaborate, graces so multitudinous. It seems to me that she might, by merely sitting quietly at his side, saying little and looking less, get nigher his heart.
I have seen in his face a far different expression from that which hardens it now while she is so vivaciously accosting him; but then it came of itself: it was not elicited by meretricious arts and calculated manoeuvres; and one had but to accept it--to answer what he asked without pretension, to address him when needful without grimace--and it increased and grew kinder and more genial, and warmed one like a fostering sunbeam.
How will she manage to please him when they are married?
I do not think she will manage it; and yet it might be managed; and his wife might, I verily believe, be the very happiest woman the sun shines on."
It surprised me when I first discovered that such was his intention: I had thought him a man unlikely to be influenced by motives so commonplace in his choice of a wife; but the longer I considered the position, education, &c., of the parties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming either him or Miss Ingram for acting in conformity to ideas and principles instilled into them, doubtless, from their childhood.
But in other points, as well as this, I was growing very lenient to my master: I was forgetting all his faults, for which I had once kept a sharp look-out.
It had formerly been my endeavour to study all sides of his character: to take the bad with the good; and from the just weighing of both, to form an equitable judgment. Now I saw no bad.
And as for the vague something--was it a sinister or a sorrowful, a designing or a desponding expression?--that opened upon a careful observer, now and then, in his eye, and closed again before one could fathom the strange depth partially disclosed; that something which used to make me fear and shrink, as if I had been wandering amongst volcanic-looking hills, and had suddenly felt the ground quiver and seen it gape: that something, I, at intervals, beheld still; and with throbbing heart, but not with palsied nerves.
Instead of wishing to shun, I longed only to dare--to divine it; and I thought Miss Ingram happy, because one day she might look into the abyss at her leisure, explore its secrets and analyse their nature.
Meantime, while I thought only of my master and his future bride--saw only them, heard only their discourse, and considered only their movements of importance--the rest of the party were occupied with their own separate interests and pleasures.
Sometimes all, as with one consent, suspended their by-play to observe and listen to the principal actors: for, after all, Mr. Rochester and--because closely connected with him--Miss Ingram were the life and soul of the party. If he was absent from the room an hour, a perceptible dulness seemed to steal over the spirits of his guests; and his re-entrance was sure to give a fresh impulse to the vivacity of conversation.
The want of his animating influence appeared to be peculiarly felt one day that he had been summoned to Millcote on business, and was not likely to return till late.
Blanche Ingram, after having repelled, by supercilious taciturnity, some efforts of Mrs. Dent and Mrs. Eshton to draw her into conversation, had first murmured over some sentimental tunes and airs on the piano, and then, having fetched a novel from the library, had flung herself in haughty listlessness on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedious hours of absence.
I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa: the others, too, looked up from their several occupations; for at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse-hoofs became audible on the wet gravel.
"What can possess him to come home in that style?" said Miss Ingram. "He rode Mesrour (the black horse), did he not, when he went out? and Pilot was with him:--what has he done with the animals?"
As she said this, she approached her tall person and ample garments so near the window, that I was obliged to bend back almost to the breaking of my spine: in her eagerness she did not observe me at first, but when she did, she curled her lip and moved to another casement.
The post-chaise stopped; the driver rang the door-bell, and a gentleman alighted attired in travelling garb; but it was not Mr. Rochester; it was a tall, fashionable-looking man, a stranger.
"How provoking!" exclaimed Miss Ingram: "you tiresome monkey!" (apostrophising Adele), "who perched you up in the window to give false intelligence?" and she cast on me an angry glance, as if I were in fault.
He bowed to Lady Ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.
"It appears I come at an inopportune time, madam," said he, "when my friend, Mr. Rochester, is from home; but I arrive from a very long journey, and I think I may presume so far on old and intimate acquaintance as to instal myself here till he returns."
His manner was polite; his accent, in speaking, struck me as being somewhat unusual,--not precisely foreign, but still not altogether English: his age might be about Mr. Rochester's,--between thirty and forty; his complexion was singularly sallow: otherwise he was a fine-looking man, at first sight especially.
On closer examination, you detected something in his face that displeased, or rather that failed to please.
His features were regular, but too relaxed: his eye was large and well cut, but the life looking out of it was a tame, vacant life--at least so I thought. The sound of the dressing-bell dispersed the party.
It was not till after dinner that I saw him again: he then seemed quite at his ease.
But I liked his physiognomy even less than before: it struck me as being at the same time unsettled and inanimate.
For a handsome and not an unamiable-looking man, he repelled me exceedingly: there was no power in that smooth-skinned face of a full oval shape: no firmness in that aquiline nose and small cherry mouth; there was no thought on the low, even forehead; no command in that blank, brown eye.
As I sat in my usual nook, and looked at him with the light of the girandoles on the mantelpiece beaming full over him--for he occupied an arm-chair drawn close to the fire, and kept shrinking still nearer, as if he were cold, I compared him with Mr. Rochester.
These last were discussing the stranger; they both called him "a beautiful man."
Louisa said he was "a love of a creature," and she "adored him;" and Mary instanced his "pretty little mouth, and nice nose," as her ideal of the charming. "And what a sweet-tempered forehead he has!" cried Louisa,--"so smooth--none of those frowning irregularities I dislike so much; and such a placid eye and smile!"
I was now able to concentrate my attention on the group by the fire, and I presently gathered that the new-comer was called Mr. Mason; then I learned that he was but just arrived in England, and that he came from some hot country: which was the reason, doubtless, his face was so sallow, and that he sat so near the hearth, and wore a surtout in the house.
Presently the words Jamaica, Kingston, Spanish Town, indicated the West Indies as his residence; and it was with no little surprise I gathered, ere long, that he had there first seen and become acquainted with Mr. Rochester.
He spoke of his friend's dislike of the burning heats, the hurricanes, and rainy seasons of that region.
I knew Mr. Rochester had been a traveller: Mrs. Fairfax had said so; but I thought the continent of Europe had bounded his wanderings; till now I had never heard a hint given of visits to more distant shores.
The footman who brought the coal, in going out, stopped near Mr. Eshton's chair, and said something to him in a low voice, of which I heard only the words, "old woman,"--"quite troublesome."
"Tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not take herself off," replied the magistrate.
"No--stop!" interrupted Colonel Dent. "Don't send her away, Eshton; we might turn the thing to account; better consult the ladies."
And speaking aloud, he continued--"Ladies, you talked of going to Hay Common to visit the gipsy camp; Sam here says that one of the old Mother Bunches is in the servants' hall at this moment, and insists upon being brought in before 'the quality,' to tell them their fortunes.
Would you like to see her?"
Dismiss her, by all means, at once!"
"But I cannot persuade her to go away, my lady," said the footman; "nor can any of the servants: Mrs. Fairfax is with her just now, entreating her to be gone; but she has taken a chair in the chimney-corner, and says nothing shall stir her from it till she gets leave to come in here."
"What does she want?" asked Mrs. Eshton.
"'To tell the gentry their fortunes,' she says, ma'am; and she swears she must and will do it."
"What is she like?" inquired the Misses Eshton, in a breath.
"Why, she's a real sorceress!" cried Frederick Lynn. "Let us have her in, of course."
"To be sure," rejoined his brother; "it would be a thousand pities to throw away such a chance of fun."
"Indeed, mama, but you can--and will," pronounced the haughty voice of Blanche, as she turned round on the piano-stool; where till now she had sat silent, apparently examining sundry sheets of music. "I have a curiosity to hear my fortune told: therefore, Sam, order the beldame forward."
"Let her come--it will be excellent sport!"
The footman still lingered. "She looks such a rough one," said he.
"Go!" ejaculated Miss Ingram, and the man went.
"She won't come now," said he. "She says it's not her mission to appear before the 'vulgar herd' (them's her words).
I must show her into a room by herself, and then those who wish to consult her must go to her one by one."
"You see now, my queenly Blanche," began Lady Ingram, "she encroaches. Be advised, my angel girl--and--"
"Show her into the library, of course," cut in the "angel girl."
"It is not my mission to listen to her before the vulgar herd either: I mean to have her all to myself.
"Yes, ma'am--but she looks such a tinkler."
"She's ready now," said the footman, as he reappeared. "She wishes to know who will be her first visitor."
"I think I had better just look in upon her before any of the ladies go," said Colonel Dent. "Tell her, Sam, a gentleman is coming."
"She says, sir, that she'll have no gentlemen; they need not trouble themselves to come near her; nor," he added, with difficulty suppressing a titter, "any ladies either, except the young, and single."
"By Jove, she has taste!" exclaimed Henry Lynn.
Miss Ingram rose solemnly: "I go first," she said, in a tone which might have befitted the leader of a forlorn hope, mounting a breach in the van of his men.
"Oh, my best! oh, my dearest! pause--reflect!" was her mama's cry; but she swept past her in stately silence, passed through the door which Colonel Dent held open, and we heard her enter the library. A comparative silence ensued.
Lady Ingram thought it "le cas" to wring her hands: which she did accordingly.
Miss Mary declared she felt, for her part, she never dared venture.
Would she laugh?
Would she take it as a joke?
All eyes met her with a glance of eager curiosity, and she met all eyes with one of rebuff and coldness; she looked neither flurried nor merry: she walked stiffly to her seat, and took it in silence.
"What did she say, sister?" asked Mary.
How do you feel?--Is she a real fortune-teller?" demanded the Misses Eshton.
I have seen a gipsy vagabond; she has practised in hackneyed fashion the science of palmistry and told me what such people usually tell.
My whim is gratified; and now I think Mr. Eshton will do well to put the hag in the stocks to-morrow morning, as he threatened."
Miss Ingram took a book, leant back in her chair, and so declined further conversation.
I watched her for nearly half-an-hour: during all that time she never turned a page, and her face grew momently darker, more dissatisfied, and more sourly expressive of disappointment.
She had obviously not heard anything to her advantage: and it seemed to me, from her prolonged fit of gloom and taciturnity, that she herself, notwithstanding her professed indifference, attached undue importance to whatever revelations had been made her.
{During all that time she never turned a page: p184.jpg} Meantime, Mary Ingram, Amy and Louisa Eshton, declared they dared not go alone; and yet they all wished to go.
Pressed for further explanation, they declared she had told them of things they had said and done when they were mere children; described books and ornaments they had in their boudoirs at home: keepsakes that different relations had presented to them.
They affirmed that she had even divined their thoughts, and had whispered in the ear of each the name of the person she liked best in the world, and informed them of what they most wished for.
"If you please, miss, the gipsy declares that there is another young single lady in the room who has not been to her yet, and she swears she will not go till she has seen all.
What shall I tell her?"
"If you like, miss," said Sam, "I'll wait in the hall for you; and if she frightens you, just call and I'll come in."
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl--if Sibyl she were--was seated snugly enough in an easy-chair at the chimney- corner.
She had on a red cloak and a black bonnet: or rather, a broad- brimmed gipsy hat, tied down with a striped handkerchief under her chin.
An extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bending over the fire, and seemed reading in a little black book, like a prayer-book, by the light of the blaze: she muttered the words to herself, as most old women do, while she read; she did not desist immediately on my entrance: it appeared she wished to finish a paragraph.
She shut her book and slowly looked up; her hat-brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see, as she raised it, that it was a strange one.
It looked all brown and black: elf- locks bristled out from beneath a white band which passed under her chin, and came half over her cheeks, or rather jaws: her eye confronted me at once, with a bold and direct gaze.
"Well, and you want your fortune told?" she said, in a voice as decided as her glance, as harsh as her features.
"I don't care about it, mother; you may please yourself: but I ought to warn you, I have no faith."
The old crone "nichered" a laugh under her bonnet and bandage; she then drew out a short black pipe, and lighting it began to smoke.
Having indulged a while in this sedative, she raised her bent body, took the pipe from her lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire, said very deliberately--"You are cold; you are sick; and you are silly."
You are sick; because the best of feelings, the highest and the sweetest given to man, keeps far away from you.
She again put her short black pipe to her lips, and renewed her smoking with vigour.
I gave her a shilling: she put it into an old stocking-foot which she took out of her pocket, and having tied it round and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand.
She approached her face to the palm, and pored over it without touching it.
"It is too fine," said she. "I can make nothing of such a hand as that; almost without lines: besides, what is in a palm?
"No," she continued, "it is in the face: on the forehead, about the eyes, in the lines of the mouth.
"Ah! now you are coming to reality," I said, as I obeyed her. "I shall begin to put some faith in you presently."
I knelt within half a yard of her.
She stirred the fire, so that a ripple of light broke from the disturbed coal: the glare, however, as she sat, only threw her face into deeper shadow: mine, it illumined.
"I wonder with what feelings you came to me to-night," she said, when she had examined me a while. "I wonder what thoughts are busy in your heart during all the hours you sit in yonder room with the fine people flitting before you like shapes in a magic-lantern: just as little sympathetic communion passing between you and them as if they were really mere shadows of human forms, and not the actual substance."
"Don't be alarmed," continued the strange being; "she's a safe hand is Mrs. Poole: close and quiet; any one may repose confidence in her.
"Mr. Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests."
"No question about his right: but have you never observed that, of all the tales told here about matrimony, Mr. Rochester has been favoured with the most lively and the most continuous?"
One unexpected sentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a web of mystification; and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting for weeks by my heart watching its workings and taking record of every pulse.
"Eagerness of a listener!" repeated she: "yes; Mr. Rochester has sat by the hour, his ear inclined to the fascinating lips that took such delight in their task of communicating; and Mr. Rochester was so willing to receive and looked so grateful for the pastime given him; you have noticed this?"
I cannot remember detecting gratitude in his face."
"You have seen love: have you not?--and, looking forward, you have seen him married, and beheld his bride happy?"
He must love such a handsome, noble, witty, accomplished lady; and probably she loves him, or, if not his person, at least his purse.
I know she considers the Rochester estate eligible to the last degree; though (God pardon me!) I told her something on that point about an hour ago which made her look wondrous grave: the corners of her mouth fell half an inch.
I would advise her blackaviced suitor to look out: if another comes, with a longer or clearer rent-roll,--he's dished--"
"But, mother, I did not come to hear Mr. Rochester's fortune: I came to hear my own; and you have told me nothing of it."
I saw her do it.
She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back in her chair. She began muttering,--
I have an inward treasure born with me, which can keep me alive if all extraneous delights should be withheld, or offered only at a price I cannot afford to give.' The forehead declares, 'Reason sits firm and holds the reins, and she will not let the feelings burst away and hurry her to wild chasms.
The old woman's voice had changed: her accent, her gesture, and all were familiar to me as my own face in a glass--as the speech of my own tongue. I got up, but did not go.
I looked; I stirred the fire, and I looked again: but she drew her bonnet and her bandage closer about her face, and again beckoned me to depart.
The flame illuminated her hand stretched out: roused now, and on the alert for discoveries, I at once noticed that hand.
"There, then--'Off, ye lendings!'" And Mr. Rochester stepped out of his disguise.
I knew gipsies and fortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old woman had expressed herself; besides I had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to conceal her features.
But my mind had been running on Grace Poole--that living enigma, that mystery of mysteries, as I considered her.
"Well," said he, "what are you musing about?
I expected no one; is he gone?"
"No; he said he had known you long, and that he could take the liberty of installing himself here till you returned." "The devil he did!
Did he give his name?"
"His name is Mason, sir; and he comes from the West Indies; from Spanish Town, in Jamaica, I think."
Mr. Rochester was standing near me; he had taken my hand, as if to lead me to a chair.
As I spoke he gave my wrist a convulsive grip; the smile on his lips froze: apparently a spasm caught his breath.
"Mason!--the West Indies!" he said, in the tone one might fancy a speaking automaton to enounce its single words; "Mason!--the West Indies!" he reiterated; and he went over the syllables three times, growing, in the intervals of speaking, whiter than ashes: he hardly seemed to know what he was doing.
Holding my hand in both his own, he chafed it; gazing on me, at the same time, with the most troubled and dreary look.
"My little friend!" said he, "I wish I were in a quiet island with only you; and trouble, and danger, and hideous recollections removed from me."
"Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-room: they will be at supper there; and tell me if Mason is with them, and what he is doing." I went.
I found all the party in the dining-room at supper, as Mr. Rochester had said; they were not seated at table,--the supper was arranged on the sideboard; each had taken what he chose, and they stood about here and there in groups, their plates and glasses in their hands.
I filled a wine-glass (I saw Miss Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so: she thought I was taking a liberty, I daresay), and I returned to the library.
Mr. Rochester's extreme pallor had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern.
"Here is to your health, ministrant spirit!" he said. He swallowed the contents and returned it to me.
"Go back now into the room; step quietly up to Mason, and whisper in his ear that Mr. Rochester is come and wishes to see him: show him in here and then leave me." "Yes, sir."
I did his behest.
The consequence was, that when the moon, which was full and bright (for the night was fine), came in her course to that space in the sky opposite my casement, and looked in at me through the unveiled panes, her glorious gaze roused me.
Awaking in the dead of night, I opened my eyes on her disk--silver-white and crystal clear.
Indeed, whatever being uttered that fearful shriek could not soon repeat it: not the widest-winged condor on the Andes could, twice in succession, send out such a yell from the cloud shrouding his eyrie.
And the door at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr. Rochester advanced with a candle: he had just descended from the upper storey. One of the ladies ran to him directly; she seized his arm: it was Miss Ingram.
"What awful event has taken place?" said she.
"But don't pull me down or strangle me," he replied: for the Misses Eshton were clinging about him now; and the two dowagers, in vast white wrappers, were bearing down on him like ships in full sail.
And dangerous he looked: his black eyes darted sparks.
Calming himself by an effort, he added--
She's an excitable, nervous person: she construed her dream into an apparition, or something of that sort, no doubt; and has taken a fit with fright.
Now, then, I must see you all back into your rooms; for, till the house is settled, she cannot be looked after.
And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he contrived to get them all once more enclosed in their separate dormitories.
Meantime the moon declined: she was about to set.
"I want you," he said: "come this way: take your time, and make no noise."
He glided up the gallery and up the stairs, and stopped in the dark, low corridor of the fateful third storey: I had followed and stood at his side.
"Have you a sponge in your room?" he asked in a whisper.
He still waited; he held a key in his hand: approaching one of the small, black doors, he put it in the lock; he paused, and addressed me again.
"Just give me your hand," he said: "it will not do to risk a fainting fit."
I put my fingers into his.
"Warm and steady," was his remark: he turned the key and opened the door.
Mr. Rochester, putting down his candle, said to me, "Wait a minute," and he went forward to the inner apartment.
A shout of laughter greeted his entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in Grace Poole's own goblin ha! ha! _She_ then was there.
He made some sort of arrangement without speaking, though I heard a low voice address him: he came out and closed the door behind him.
"Here, Jane!" he said; and I walked round to the other side of a large bed, which with its drawn curtains concealed a considerable portion of the chamber.
An easy-chair was near the bed-head: a man sat in it, dressed with the exception of his coat; he was still; his head leant back; his eyes were closed.
Mr. Rochester held the candle over him; I recognised in his pale and seemingly lifeless face--the stranger, Mason: I saw too that his linen on one side, and one arm, was almost soaked in blood.
"Hold the candle," said Mr. Rochester, and I took it: he fetched a basin of water from the washstand: "Hold that," said he. I obeyed.
He took the sponge, dipped it in, and moistened the corpse-like face; he asked for my smelling-bottle, and applied it to the nostrils.
Mr. Mason shortly unclosed his eyes; he groaned.
Mr. Rochester opened the shirt of the wounded man, whose arm and shoulder were bandaged: he sponged away blood, trickling fast down.
Don't be so overcome, man: bear up!
Jane," he continued.
"I shall have to leave you in this room with this gentleman, for an hour, or perhaps two hours: you will sponge the blood as I do when it returns: if he feels faint, you will put the glass of water on that stand to his lips, and your salts to his nose. You will not speak to him on any pretext--and--Richard, it will be at the peril of your life if you speak to her: open your lips--agitate yourself--and I'll not answer for the consequences."
Again the poor man groaned; he looked as if he dared not move; fear, either of death or of something else, appeared almost to paralyse him.
Mr. Rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceeded to use it as he had done.
He watched me a second, then saying, "Remember!--No conversation," he left the room.
I experienced a strange feeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sound of his retreating step ceased to be heard.
According as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam hovered here or glanced there, it was now the bearded physician, Luke, that bent his brow; now St. John's long hair that waved; and anon the devilish face of Judas, that grew out of the panel, and seemed gathering life and threatening a revelation of the arch-traitor--of Satan himself--in his subordinate's form.
What creature was it, that, masked in an ordinary woman's face and shape, uttered the voice, now of a mocking demon, and anon of a carrion-seeking bird of prey?
And this man I bent over--this commonplace, quiet stranger--how had he become involved in the web of horror? and why had the Fury flown at him?
What made him seek this quarter of the house at an untimely season, when he should have been asleep in bed?
And why, now, was he so tame under the violence or treachery done him?
Why did he so quietly submit to the concealment Mr. Rochester enforced? Why _did_ Mr. Rochester enforce this concealment?
His guest had been outraged, his own life on a former occasion had been hideously plotted against; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and sank in oblivion!
It was evident that in their former intercourse, the passive disposition of the one had been habitually influenced by the active energy of the other: whence then had arisen Mr. Rochester's dismay when he heard of Mr. Mason's arrival?
Why had the mere name of this unresisting individual--whom his word now sufficed to control like a child--fallen on him, a few hours since, as a thunderbolt might fall on an oak? Oh!
I could not forget his look and his paleness when he whispered: "Jane, I have got a blow--I have got a blow, Jane."
I could not forget how the arm had trembled which he rested on my shoulder: and it was no light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill the vigorous frame of Fairfax Rochester.
When will he come?" I cried inwardly, as the night lingered and lingered--as my bleeding patient drooped, moaned, sickened: and neither day nor aid arrived.
I had, again and again, held the water to Mason's white lips; again and again offered him the stimulating salts: my efforts seemed ineffectual: either bodily or mental suffering, or loss of blood, or all three combined, were fast prostrating his strength.
He moaned so, and looked so weak, wild, and lost, I feared he was dying; and I might not even speak to him.
Presently I heard Pilot bark far below, out of his distant kennel in the courtyard: hope revived.
Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.
"Now, Carter, be on the alert," he said to this last: "I give you but half-an-hour for dressing the wound, fastening the bandages, getting the patient downstairs and all."
"But is he fit to move, sir?"
"No doubt of it; it is nothing serious; he is nervous, his spirits must be kept up.
Mr. Rochester drew back the thick curtain, drew up the holland blind, let in all the daylight he could; and I was surprised and cheered to see how far dawn was advanced: what rosy streaks were beginning to brighten the east.
Then he approached Mason, whom the surgeon was already handling.
"Now, my good fellow, how are you?" he asked.
"I can do that conscientiously," said Carter, who had now undone the bandages; "only I wish I could have got here sooner: he would not have bled so much--but how is this?
"She bit me," he murmured. "She worried me like a tigress, when Rochester got the knife from her."
"You should not have yielded: you should have grappled with her at once," said Mr. Rochester.
"Oh, it was frightful!" he added, shuddering. "And I did not expect it: she looked so quiet at first."
"I warned you," was his friend's answer; "I said--be on your guard when you go near her.
I must look to this other wound in the arm: she has had her teeth here too, I think."
"She sucked the blood: she said she'd drain my heart," said Mason.
I saw Mr. Rochester shudder: a singularly marked expression of disgust, horror, hatred, warped his countenance almost to distortion; but he only said--
"Come, be silent, Richard, and never mind her gibberish: don't repeat it."
"You will when you are out of the country: when you get back to Spanish Town, you may think of her as dead and buried--or rather, you need not think of her at all."
"It is not impossible: have some energy, man.
Jane" (he turned to me for the first time since his re-entrance), "take this key: go down into my bedroom, and walk straight forward into my dressing-room: open the top drawer of the wardrobe and take out a clean shirt and neck-handkerchief: bring them here; and be nimble."
I went; sought the repository he had mentioned, found the articles named, and returned with them.
"Now," said he, "go to the other side of the bed while I order his toilet; but don't leave the room: you may be wanted again."
Here, Carter, help him on with his waist-coat.
I did so; he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid, and presented it to Mason.
He was dressed now: he still looked pale, but he was no longer gory and sullied.
Mr. Rochester let him sit three minutes after he had swallowed the liquid; he then took his arm--
"Now I am sure you can get on your feet," he said--"try."
Now, Jane, trip on before us away to the backstairs; unbolt the side-passage door, and tell the driver of the post-chaise you will see in the yard--or just outside, for I told him not to drive his rattling wheels over the pavement--to be ready; we are coming: and, Jane, if any one is about, come to the foot of the stairs and hem."
I approached him, and said the gentlemen were coming; he nodded: then I looked carefully round and listened.
"Take care of him," said Mr. Rochester to the latter, "and keep him at your house till he is quite well: I shall ride over in a day or two to see how he gets on.
"Leave the window open on his side, Carter; there is no wind--good-bye, Dick."
"Let her be taken care of; let her be treated as tenderly as may be: let her--" he stopped and burst into tears.
"I do my best; and have done it, and will do it," was the answer: he shut up the chaise door, and the vehicle drove away.
"Yet would to God there was an end of all this!" added Mr. Rochester, as he closed and barred the heavy yard-gates.
This done, he moved with slow step and abstracted air towards a door in the wall bordering the orchard.
I, supposing he had done with me, prepared to return to the house; again, however, I heard him call "Jane!"
He had opened feel portal and stood at it, waiting for me. "Come where there is some freshness, for a few moments," he said; "that house is a mere dungeon: don't you feel it so?"
"The glamour of inexperience is over your eyes," he answered; "and you see it through a charmed medium: you cannot discern that the gilding is slime and the silk draperies cobwebs; that the marble is sordid slate, and the polished woods mere refuse chips and scaly bark.
He strayed down a walk edged with box, with apple trees, pear trees, and cherry trees on one side, and a border on the other full of all sorts of old-fashioned flowers, stocks, sweet-williams, primroses, pansies, mingled with southernwood, sweet-briar, and various fragrant herbs.
They were fresh now as a succession of April showers and gleams, followed by a lovely spring morning, could make them: the sun was just entering the dappled east, and his light illumined the wreathed and dewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet walks under them.
"Oh yes! don't trouble your head about her--put the thing out of your thoughts."
"Yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays."
To live, for me, Jane, is to stand on a crater-crust which may crack and spue fire any day." "But Mr. Mason seems a man easily led.
Your influence, sir, is evidently potent with him: he will never set you at defiance or wilfully injure you."
"Oh, no! Mason will not defy me; nor, knowing it, will he hurt me--but, unintentionally, he might in a moment, by one careless word, deprive me, if not of life, yet for ever of happiness."
"Sit," he said; "the bench is long enough for two.
"Well then, Jane, call to aid your fancy:--suppose you were no longer a girl well reared and disciplined, but a wild boy indulged from childhood upwards; imagine yourself in a remote foreign land; conceive that you there commit a capital error, no matter of what nature or from what motives, but one whose consequences must follow you through life and taint all your existence.
Again Mr. Rochester propounded his query:
"Is the wandering and sinful, but now rest-seeking and repentant, man justified in daring the world's opinion, in order to attach to him for ever this gentle, gracious, genial stranger, thereby securing his own peace of mind and regeneration of life?"
Men and women die; philosophers falter in wisdom, and Christians in goodness: if any one you know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength to amend and solace to heal."
I have myself--I tell it you without parable--been a worldly, dissipated, restless man; and I believe I have found the instrument for my cure in--"
At last I looked up at the tardy speaker: he was looking eagerly at me.
"Little friend," said he, in quite a changed tone--while his face changed too, losing all its softness and gravity, and becoming harsh and sarcastic--"you have noticed my tender penchant for Miss Ingram: don't you think if I married her she would regenerate me with a vengeance?"
He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of the walk, and when he came back he was humming a tune.
"Jane, Jane," said he, stopping before me, "you are quite pale with your vigils: don't you curse me for disturbing your rest?"
To you I can talk of my lovely one: for now you have seen her and know her."
"She's a rare one, is she not, Jane?"
Go in by the shrubbery, through that wicket." As I went one way, he went another, and I heard him in the yard, saying cheerfully--
"Mason got the start of you all this morning; he was gone before sunrise: I rose at four to see him off."
Sympathies, I believe, exist (for instance, between far-distant, long-absent, wholly estranged relatives asserting, notwithstanding their alienation, the unity of the source to which each traces his origin) whose workings baffle mortal comprehension.
And signs, for aught we know, may be but the sympathies of Nature with man.
When I was a little girl, only six years old, I one night heard Bessie Leaven say to Martha Abbot that she had been dreaming about a little child; and that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble, either to one's self or one's kin.
The next day Bessie was sent for home to the deathbed of her little sister.
On repairing thither, I found a man waiting for me, having the appearance of a gentleman's servant: he was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat he held in his hand was surrounded with a crape band.
"I daresay you hardly remember me, Miss," he said, rising as I entered; "but my name is Leaven: I lived coachman with Mrs. Reed when you were at Gateshead, eight or nine years since, and I live there still."
"Yes, Miss: my wife is very hearty, thank you; she brought me another little one about two months since--we have three now--and both mother and child are thriving."
"I hope no one is dead," I said, glancing at his black dress.
He too looked down at the crape round his hat and replied-- "Mr. John died yesterday was a week, at his chambers in London."
"And how does his mother bear it?"
"Why, you see, Miss Eyre, it is not a common mishap: his life has been very wild: these last three years he gave himself up to strange ways, and his death was shocking."
"I heard from Bessie he was not doing well."
He could not do worse: he ruined his health and his estate amongst the worst men and the worst women.
He got into debt and into jail: his mother helped him out twice, but as soon as he was free he returned to his old companions and habits.
His head was not strong: the knaves he lived amongst fooled him beyond anything I ever heard.
Missis refused: her means have long been much reduced by his extravagance; so he went back again, and the next news was that he was dead.
How he died, God knows!--they say he killed himself."
Robert Leaven resumed-- "Missis had been out of health herself for some time: she had got very stout, but was not strong with it; and the loss of money and fear of poverty were quite breaking her down.
She was three days without speaking; but last Tuesday she seemed rather better: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and kept making signs to my wife and mumbling.
It was only yesterday morning, however, that Bessie understood she was pronouncing your name; and at last she made out the words, 'Bring Jane--fetch Jane Eyre: I want to speak to her.'
Bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or means anything by the words; but she told Miss Reed and Miss Georgiana, and advised them to send for you.
The young ladies put it off at first; but their mother grew so restless, and said, 'Jane, Jane,' so many times, that at last they consented.
"I think so too, Miss. Bessie said she was sure you would not refuse: but I suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off?"
He was not in any of the lower rooms; he was not in the yard, the stables, or the grounds.
I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had seen him;--yes: she believed he was playing billiards with Miss Ingram.
It required some courage to disturb so interesting a party; my errand, however, was one I could not defer, so I approached the master where he stood at Miss Ingram's side.
She turned as I drew near, and looked at me haughtily: her eyes seemed to demand, "What can the creeping creature want now?" and when I said, in a low voice, "Mr. Rochester," she made a movement as if tempted to order me away.
I remember her appearance at the moment--it was very graceful and very striking: she wore a morning robe of sky-blue crape; a gauzy azure scarf was twisted in her hair.
She had been all animation with the game, and irritated pride did not lower the expression of her haughty lineaments.
"Does that person want you?" she inquired of Mr. Rochester; and Mr. Rochester turned to see who the "person" was. He made a curious grimace--one of his strange and equivocal demonstrations--threw down his cue and followed me from the room.
"Well, Jane?" he said, as he rested his back against the schoolroom door, which he had shut.
"What sick lady?--where does she live?"
Who may she be that sends for people to see her that distance?"
"It is his widow, sir."
"And what have you to do with her?
How do you know her?"
"Mr. Reed was my uncle--my mother's brother."
"The deuce he was!
"None that would own me, sir. Mr. Reed is dead, and his wife cast me off."
"Because I was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me."
Sir George Lynn was talking of a Reed of Gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of the veriest rascals on town; and Ingram was mentioning a Georgiana Reed of the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago in London."
"John Reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined his family, and is supposed to have committed suicide.
The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack."
"And what good can you do her?
I would never think of running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off."
"Yes, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circumstances were very different: I could not be easy to neglect her wishes now."
"At all events you _will_ come back: you will not be induced under any pretext to take up a permanent residence with her?"
"No, sir, she has sent her coachman."
"Yes, sir, he has lived ten years in the family."
How much have you in the world, Jane?" he asked, smiling.
He took the purse, poured the hoard into his palm, and chuckled over it as if its scantiness amused him.
Soon he produced his pocket-book: "Here," said he, offering me a note; it was fifty pounds, and he owed me but fifteen.
He scowled at first; then, as if recollecting something, he said-- "Right, right!
"To get her out of my bride's way, who might otherwise walk over her rather too emphatically?
"In course!" he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a distortion of features equally fantastic and ludicrous.
"And old Madam Reed, or the Misses, her daughters, will be solicited by you to seek a place, I suppose?"
"You shall walk up the pyramids of Egypt!" he growled. "At your peril you advertise!
"Little niggard!" said he, "refusing me a pecuniary request!
"How long is he going to stand with his back against that door?" I asked myself; "I want to commence my packing."
The dinner-bell rang, and suddenly away he bolted, without another syllable: I saw him no more during the day, and was off before he had risen in the morning.
Bessie sat on the hearth, nursing her last-born, and Robert and his sister played quietly in a corner.
"Yes, Bessie," said I, after I had kissed her; "and I trust I am not too late.
"Yes, she is alive; and more sensible and collected than she was.
The doctor says she may linger a week or two yet; but he hardly thinks she will finally recover."
"Has she mentioned me lately?"
"She was talking of you only this morning, and wishing you would come, but she is sleeping now, or was ten minutes ago, when I was up at the house.
Robert here entered, and Bessie laid her sleeping child in the cradle and went to welcome him: afterwards she insisted on my taking off my bonnet and having some tea; for she said I looked pale and tired.
I was glad to accept her hospitality; and I submitted to be relieved of my travelling garb just as passively as I used to let her undress me when a child.
Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched her bustling about--setting out the tea-tray with her best china, cutting bread and butter, toasting a tea-cake, and, between whiles, giving little Robert or Jane an occasional tap or push, just as she used to give me in former days.
Bessie had retained her quick temper as well as her light foot and good looks.
Tea ready, I was going to approach the table; but she desired me to sit still, quite in her old peremptory tones.
I must be served at the fireside, she said; and she placed before me a little round stand with my cup and a plate of toast, absolutely as she used to accommodate me with some privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair: and I smiled and obeyed her as in bygone days.
She wanted to know if I was happy at Thornfield Hall, and what sort of a person the mistress was; and when I told her there was only a master, whether he was a nice gentleman, and if I liked him.
I told her he was rather an ugly man, but quite a gentleman; and that he treated me kindly, and I was content.
Then I went on to describe to her the gay company that had lately been staying at the house; and to these details Bessie listened with interest: they were precisely of the kind she relished.
In such conversation an hour was soon gone: Bessie restored to me my bonnet, &c., and, accompanied by her, I quitted the lodge for the hall.
It was also accompanied by her that I had, nearly nine years ago, walked down the path I was now ascending.
"You shall go into the breakfast-room first," said Bessie, as she preceded me through the hall; "the young ladies will be there."
There was every article of furniture looking just as it did on the morning I was first introduced to Mr. Brocklehurst: the very rug he had stood upon still covered the hearth.
There was something ascetic in her look, which was augmented by the extreme plainness of a straight-skirted, black, stuff dress, a starched linen collar, hair combed away from the temples, and the nun-like ornament of a string of ebony beads and a crucifix.
This I felt sure was Eliza, though I could trace little resemblance to her former self in that elongated and colourless visage.
The other was as certainly Georgiana: but not the Georgiana I remembered--the slim and fairy-like girl of eleven.
The hue of her dress was black too; but its fashion was so different from her sister's--so much more flowing and becoming--it looked as stylish as the other's looked puritanical.
In each of the sisters there was one trait of the mother--and only one; the thin and pallid elder daughter had her parent's Cairngorm eye: the blooming and luxuriant younger girl had her contour of jaw and chin--perhaps a little softened, but still imparting an indescribable hardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous and buxom.
Eliza's greeting was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a smile; and then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the fire, and seemed to forget me.
Georgiana added to her "How d'ye do?" several commonplaces about my journey, the weather, and so on, uttered in rather a drawling tone: and accompanied by sundry side-glances that measured me from head to foot--now traversing the folds of my drab merino pelisse, and now lingering on the plain trimming of my cottage bonnet.
"Mrs. Reed? Ah! mama, you mean; she is extremely poorly: I doubt if you can see her to-night."
"If," said I, "you would just step upstairs and tell her I am come, I should be much obliged to you."
Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.
"I know she had a particular wish to see me," I added, "and I would not defer attending to her desire longer than is absolutely necessary."
I soon rose, quietly took off my bonnet and gloves, uninvited, and said I would just step out to Bessie--who was, I dared say, in the kitchen--and ask her to ascertain whether Mrs. Reed was disposed to receive me or not to- night.
I went, and having found Bessie and despatched her on my errand, I proceeded to take further measures.
I had taken a journey of a hundred miles to see my aunt, and I must stay with her till she was better--or dead: as to her daughters' pride or folly, I must put it on one side, make myself independent of it.
So I addressed the housekeeper; asked her to show me a room, told her I should probably be a visitor here for a week or two, had my trunk conveyed to my chamber, and followed it thither myself: I met Bessie on the landing.
"Missis is awake," said she; "I have told her you are here: come and let us see if she will know you."
It is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeance and hushes the promptings of rage and aversion. I had left this woman in bitterness and hate, and I came back to her now with no other emotion than a sort of ruth for her great sufferings, and a strong yearning to forget and forgive all injuries--to be reconciled and clasp hands in amity.
And yet I stooped down and kissed her: she looked at me.
"Is this Jane Eyre?" she said.
How are you, dear aunt?" I had once vowed that I would never call her aunt again: I thought it no sin to forget and break that vow now.
My fingers had fastened on her hand which lay outside the sheet: had she pressed mine kindly, I should at that moment have experienced true pleasure.
But unimpressionable natures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily eradicated. Mrs. Reed took her hand away, and, turning her face rather from me, she remarked that the night was warm.
Again she regarded me so icily, I felt at once that her opinion of me--her feeling towards me--was unchanged and unchangeable.
I knew by her stony eye--opaque to tenderness, indissoluble to tears--that she was resolved to consider me bad to the last; because to believe me good would give her no generous pleasure: only a sense of mortification.
I felt pain, and then I felt ire; and then I felt a determination to subdue her--to be her mistress in spite both of her nature and her will.
But there was something I wished to say--let me see--" The wandering look and changed utterance told what wreck had taken place in her once vigorous frame.
Turning restlessly, she drew the bedclothes round her; my elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down: she was at once irritated.
"Sit up!" said she; "don't annoy me with holding the clothes fast.
Such a burden to be left on my hands--and so much annoyance as she caused me, daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, and her sudden starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural watchings of one's movements!
I declare she talked to me once like something mad, or like a fiend--no child ever spoke or looked as she did; I was glad to get her away from the house.
What did they do with her at Lowood?
She, however, did not die: but I said she did--I wish she had died!"
"A strange wish, Mrs. Reed; why do you hate her so?"
"I had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my husband's only sister, and a great favourite with him: he opposed the family's disowning her when she made her low marriage; and when news came of her death, he wept like a simpleton.
Reed pitied it; and he used to nurse it and notice it as if it had been his own: more, indeed, than he ever noticed his own at that age.
He would try to make my children friendly to the little beggar: the darlings could not bear it, and he was angry with them when they showed their dislike.
In his last illness, he had it brought continually to his bedside; and but an hour before he died, he bound me by vow to keep the creature.
I would as soon have been charged with a pauper brat out of a workhouse: but he was weak, naturally weak.
John does not at all resemble his father, and I am glad of it: John is like me and like my brothers--he is quite a Gibson.
Oh, I wish he would cease tormenting me with letters for money? I have no more money to give him: we are getting poor.
John gambles dreadfully, and always loses--poor boy! He is beset by sharpers: John is sunk and degraded--his look is frightful--I feel ashamed for him when I see him."
"I think I had better leave her now," said I to Bessie, who stood on the other side of the bed.
"Perhaps you had, Miss: but she often talks in this way towards night--in the morning she is calmer."
He threatens me--he continually threatens me with his own death, or mine: and I dream sometimes that I see him laid out with a great wound in his throat, or with a swollen and blackened face. I am come to a strange pass: I have heavy troubles.
Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught: she succeeded with difficulty.
I then left her.
More than ten days elapsed before I had again any conversation with her.
She continued either delirious or lethargic; and the doctor forbade everything which could painfully excite her.
Eliza would sit half the day sewing, reading, or writing, and scarcely utter a word either to me or her sister.
Georgiana would chatter nonsense to her canary bird by the hour, and take no notice of me.
But what was that to her, or to any one but myself?
Georgiana also advanced to look. The other drawings pleased her much, but she called that "an ugly man."
Then Georgiana produced her album.
I promised to contribute a water-colour drawing: this put her at once into good humour.
Before we had been out two hours, we were deep in a confidential conversation: she had favoured me with a description of the brilliant winter she had spent in London two seasons ago--of the admiration she had there excited--the attention she had received; and I even got hints of the titled conquest she had made.
In the course of the afternoon and evening these hints were enlarged on: various soft conversations were reported, and sentimental scenes represented; and, in short, a volume of a novel of fashionable life was that day improvised by her for my benefit.
The communications were renewed from day to day: they always ran on the same theme--herself, her loves, and woes.
It was strange she never once adverted either to her mother's illness, or her brother's death, or the present gloomy state of the family prospects. Her mind seemed wholly taken up with reminiscences of past gaiety, and aspirations after dissipations to come.
She passed about five minutes each day in her mother's sick-room, and no more.
Eliza still spoke little: she had evidently no time to talk.
I never saw a busier person than she seemed to be; yet it was difficult to say what she did: or rather, to discover any result of her diligence.
She had an alarm to call her up early. I know not how she occupied herself before breakfast, but after that meal she divided her time into regular portions, and each hour had its allotted task.
Three times a day she studied a little book, which I found, on inspection, was a Common Prayer Book.
I asked her once what was the great attraction of that volume, and she said, "the Rubric."
Three hours she gave to stitching, with gold thread, the border of a square crimson cloth, almost large enough for a carpet.
In answer to my inquiries after the use of this article, she informed me it was a covering for the altar of a new church lately erected near Gateshead.
Two hours she devoted to her diary; two to working by herself in the kitchen-garden; and one to the regulation of her accounts.
She seemed to want no company; no conversation. I believe she was happy in her way: this routine sufficed for her; and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of any incident which forced her to vary its clockwork regularity.
She told me one evening, when more disposed to be communicative than usual, that John's conduct, and the threatened ruin of the family, had been a source of profound affliction to her: but she had now, she said, settled her mind, and formed her resolution.
Her own fortune she had taken care to secure; and when her mother died--and it was wholly improbable, she tranquilly remarked, that she should either recover or linger long--she would execute a long-cherished project: seek a retirement where punctual habits would be permanently secured from disturbance, and place safe barriers between herself and a frivolous world.
I asked if Georgiana would accompany her.
Georgiana and she had nothing in common: they never had had.
She would not be burdened with her society for any consideration.
Georgiana should take her own course; and she, Eliza, would take hers."
Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me, spent most of her time in lying on the sofa, fretting about the dulness of the house, and wishing over and over again that her aunt Gibson would send her an invitation up to town.
"It would be so much better," she said, "if she could only get out of the way for a month or two, till all was over."
I did not ask what she meant by "all being over," but I suppose she referred to the expected decease of her mother and the gloomy sequel of funeral rites.
Eliza generally took no more notice of her sister's indolence and complaints than if no such murmuring, lounging object had been before her.
One day, however, as she put away her account-book and unfolded her embroidery, she suddenly took her up thus--
Instead of living for, in, and with yourself, as a reasonable being ought, you seek only to fasten your feebleness on some other person's strength: if no one can be found willing to burden her or himself with such a fat, weak, puffy, useless thing, you cry out that you are ill-treated, neglected, miserable.
After my mother's death, I wash my hands of you: from the day her coffin is carried to the vault in Gateshead Church, you and I will be as separate as if we had never known each other.
She closed her lips.
Georgiana took out her handkerchief and blew her nose for an hour afterwards; Eliza sat cold, impassable, and assiduously industrious.
It was a wet and windy afternoon: Georgiana had fallen asleep on the sofa over the perusal of a novel; Eliza was gone to attend a saint's-day service at the new church--for in matters of religion she was a rigid formalist: no weather ever prevented the punctual discharge of what she considered her devotional duties; fair or foul, she went to church thrice every Sunday, and as often on week-days as there were prayers.
I bethought myself to go upstairs and see how the dying woman sped, who lay there almost unheeded: the very servants paid her but a remittent attention: the hired nurse, being little looked after, would slip out of the room whenever she could.
Bessie was faithful; but she had her own family to mind, and could only come occasionally to the hall.
I found the sick-room unwatched, as I had expected: no nurse was there; the patient lay still, and seemingly lethargic; her livid face sunk in the pillows: the fire was dying in the grate.
I renewed the fuel, re-arranged the bedclothes, gazed awhile on her who could not now gaze on me, and then I moved away to the window.
In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns, recalled her dying words--her faith--her doctrine of the equality of disembodied souls.
I was still listening in thought to her well-remembered tones--still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect, her wasted face and sublime gaze, as she lay on her placid deathbed, and whispered her longing to be restored to her divine Father's bosom--when a feeble voice murmured from the couch behind: "Who is that?"
I knew Mrs. Reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving?
I went up to her.
"Who--I?" was her answer. "Who are you?" looking at me with surprise and a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.
"Aunt," she repeated. "Who calls me aunt?
"Yet," said she, "I am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me.
I wished to see Jane Eyre, and I fancy a likeness where none exists: besides, in eight years she must be so changed."
I now gently assured her that I was the person she supposed and desired me to be: and seeing that I was understood, and that her senses were quite collected, I explained how Bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from Thornfield.
"I am very ill, I know," she said ere long. "I was trying to turn myself a few minutes since, and find I cannot move a limb.
I assured her we were alone.
One was in breaking the promise which I gave my husband to bring you up as my own child; the other--" she stopped.
"After all, it is of no great importance, perhaps," she murmured to herself: "and then I may get better; and to humble myself so to her is painful."
She made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her face changed; she seemed to experience some inward sensation--the precursor, perhaps, of the last pang.
Eternity is before me: I had better tell her.--Go to my dressing-case, open it, and take out a letter you will see there."
I obeyed her directions.
"Read the letter," she said.
"Madam,--Will you have the goodness to send me the address of my niece, Jane Eyre, and to tell me how she is?
It is my intention to write shortly and desire her to come to me at Madeira.
Providence has blessed my endeavours to secure a competency; and as I am unmarried and childless, I wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her at my death whatever I may have to leave.--I am, Madam, &c., &c.,
I could not forget my own sensations when you thus started up and poured out the venom of your mind: I felt fear as if an animal that I had struck or pushed had looked up at me with human eyes and cursed me in a man's voice.--Bring me some water!
"Dear Mrs. Reed," said I, as I offered her the draught she required, "think no more of all this, let it pass away from your mind.
She heeded nothing of what I said; but when she had tasted the water and drawn breath, she went on thus--
I wrote to him; I said I was sorry for his disappointment, but Jane Eyre was dead: she had died of typhus fever at Lowood.
"You have a very bad disposition," said she, "and one to this day I feel it impossible to understand: how for nine years you could be patient and quiescent under any treatment, and in the tenth break out all fire and violence, I can never comprehend."
I approached my cheek to her lips: she would not touch it.
She said I oppressed her by leaning over the bed, and again demanded water.
As I laid her down--for I raised her and supported her on my arm while she drank--I covered her ice-cold and clammy hand with mine: the feeble fingers shrank from my touch--the glazing eyes shunned my gaze.
Poor, suffering woman! it was too late for her to make now the effort to change her habitual frame of mind: living, she had ever hated me--dying, she must hate me still.
I yet lingered half-an-hour longer, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave none.
She was fast relapsing into stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelve o'clock that night she died.
I was not present to close her eyes, nor were either of her daughters.
Eliza and I went to look at her: Georgiana, who had burst out into loud weeping, said she dared not go.
There was stretched Sarah Reed's once robust and active frame, rigid and still: her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid; her brow and strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable soul.
Eliza surveyed her parent calmly.
After a silence of some minutes she observed--
"With her constitution she should have lived to a good old age: her life was shortened by trouble."
And then a spasm constricted her mouth for an instant: as it passed away she turned and left the room, and so did I. Neither of us had dropt a tear.
I wished to leave immediately after the funeral, but Georgiana entreated me to stay till she could get off to London, whither she was now at last invited by her uncle, Mr. Gibson, who had come down to direct his sister's interment and settle the family affairs.
Georgiana said she dreaded being left alone with Eliza; from her she got neither sympathy in her dejection, support in her fears, nor aid in her preparations; so I bore with her feeble-minded wailings and selfish lamentations as well as I could, and did my best in sewing for her and packing her dresses.
It is true, that while I worked, she would idle; and I thought to myself, "If you and I were destined to live always together, cousin, we would commence matters on a different footing.
Her plans required all her time and attention, she said; she was about to depart for some unknown bourne; and all day long she stayed in her own room, her door bolted within, filling trunks, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holding no communication with any one.
One morning she told me I was at liberty.
"And," she added, "I am obliged to you for your valuable services and discreet conduct!
To-morrow," she continued, "I set out for the Continent.
I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade her from it.
When we parted, she said: "Good-bye, cousin Jane Eyre; I wish you well: you have some sense."
"You are in the right," said she; and with these words we each went our separate way.
As I shall not have occasion to refer either to her or her sister again, I may as well mention here, that Georgiana made an advantageous match with a wealthy worn-out man of fashion, and that Eliza actually took the veil, and is at this day superior of the convent where she passed the period of her novitiate, and which she endowed with her fortune.
During the first twelve hours I thought of Mrs. Reed in her last moments; I saw her disfigured and discoloured face, and heard her strangely altered voice.
I had heard from Mrs. Fairfax in the interim of my absence: the party at the hall was dispersed; Mr. Rochester had left for London three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return in a fortnight.
Mrs. Fairfax surmised that he was gone to make arrangements for his wedding, as he had talked of purchasing a new carriage: she said the idea of his marrying Miss Ingram still seemed strange to her; but from what everybody said, and from what she had herself seen, she could no longer doubt that the event would shortly take place.
The question followed, "Where was I to go?" I dreamt of Miss Ingram all the night: in a vivid morning dream I saw her closing the gates of Thornfield against me and pointing me out another road; and Mr. Rochester looked on with his arms folded--smiling sardonically, as it seemed, at both her and me.
"Mrs. Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure," said I; "and little Adele will clap her hands and jump to see you: but you know very well you are thinking of another than they, and that he is not thinking of you."
What so blind as inexperience? These affirmed that it was pleasure enough to have the privilege of again looking on Mr. Rochester, whether he looked on me or not; and they added--"Hasten! hasten! be with him while you may: but a few more days or weeks, at most, and you are parted from him for ever!"
Rochester sitting there, a book and a pencil in his hand; he is writing.
Well, he is not a ghost; yet every nerve I have is unstrung: for a moment I am beyond my own mastery.
I did not think I should tremble in this way when I saw him, or lose my voice or the power of motion in his presence.
I know another way to the house. It does not signify if I knew twenty ways; for he has seen me.
"Hillo!" he cries; and he puts up his book and his pencil.
She comes from the other world--from the abode of people who are dead; and tells me so when she meets me alone here in the gloaming!
Truant! truant!" he added, when he had paused an instant. "Absent from me a whole month, and forgetting me quite, I'll be sworn!"
I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master again, even though broken by the fear that he was so soon to cease to be my master, and by the knowledge that I was nothing to him: but there was ever in Mr. Rochester (so at least I thought) such a wealth of the power of communicating happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scattered to stray and stranger birds like me, was to feast genially.
And he had spoken of Thornfield as my home--would that it were my home!
I inquired soon if he had not been to London.
"And did she inform you what I went to do?"
"You must see the carriage, Jane, and tell me if you don't think it will suit Mrs. Rochester exactly; and whether she won't look like Queen Boadicea, leaning back against those purple cushions.
I wish, Jane, I were a trifle better adapted to match with her externally.
Tell me now, fairy as you are--can't you give me a charm, or a philter, or something of that sort, to make me a handsome man?"
Mr. Rochester had sometimes read my unspoken thoughts with an acumen to me incomprehensible: in the present instance he took no notice of my abrupt vocal response; but he smiled at me with a certain smile he had of his own, and which he used but on rare occasions.
"Pass, Janet," said he, making room for me to cross the stile: "go up home, and stay your weary little wandering feet at a friend's threshold."
I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had he tried.
Little Adele was half wild with delight when she saw me.
Mrs. Fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness.
When tea was over and Mrs. Fairfax had taken her knitting, and I had assumed a low seat near her, and Adele, kneeling on the carpet, had nestled close up to me, and a sense of mutual affection seemed to surround us with a ring of golden peace, I uttered a silent prayer that we might not be parted far or soon; but when, as we thus sat, Mr. Rochester entered, unannounced, and looking at us, seemed to take pleasure in the spectacle of a group so amicable--when he said he supposed the old lady was all right now that she had got her adopted daughter back again, and added that he saw Adele was "prete a croquer sa petite maman Anglaise"--I half ventured to hope that he would, even after his marriage, keep us together somewhere under the shelter of his protection, and not quite exiled from the sunshine of his presence.
Almost every day I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had yet heard anything decided: her answer was always in the negative.
Once she said she had actually put the question to Mr. Rochester as to when he was going to bring his bride home; but he had answered her only by a joke and one of his queer looks, and she could not tell what to make of him.
If, in the moments I and my pupil spent with him, I lacked spirits and sank into inevitable dejection, he became even gay.
Never had he called me more frequently to his presence; never been kinder to me when there--and, alas! never had I loved him so well.
I watched her drop asleep, and when I left her, I sought the garden.
The east had its own charm or fine deep blue, and its own modest gem, a casino and solitary star: soon it would boast the moon; but she was yet beneath the horizon.
I step aside into the ivy recess; he will not stay long: he will soon return whence he came, and if I sit still he will never see me.
But no--eventide is as pleasant to him as to me, and this antique garden as attractive; and he strolls on, now lifting the gooseberry-tree branches to look at the fruit, large as plums, with which they are laden; now taking a ripe cherry from the wall; now stooping towards a knot of flowers, either to inhale their fragrance or to admire the dew-beads on their petals.
A great moth goes humming by me; it alights on a plant at Mr. Rochester's foot: he sees it, and bends to examine it.
"Now, he has his back towards me," thought I, "and he is occupied too; perhaps, if I walk softly, I can slip away unnoticed."
I trode on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravel might not betray me: he was standing among the beds at a yard or two distant from where I had to pass; the moth apparently engaged him.
As I crossed his shadow, thrown long over the garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he said quietly, without turning--
I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind--could his shadow feel?
"Look at his wings," said he, "he reminds me rather of a West Indian insect; one does not often see so large and gay a night-rover in England; there! he is flown."
I was sheepishly retreating also; but Mr. Rochester followed me, and when we reached the wicket, he said--
I followed with lagging step, and thoughts busily bent on discovering a means of extrication; but he himself looked so composed and so grave also, I became ashamed of feeling any confusion: the evil--if evil existent or prospective there was--seemed to lie with me only; his mind was unconscious and quiet.
"Jane," he recommenced, as we entered the laurel walk, and slowly strayed down in the direction of the sunk fence and the horse-chestnut, "Thornfield is a pleasant place in summer, is it not?"
"Pity!" he said, and sighed and paused.
"It is always the way of events in this life," he continued presently: "no sooner have you got settled in a pleasant resting-place, than a voice calls out to you to rise and move on, for the hour of repose is expired."
I consider that when a dependent does her duty as well as you have done yours, she has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little assistance he can conveniently render her; indeed I have already, through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place that I think will suit: it is to undertake the education of the five daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O'Gall of Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught, Ireland.
"No matter--a girl of your sense will not object to the voyage or the distance."
"Because," he said, "I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard to you--especially when you are near me, as now: it is as if I had a string somewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably knotted to a similar string situated in the corresponding quarter of your little frame.
"Where do you see the necessity?" he asked suddenly.
"In the shape of Miss Ingram; a noble and beautiful woman,--your bride."
"Yes;--I will!--I will!" He set his teeth.
"As we are!" repeated Mr. Rochester--"so," he added, enclosing me in his arms. Gathering me to his breast, pressing his lips on my lips: "so, Jane!"
"Yes, so, sir," I rejoined: "and yet not so; for you are a married man--or as good as a married man, and wed to one inferior to you--to one with whom you have no sympathy--whom I do not believe you truly love; for I have seen and heard you sneer at her.
"And your will shall decide your destiny," he said: "I offer you my hand, my heart, and a share of all my possessions."
Some time passed before he spoke; he at last said--
I was silent: I thought he mocked me.
"My bride is here," he said, again drawing me to him, "because my equal is here, and my likeness.
Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from his grasp: for I was still incredulous.
"Am I a liar in your eyes?" he asked passionately. "Little sceptic, you _shall_ be convinced.
What love has she for me?
None: as I have taken pains to prove: I caused a rumour to reach her that my fortune was not a third of what was supposed, and after that I presented myself to see the result; it was coldness both from her and her mother. I would not--I could not--marry Miss Ingram.
I ejaculated, beginning in his earnestness--and especially in his incivility--to credit his sincerity: "me who have not a friend in the world but you--if you are my friend: not a shilling but what you have given me?"
"Oh, Jane, you torture me!" he exclaimed. "With that searching and yet faithful and generous look, you torture me!"
"Gratitude!" he ejaculated; and added wildly--"Jane accept me quickly. Say, Edward--give me my name--Edward--I will marry you."
"Come to me--come to me entirely now," said he; and added, in his deepest tone, speaking in my ear as his cheek was laid on mine, "Make my happiness--I will make yours."
"God pardon me!" he subjoined ere long; "and man meddle not with me: I have her, and will hold her."
"No--that is the best of it," he said.
And if I had loved him less I should have thought his accent and look of exultation savage; but, sitting by him, roused from the nightmare of parting--called to the paradise of union--I thought only of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow.
Again and again he said, "Are you happy, Jane?" And again and again I answered, "Yes."
After which he murmured, "It will atone--it will atone.
Have I not found her friendless, and cold, and comfortless?
Will I not guard, and cherish, and solace her? Is there not love in my heart, and constancy in my resolves?
For man's opinion--I defy it."
He was taking off my shawl in the hall, and shaking the water out of my loosened hair, when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from her room.
I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr. Rochester.
"Hasten to take off your wet things," said he; "and before you go, good- night--good-night, my darling!"
He kissed me repeatedly. When I looked up, on leaving his arms, there stood the widow, pale, grave, and amazed.
I only smiled at her, and ran upstairs.
"Explanation will do for another time," thought I. Still, when I reached my chamber, I felt a pang at the idea she should even temporarily misconstrue what she had seen.
I could not be certain of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love and promise.
I had often been unwilling to look at my master, because I feared he could not be pleased at my look; but I was sure I might lift my face to his now, and not cool his affection by its expression.
A beggar-woman and her little boy--pale, ragged objects both--were coming up the walk, and I ran down and gave them all the money I happened to have in my purse--some three or four shillings: good or bad, they must partake of my jubilee.
During the meal she was quiet and cool: but I could not undeceive her then.
I must wait for my master to give explanations; and so must she.
"Where is he?"
"In there," pointing to the apartment she had left; and I went in, and there he stood.
"Come and bid me good-morning," said he.
"Jane, you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty," said he: "truly pretty this morning.
This little sunny-faced girl with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips; the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?"
"Soon to be Jane Rochester," he added: "in four weeks, Janet; not a day more.
"Yes, Mrs. Rochester," said he; "young Mrs. Rochester--Fairfax Rochester's girl-bride."
This morning I wrote to my banker in London to send me certain jewels he has in his keeping,--heirlooms for the ladies of Thornfield.
In a day or two I hope to pour them into your lap: for every privilege, every attention shall be yours that I would accord a peer's daughter, if about to marry her."
"I will myself put the diamond chain round your neck, and the circlet on your forehead,--which it will become: for nature, at least, has stamped her patent of nobility on this brow, Jane; and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers with rings."
"I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty, too," he went on, while I really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because I felt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me.
"I will attire my Jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair; and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil."
He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.
After a brief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer the sun: to French vineyards and Italian plains; and she shall see whatever is famous in old story and in modern record: she shall taste, too, of the life of cities; and she shall learn to value herself by just comparison with others."
I laughed at him as he said this.
"What? what?" he said hastily. "Curiosity is a dangerous petition: it is well I have not taken a vow to accord every request--"
And now he unknit his black brows; looked down, smiling at me, and stroked my hair, as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted.
"I think I may confess," he continued, "even although I should make you a little indignant, Jane--and I have seen what a fire-spirit you can be when you are indignant. You glowed in the cool moonlight last night, when you mutinied against fate, and claimed your rank as my equal.
Won't she feel forsaken and deserted?"
"Impossible!--when I told you how she, on the contrary, deserted me: the idea of my insolvency cooled, or rather extinguished, her flame in a moment."
"That you may, my good little girl: there is not another being in the world has the same pure love for me as yourself--for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul, Jane, a belief in your affection."
"Ask something more," he said presently; "it is my delight to be entreated, and to yield."
"Communicate your intentions to Mrs. Fairfax, sir: she saw me with you last night in the hall, and she was shocked.
Give her some explanation before I see her again.
It pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman."
"Go to your room, and put on your bonnet," he replied. "I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this morning; and while you prepare for the drive, I will enlighten the old lady's understanding.
Did she think, Janet, you had given the world for love, and considered it well lost?"
"I believe she thought I had forgotten my station, and yours, sir."
The old lady, had been reading her morning portion of Scripture--the Lesson for the day; her Bible lay open before her, and her spectacles were upon it.
Her occupation, suspended by Mr. Rochester's announcement, seemed now forgotten: her eyes, fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the surprise of a quiet mind stirred by unwonted tidings.
Seeing me, she roused herself: she made a sort of effort to smile, and framed a few words of congratulation; but the smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned unfinished.
She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from the table.
"I feel so astonished," she began, "I hardly know what to say to you, Miss Eyre.
It has seemed to me more than once when I have been in a doze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since, has come in and sat down beside me; and that I have even heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do.
But I really thought he came in here five minutes ago, and said that in a month you would be his wife."
He is a proud man: all the Rochesters were proud: and his father, at least, liked money.
She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.
"It passes me!" she continued; "but no doubt, it is true since you say so.
He might almost be your father."
"No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax!" exclaimed I, nettled; "he is nothing like my father!
"Is it really for love he is going to marry you?" she asked.
I was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism, that the tears rose to my eyes.
I have always noticed that you were a sort of pet of his.
There are times when, for your sake, I have been a little uneasy at his marked preference, and have wished to put you on your guard: but I did not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong.
"I hope all will be right in the end," she said: "but believe me, you cannot be too careful.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry their governesses."
"Let me go,--let me go to Millcote too!" she cried. "Mr. Rochester won't: though there is so much room in the new carriage.
"That I will, Adele;" and I hastened away with her, glad to quit my gloomy monitress.
"Adele may accompany us, may she not, sir?"
"I told her no.
"Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please: it would be better."
"Not it: she will be a restraint." He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
The chill of Mrs. Fairfax's warnings, and the damp of her doubts were upon me: something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty had beset my hopes.
I was about mechanically to obey him, without further remonstrance; but as he helped me into the carriage, he looked at my face.
"What is the matter?" he asked; "all the sunshine is gone.
Do you really wish the bairn to go? Will it annoy you if she is left behind?"
"I would far rather she went, sir."
"Then off for your bonnet, and back like a flash of lightning!" cried he to Adele.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
"After all, a single morning's interruption will not matter much," said he, "when I mean shortly to claim you--your thoughts, conversation, and company--for life."
Adele, when lifted in, commenced kissing me, by way of expressing her gratitude for my intercession: she was instantly stowed away into a corner on the other side of him.
She then peeped round to where I sat; so stern a neighbour was too restrictive to him, in his present fractious mood, she dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
"Let her come to me," I entreated: "she will, perhaps, trouble you, sir: there is plenty of room on this side."
He handed her over as if she had been a lapdog. "I'll send her to school yet," he said, but now he was smiling.
Adele heard him, and asked if she was to go to school "sans mademoiselle?"
"Yes," he replied, "absolutely sans mademoiselle; for I am to take mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano-tops, and mademoiselle shall live with me there, and only me."
"She will have nothing to eat: you will starve her," observed Adele.
"I shall gather manna for her morning and night: the plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna, Adele."
"She will want to warm herself: what will she do for a fire?"
"Fire rises out of the lunar mountains: when she is cold, I'll carry her up to a peak, and lay her down on the edge of a crater."
And her clothes, they will wear out: how can she get new ones?"
"Hem!" said he. "What would you do, Adele?
"She is far better as she is," concluded Adele, after musing some time: "besides, she would get tired of living with only you in the moon.
"She has consented: she has pledged her word."
"But you can't get her there; there is no road to the moon: it is all air; and neither you nor she can fly."
"It was a fairy, and come from Elf-land, it said; and its errand was to make me happy: I must go with it out of the common world to a lonely place--such as the moon, for instance--and it nodded its head towards her horn, rising over Hay-hill: it told me of the alabaster cave and silver vale where we might live.
Here is a talisman will remove all difficulties;' and she held out a pretty gold ring.
'Put it,' she said, 'on the fourth finger of my left hand, and I am yours, and you are mine; and we shall leave earth, and make our own heaven yonder.'
"Mademoiselle is a fairy," he said, whispering mysteriously.
Whereupon I told her not to mind his badinage; and she, on her part, evinced a fund of genuine French scepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester "un vrai menteur," and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his "contes de fee," and that "du reste, il n'y avait pas de fees, et quand meme il y en avait:" she was sure they would never appear to him, nor ever give him rings, or offer to live with him in the moon.
By dint of entreaties expressed in energetic whispers, I reduced the half-dozen to two: these however, he vowed he would select himself.
With anxiety I watched his eye rove over the gay stores: he fixed on a rich silk of the most brilliant amethyst dye, and a superb pink satin.
I told him in a new series of whispers, that he might as well buy me a gold gown and a silver bonnet at once: I should certainly never venture to wear his choice.
With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone, I persuaded him to make an exchange in favour of a sober black satin and pearl-grey silk.
"It might pass for the present," he said; "but he would yet see me glittering like a parterre."
Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse, and then out of a jewellers shop: the more he bought me, the more my cheek burned with a sense of annoyance and degradation.
As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back feverish and fagged, I remembered what, in the hurry of events, dark and bright, I had wholly forgotten--the letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed: his intention to adopt me and make me his legatee.
He smiled; and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a blissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and gems had enriched: I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously, and thrust it back to him red with the passionate pressure.
I'll be married in this lilac gingham: you may make a dressing-gown for yourself out of the pearl-grey silk, and an infinite series of waistcoats out of the black satin." He chuckled; he rubbed his hands.
"Oh, it is rich to see and hear her?" he exclaimed.
"Is she original?
Is she piquant?
I would not exchange this one little English girl for the Grand Turk's whole seraglio, gazelle- eyes, houri forms, and all!"
Do you remember what you said of Celine Varens?--of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her?
"Well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven't your equal," said he.
"Will it please you to dine with me to-day?" he asked, as we re-entered the gates.
It is your time now, little tyrant, but it will be mine presently; and when once I have fairly seized you, to have and to hold, I'll just--figuratively speaking--attach you to a chain like this" (touching his watch-guard). "Yes, bonny wee thing, I'll wear you in my bosom, lest my jewel I should tyne."
He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage, and while he afterwards lifted out Adele, I entered the house, and made good my retreat upstairs.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I had prepared an occupation for him; for I was determined not to spend the whole time in a _tete-a-tete_ conversation. I remembered his fine voice; I knew he liked to sing--good singers generally do.
I was no vocalist myself, and, in his fastidious judgment, no musician, either; but I delighted in listening when the performance was good.
No sooner had twilight, that hour of romance, began to lower her blue and starry banner over the lattice, than I rose, opened the piano, and entreated him, for the love of heaven, to give me a song.
He said I was a capricious witch, and that he would rather sing another time; but I averred that no time was like the present.
"Did I like his voice?" he asked.
I was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity of his; but for once, and from motives of expediency, I would e'en soothe and stimulate it.
Being pushed unceremoniously to one side--which was precisely what I wished--he usurped my place, and proceeded to accompany himself: for he could play as well as sing.
Her coming was my hope each day, Her parting was my pain; The chance that did her steps delay Was ice in every vein.
My love has placed her little hand With noble faith in mine, And vowed that wedlock's sacred band Our nature shall entwine.
He rose and came towards me, and I saw his face all kindled, and his full falcon-eye flashing, and tenderness and passion in every lineament.
Soft scene, daring demonstration, I would not have; and I stood in peril of both: a weapon of defence must be prepared--I whetted my tongue: as he reached me, I asked with asperity, "whom he was going to marry now?"
"That was a strange question to be put by his darling Jane."
I considered it a very natural and necessary one: he had talked of his future wife dying with him.
What did he mean by such a pagan idea? _I_ had no intention of dying with him--he might depend on that."
"Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for, was that I might live with him!
"Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when my time came as he had: but I should bide that time, and not be hurried away in a suttee."
Here I heard myself apostrophised as a "hard little thing;" and it was added, "any other woman would have been melted to marrow at hearing such stanzas crooned in her praise."
I assured him I was naturally hard--very flinty, and that he would often find me so; and that, moreover, I was determined to show him divers rugged points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know fully what sort of a bargain he had made, while there was yet time to rescind it.
"I would be quiet if he liked, and as to talking rationally, I flattered myself I was doing that now."
From less to more, I worked him up to considerable irritation; then, after he had retired, in dudgeon, quite to the other end of the room, I got up, and saying, "I wish you good-night, sir," in my natural and wonted respectful manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got away.
He was kept, to be sure, rather cross and crusty; but on the whole I could see he was excellently entertained, and that a lamb-like submission and turtle-dove sensibility, while fostering his despotism more, would have pleased his judgment, satisfied his common-sense, and even suited his taste less.
He continued to send for me punctually the moment the clock struck seven; though when I appeared before him now, he had no such honeyed terms as "love" and "darling" on his lips: the best words at my service were "provoking puppet," "malicious elf," "sprite," "changeling," &c.
Mrs. Fairfax, I saw, approved me: her anxiety on my account vanished; therefore I was certain I did well.
I laughed in my sleeve at his menaces. "I can keep you in reasonable check now," I reflected; "and I don't doubt to be able to do it hereafter: if one expedient loses its virtue, another must be devised."
He stood between me and every thought of religion, as an eclipse intervenes between man and the broad sun.
She did not exist: she would not be born till to-morrow, some time after eight o'clock a.m.; and I would wait to be assured she had come into the world alive before I assigned to her all that property.
Mr. Rochester that night was absent from home; nor was he yet returned: business had called him to a small estate of two or three farms he possessed thirty miles off--business it was requisite he should settle in person, previous to his meditated departure from England.
I waited now his return; eager to disburthen my mind, and to seek of him the solution of the enigma that perplexed me.
Stay till he comes, reader; and, when I disclose my secret to him, you shall share the confidence.
As I looked up at them, the moon appeared momentarily in that part of the sky which filled their fissure; her disk was blood-red and half overcast; she seemed to throw on me one bewildered, dreary glance, and buried herself again instantly in the deep drift of cloud.
Then I repaired to the library to ascertain whether the fire was lit, for, though summer, I knew on such a gloomy evening Mr. Rochester would like to see a cheerful hearth when he came in: yes, the fire had been kindled some time, and burnt well.
I placed his arm-chair by the chimney-corner: I wheeled the table near it: I let down the curtain, and had the candles brought in ready for lighting.
I lingered; the moon shut herself wholly within her chamber, and drew close her curtain of dense cloud: the night grew dark; rain came driving fast on the gale.
"I wish he would come!
I wish he would come!" I exclaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding.
I had expected his arrival before tea; now it was dark: what could keep him?
"Well, I cannot return to the house," I thought; "I cannot sit by the fireside, while he is abroad in inclement weather: better tire my limbs than strain my heart; I will go forward and meet him."
I set out; I walked fast, but not far: ere I had measured a quarter of a mile, I heard the tramp of hoofs; a horseman came on, full gallop; a dog ran by his side.
It was he: here he was, mounted on Mesrour, followed by Pilot.
He saw me; for the moon had opened a blue field in the sky, and rode in it watery bright: he took his hat off, and waved it round his head.
"There!" he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand and bent from the saddle: "You can't do without me, that is evident.
He checked himself in his exultation to demand, "But is there anything the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at such an hour?
As John took his horse, and he followed me into the hall, he told me to make haste and put something dry on, and then return to him in the library; and he stopped me, as I made for the staircase, to extort a promise that I would not be long: nor was I long; in five minutes I rejoined him.
"Is that a dream?" said he, placing it close to my eyes.
"And on my part likewise," he returned, "I have settled everything; and we shall leave Thornfield to-morrow, within half-an-hour after our return from church."
I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face: it was ardent and flushed.
"Give me your confidence, Jane," he said: "relieve your mind of any weight that oppresses it, by imparting it to me.
I thought how I would carry down to you the square of unembroidered blond I had myself prepared as a covering for my low-born head, and ask if that was not good enough for a woman who could bring her husband neither fortune, beauty, nor connections.
"Well," he said, after some minutes' silence, "it is strange; but that sentence has penetrated my breast painfully.
The disquietude of his air, the somewhat apprehensive impatience of his manner, surprised me: but I proceeded.
Mr. Rochester, this was not Sophie, it was not Leah, it was not Mrs. Fairfax: it was not--no, I was sure of it, and am still--it was not even that strange woman, Grace Poole."
"It seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and dark hair hanging long down her back.
I know not what dress she had on: it was white and straight; but whether gown, sheet, or shroud, I cannot tell."
"Did you see her face?"
But presently she took my veil from its place; she held it up, gazed at it long, and then she threw it over her own head, and turned to the mirror.
Just at my bedside, the figure stopped: the fiery eyes glared upon me--she thrust up her candle close to my face, and extinguished it under my eyes.
I was aware her lurid visage flamed over mine, and I lost consciousness: for the second time in my life--only the second time--I became insensible from terror."
Now, sir, tell me who and what that woman was?"
I felt Mr. Rochester start and shudder; he hastily flung his arms round me.
"Thank God!" he exclaimed, "that if anything malignant did come near you last night, it was only the veil that was harmed.
He drew his breath short, and strained me so close to him, I could scarcely pant.
After some minutes' silence, he continued, cheerily--
It was half dream, half reality. A woman did, I doubt not, enter your room: and that woman was--must have been--Grace Poole.
You call her a strange being yourself: from all you know, you have reason so to call her--what did she do to me? what to Mason?
In a state between sleeping and waking, you noticed her entrance and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as you were, you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her own: the long dishevelled hair, the swelled black face, the exaggerated stature, were figments of imagination; results of nightmare: the spiteful tearing of the veil was real: and it is like her.
I see you would ask why I keep such a woman in my house: when we have been married a year and a day, I will tell you; but not now.
"Does not Sophie sleep with Adele in the nursery?" he asked, as I lit my candle.
You must share it with her to-night, Jane: it is no wonder that the incident you have related should make you nervous, and I would rather you did not sleep alone: promise me to go to the nursery."
Wake Sophie when you go upstairs, under pretence of requesting her to rouse you in good time to- morrow; for you must be dressed and have finished breakfast before eight.
I remember Adele clung to me as I left her: I remember I kissed her as I loosened her little hands from my neck; and I cried over her with strange emotion, and quitted her because I feared my sobs would break her still sound repose.
Sophie came at seven to dress me: she was very long indeed in accomplishing her task; so long that Mr. Rochester, grown, I suppose, impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why I did not come.
She was just fastening my veil (the plain square of blond after all) to my hair with a brooch; I hurried from under her hands as soon as I could.
"Stop!" she cried in French. "Look at yourself in the mirror: you have not taken one peep."
"Lingerer!" he said, "my brain is on fire with impatience, and you tarry so long!"
He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly all over, pronounced me "fair as a lily, and not only the pride of his life, but the desire of his eyes," and then telling me he would give me but ten minutes to eat some breakfast, he rang the bell.
One of his lately hired servants, a footman, answered it.
"Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice."
"We shall not want it to go to church; but it must be ready the moment we return: all the boxes and luggage arranged and strapped on, and the coachman in his seat."
There were no groomsmen, no bridesmaids, no relatives to wait for or marshal: none but Mr. Rochester and I. Mrs. Fairfax stood in the hall as we passed. I would fain have spoken to her, but my hand was held by a grasp of iron: I was hurried along by a stride I could hardly follow; and to look at Mr. Rochester's face was to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerated for any purpose.
I wonder what other bridegroom ever looked as he did--so bent up to a purpose, so grimly resolute: or who, under such steadfast brows, ever revealed such flaming and flashing eyes.
I wanted to see the invisible thing on which, as we went along, he appeared to fasten a glance fierce and fell.
I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force he seemed breasting and resisting.
At the churchyard wicket he stopped: he discovered I was quite out of breath.
"Am I cruel in my love?" he said. "Delay an instant: lean on me, Jane."
By Mr. Rochester they were not observed; he was earnestly looking at my face from which the blood had, I daresay, momentarily fled: for I felt my forehead dewy, and my cheeks and lips cold.
When I rallied, which I soon did, he walked gently with me up the path to the porch.
We entered the quiet and humble temple; the priest waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar, the clerk beside him.
And the clergyman, who had not lifted his eyes from his book, and had held his breath but for a moment, was proceeding: his hand was already stretched towards Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, "Wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?"--when a distinct and near voice said--
The clergyman looked up at the speaker and stood mute; the clerk did the same; Mr. Rochester moved slightly, as if an earthquake had rolled under his feet: taking a firmer footing, and not turning his head or eyes, he said, "Proceed."
Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word, with deep but low intonation.
Mr. Rochester heard, but heeded not: he stood stubborn and rigid, making no movement but to possess himself of my hand.
What a hot and strong grasp he had! and how like quarried marble was his pale, firm, massive front at this moment!
How his eye shone, still watchful, and yet wild beneath!
"What is the nature of the impediment?" he asked. "Perhaps it may be got over--explained away?"
His whole face was colourless rock: his eye was both spark and flint.
He disavowed nothing: he seemed as if he would defy all things.
Without speaking, without smiling, without seeming to recognise in me a human being, he only twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side.
"Who are you?" he asked of the intruder.
"Favour me with an account of her--with her name, her parentage, her place of abode."
Mr. Briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket, and read out in a sort of official, nasal voice:--
"That--if a genuine document--may prove I have been married, but it does not prove that the woman mentioned therein as my wife is still living."
Mr. Rochester, on hearing the name, set his teeth; he experienced, too, a sort of strong convulsive quiver; near to him as I was, I felt the spasmodic movement of fury or despair run through his frame.
His eye, as I have often said, was a black eye: it had now a tawny, nay, a bloody light in its gloom; and his face flushed--olive cheek and hueless forehead received a glow as from spreading, ascending heart-fire: and he stirred, lifted his strong arm--he could have struck Mason, dashed him on the church-floor, shocked by ruthless blow the breath from his body--but Mason shrank away, and cried faintly, "Good God!"
Contempt fell cool on Mr. Rochester--his passion died as if a blight had shrivelled it up: he only asked--"What have _you_ to say?"
Then addressing Mason, he inquired gently, "Are you aware, sir, whether or not this gentleman's wife is still living?"
"She is now living at Thornfield Hall," said Mason, in more articulate tones: "I saw her there last April.
I am her brother."
I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester's lips, and he muttered--
I took care that none should hear of it--or of her under that name."
He mused--for ten minutes he held counsel with himself: he formed his resolve, and announced it-- "Enough! all shall bolt out at once, like the bullet from the barrel.
The man obeyed.
Gentlemen, my plan is broken up:--what this lawyer and his client say is true: I have been married, and the woman to whom I was married lives!
Some have whispered to you that she is my bastard half-sister: some, my cast-off mistress.
I now inform you that she is my wife, whom I married fifteen years ago,--Bertha Mason by name; sister of this resolute personage, who is now, with his quivering limbs and white cheeks, showing you what a stout heart men may bear.
Cheer up, Dick!--never fear me!--I'd almost as soon strike a woman as you.
Bertha Mason is mad; and she came of a mad family; idiots and maniacs through three generations!
Her mother, the Creole, was both a madwoman and a drunkard!--as I found out after I had wed the daughter: for they were silent on family secrets before.
Bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
I had a charming partner--pure, wise, modest: you can fancy I was a happy man.
This girl," he continued, looking at me, "knew no more than you, Wood, of the disgusting secret: she thought all was fair and legal and never dreamt she was going to be entrapped into a feigned union with a defrauded wretch, already bound to a bad, mad, and embruted partner!
Still holding me fast, he left the church: the three gentlemen came after.
He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door: this, too, he opened.
A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report: the clothed hyena rose up, and stood tall on its hind-feet.
"Ah! sir, she sees you!" exclaimed Grace: "you'd better not stay."
The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from her visage, and gazed wildly at her visitors.
Mrs. Poole advanced. "Keep out of the way," said Mr. Rochester, thrusting her aside: "she has no knife now, I suppose, and I'm on my guard."
"One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning: it is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft."
"We had better leave her," whispered Mason.
"Go to the devil!" was his brother-in-law's recommendation.
Mr. Rochester flung me behind him: the lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously, and laid her teeth to his cheek: they struggled.
She was a big woman, in stature almost equalling her husband, and corpulent besides: she showed virile force in the contest--more than once she almost throttled him, athletic as he was.
He could have settled her with a well-planted blow; but he would not strike: he would only wrestle.
At last he mastered her arms; Grace Poole gave him a cord, and he pinioned them behind her: with more rope, which was at hand, he bound her to a chair.
Mr. Rochester then turned to the spectators: he looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate. "That is _my wife_," said he.
"Such is the sole conjugal embrace I am ever to know--such are the endearments which are to solace my leisure hours! And _this_ is what I wished to have" (laying his hand on my shoulder): "this young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth of hell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon, I wanted her just as a change after that fierce ragout.
Wood and Briggs, look at the difference! Compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder--this face with that mask--this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of the gospel and man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged!
The solicitor addressed me as he descended the stair.
"You, madam," said he, "are cleared from all blame: your uncle will be glad to hear it--if, indeed, he should be still living--when Mr. Mason returns to Madeira."
Mr. Eyre has been the Funchal correspondent of his house for some years.
When your uncle received your letter intimating the contemplated union between yourself and Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason, who was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his way back to Jamaica, happened to be with him.
Mr. Eyre mentioned the intelligence; for he knew that my client here was acquainted with a gentleman of the name of Rochester. Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed as you may suppose, revealed the real state of matters.
Your uncle, I am sorry to say, is now on a sick bed; from which, considering the nature of his disease--decline--and the stage it has reached, it is unlikely he will ever rise.
He could not then hasten to England himself, to extricate you from the snare into which you had fallen, but he implored Mr. Mason to lose no time in taking steps to prevent the false marriage.
Have we anything else to stay for?" he inquired of Mr. Mason.
The clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition or reproof, with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too departed.
And yet where was the Jane Eyre of yesterday?--where was her life?--where were her prospects?
Jane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman--almost a bride, was a cold, solitary girl again: her life was pale; her prospects were desolate.
I looked at my love: that feeling which was my master's--which he had created; it shivered in my heart, like a suffering child in a cold cradle; sickness and anguish had seized it; it could not seek Mr. Rochester's arms--it could not derive warmth from his breast.
Mr. Rochester was not to me what he had been; for he was not what I had thought him.
I would not ascribe vice to him; I would not say he had betrayed me; but the attribute of stainless truth was gone from his idea, and from his presence I must go: _that_ I perceived well.
When--how--whither, I could not yet discern; but he himself, I doubted not, would hurry me from Thornfield.
Real affection, it seemed, he could not have for me; it had been only fitful passion: that was balked; he would want me no more.
I should fear even to cross his path now: my view must be hateful to him.
I wrestled with my own resolution: I wanted to be weak that I might avoid the awful passage of further suffering I saw laid out for me; and Conscience, turned tyrant, held Passion by the throat, told her tauntingly, she had yet but dipped her dainty foot in the slough, and swore that with that arm of iron he would thrust her down to unsounded depths of agony.
"You come out at last," he said.
If the man who had but one little ewe lamb that was dear to him as a daughter, that ate of his bread and drank of his cup, and lay in his bosom, had by some mistake slaughtered it at the shambles, he would not have rued his bloody blunder more than I now rue mine.
There was such deep remorse in his eye, such true pity in his tone, such manly energy in his manner; and besides, there was such unchanged love in his whole look and mien--I forgave him all: yet not in words, not outwardly; only at my heart's core.
"You know I am a scoundrel, Jane?" ere long he inquired wistfully--wondering, I suppose, at my continued silence and tameness, the result rather of weakness than of will.
He heaved a sort of shuddering sigh, and taking me in his arms, carried me downstairs.
At first I did not know to what room he had borne me; all was cloudy to my glazed sight: presently I felt the reviving warmth of a fire; for, summer as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber.
He put wine to my lips; I tasted it and revived; then I ate something he offered me, and was soon myself.
I was in the library--sitting in his chair--he was quite near.
I obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood before me, and looked at me attentively.
Suddenly he turned away, with an inarticulate exclamation, full of passionate emotion of some kind; he walked fast through the room and came back; he stooped towards me as if to kiss me; but I remembered caresses were now forbidden.
I turned my face away and put his aside.
"What!--How is this?" he exclaimed hastily. "Oh, I know! you won't kiss the husband of Bertha Mason?
You have as good as said that I am a married man--as a married man you will shun me, keep out of my way: just now you have refused to kiss me.
You intend to make yourself a complete stranger to me: to live under this roof only as Adele's governess; if ever I say a friendly word to you, if ever a friendly feeling inclines you again to me, you will say,--'That man had nearly made me his mistress: I must be ice and rock to him;' and ice and rock you will accordingly become."
I charged them to conceal from you, before I ever saw you, all knowledge of the curse of the place; merely because I feared Adele never would have a governess to stay if she knew with what inmate she was housed, and my plans would not permit me to remove the maniac elsewhere--though I possess an old house, Ferndean Manor, even more retired and hidden than this, where I could have lodged her safely enough, had not a scruple about the unhealthiness of the situation, in the heart of a wood, made my conscience recoil from the arrangement.
Probably those damp walls would soon have eased me of her charge: but to each villain his own vice; and mine is not a tendency to indirect assassination, even of what I most hate.
"Sir," I interrupted him, "you are inexorable for that unfortunate lady: you speak of her with hate--with vindictive antipathy.
"Jane, my little darling (so I will call you, for so you are), you don't know what you are talking about; you misjudge me again: it is not because she is mad I hate her.
I should not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her: in your quiet moments you should have no watcher and no nurse but me; and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness, though you gave me no smile in return; and never weary of gazing into your eyes, though they had no longer a ray of recognition for me.
Why do you importune me about her!
"Solitude! solitude!" he reiterated with irritation.
I shook my head: it required a degree of courage, excited as he was becoming, even to risk that mute sign of dissent.
He had been walking fast about the room, and he stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot.
"Now for the hitch in Jane's character," he said at last, speaking more calmly than from his look I had expected him to speak. "The reel of silk has run smoothly enough so far; but I always knew there would come a knot and a puzzle: here it is.
He recommenced his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time just before me.
"Jane! will you hear reason?" (he stooped and approached his lips to my ear); "because, if you won't, I'll try violence."
His voice was hoarse; his look that of a man who is just about to burst an insufferable bond and plunge headlong into wild license.
The present--the passing second of time--was all I had in which to control and restrain him--a movement of repulsion, flight, fear would have sealed my doom,--and his. But I was not afraid: not in the least.
The crisis was perilous; but not without its charm: such as the Indian, perhaps, feels when he slips over the rapid in his canoe.
I took hold of his clenched hand, loosened the contorted fingers, and said to him, soothingly--
He sat down: but he did not get leave to speak directly.
I had been struggling with tears for some time: I had taken great pains to repress them, because I knew he would not like to see me weep.
I said I could not while he was in such a passion.
His softened voice announced that he was subdued; so I, in my turn, became calm.
Now he made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder, but I would not permit it.
Then he would draw me to him: no.
Jane!" he said, in such an accent of bitter sadness it thrilled along every nerve I had; "you don't love me, then?
I ought probably to have done or said nothing; but I was so tortured by a sense of remorse at thus hurting his feelings, I could not control the wish to drop balm where I had wounded.
His voice and hand quivered: his large nostrils dilated; his eye blazed: still I dared to speak.
"Jane, I am not a gentle-tempered man--you forget that: I am not long- enduring; I am not cool and dispassionate.
He bared his wrist, and offered it to me: the blood was forsaking his cheek and lips, they were growing livid; I was distressed on all hands.
To agitate him thus deeply, by a resistance he so abhorred, was cruel: to yield was out of the question.
I did what human beings do instinctively when they are driven to utter extremity--looked for aid to one higher than man: the words "God help me!" burst involuntarily from my lips.
"I am a fool!" cried Mr. Rochester suddenly. "I keep telling her I am not married, and do not explain to her why.
I forget she knows nothing of the character of that woman, or of the circumstances attending my infernal union with her.
Oh, I am certain Jane will agree with me in opinion, when she knows all that I know!
Jane, did you ever hear or know that I was not the eldest son of my house: that I had once a brother older than I?"
"And did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious, grasping man?"
"Well, Jane, being so, it was his resolution to keep the property together; he could not bear the idea of dividing his estate and leaving me a fair portion: all, he resolved, should go to my brother, Rowland.
Yet as little could he endure that a son of his should be a poor man.
Mr. Mason, a West India planter and merchant, was his old acquaintance.
He was certain his possessions were real and vast: he made inquiries.
Mr. Mason, he found, had a son and daughter; and he learned from him that he could and would give the latter a fortune of thirty thousand pounds: that sufficed.
My father said nothing about her money; but he told me Miss Mason was the boast of Spanish Town for her beauty: and this was no lie.
I found her a fine woman, in the style of Blanche Ingram: tall, dark, and majestic.
Her family wished to secure me because I was of a good race; and so did she. They showed her to me in parties, splendidly dressed.
I seldom saw her alone, and had very little private conversation with her.
She flattered me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and accomplishments.
All the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy me. I was dazzled, stimulated: my senses were excited; and being ignorant, raw, and inexperienced, I thought I loved her.
There is no folly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to its commission.
Her relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; she allured me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was.
I never loved, I never esteemed, I did not even know her.
I was not sure of the existence of one virtue in her nature: I had marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, nor refinement in her mind or manners--and, I married her:--gross, grovelling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was!
"My bride's mother I had never seen: I understood she was dead.
The honeymoon over, I learned my mistake; she was only mad, and shut up in a lunatic asylum.
The elder one, whom you have seen (and whom I cannot hate, whilst I abhor all his kindred, because he has some grains of affection in his feeble mind, shown in the continued interest he takes in his wretched sister, and also in a dog-like attachment he once bore me), will probably be in the same state one day.
My father and my brother Rowland knew all this; but they thought only of the thirty thousand pounds, and joined in the plot against me."
"These were vile discoveries; but except for the treachery of concealment, I should have made them no subject of reproach to my wife, even when I found her nature wholly alien to mine, her tastes obnoxious to me, her cast of mind common, low, narrow, and singularly incapable of being led to anything higher, expanded to anything larger--
when I found that I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour of the day with her in comfort; that kindly conversation could not be sustained between us, because whatever topic I started, immediately received from her a turn at once coarse and trite, perverse and imbecile--when I perceived that I should never have a quiet or settled household, because no servant would bear the continued outbreaks of her violent and unreasonable temper, or the vexations of her absurd, contradictory, exacting orders--even then I restrained myself: I eschewed upbraiding, I curtailed remonstrance; I tried to devour my repentance and disgust in secret; I repressed the deep antipathy I felt.
I lived with that woman upstairs four years, and before that time she had tried me indeed: her character ripened and developed with frightful rapidity; her vices sprang up fast and rank: they were so strong, only cruelty could check them, and I would not use cruelty.
What a pigmy intellect she had, and what giant propensities!
Bertha Mason, the true daughter of an infamous mother, dragged me through all the hideous and degrading agonies which must attend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste.
"My brother in the interval was dead, and at the end of the four years my father died too.
Your pity, my darling, is the suffering mother of love: its anguish is the very natal pang of the divine passion.
I accept it, Jane; let the daughter have free advent--my arms wait to receive her."
"Now, sir, proceed; what did you do when you found she was mad?"
In the eyes of the world, I was doubtless covered with grimy dishonour; but I resolved to be clean in my own sight--and to the last I repudiated the contamination of her crimes, and wrenched myself from connection with her mental defects.
Still, society associated my name and person with hers; I yet saw her and heard her daily: something of her breath (faugh!) mixed with the air I breathed; and besides, I remembered I had once been her husband--that recollection was then, and is now, inexpressibly odious to me; moreover, I knew that while she lived I could never be the husband of another and better wife; and, though five years my senior (her family and her father had lied to me even in the particular of her age), she was likely to live as long as I, being as robust in frame as she was infirm in mind.
"One night I had been awakened by her yells--(since the medical men had pronounced her mad, she had, of course, been shut up)--it was a fiery West Indian night; one of the description that frequently precede the hurricanes of those climates.
I was physically influenced by the atmosphere and scene, and my ears were filled with the curses the maniac still shrieked out; wherein she momentarily mingled my name with such a tone of demon-hate, with such language!--no professed harlot ever had a fouler vocabulary than she: though two rooms off, I heard every word--the thin partitions of the West India house opposing but slight obstruction to her wolfish cries.
You may take the maniac with you to England; confine her with due attendance and precautions at Thornfield: then travel yourself to what clime you will, and form what new tie you like.
That woman, who has so abused your long- suffering, so sullied your name, so outraged your honour, so blighted your youth, is not your wife, nor are you her husband.
See that she is cared for as her condition demands, and you have done all that God and humanity require of you.
Let her identity, her connection with yourself, be buried in oblivion: you are bound to impart them to no living being.
Place her in safety and comfort: shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.'
My father and brother had not made my marriage known to their acquaintance; because, in the very first letter I wrote to apprise them of the union--having already begun to experience extreme disgust of its consequences, and, from the family character and constitution, seeing a hideous future opening to me--I added an urgent charge to keep it secret: and very soon the infamous conduct of the wife my father had selected for me was such as to make him blush to own her as his daughter-in-law.
Far from desiring to publish the connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.
"To England, then, I conveyed her; a fearful voyage I had with such a monster in the vessel.
Glad was I when I at last got her to Thornfield, and saw her safely lodged in that third-storey room, of whose secret inner cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast's den--a goblin's cell.
I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her, as it was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could be placed; for her ravings would inevitably betray my secret: besides, she had lucid intervals of days--sometimes weeks--which she filled up with abuse of me.
She and the surgeon, Carter (who dressed Mason's wounds that night he was stabbed and worried), are the only two I have ever admitted to my confidence.
Mrs. Fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but she could have gained no precise knowledge as to facts.
Grace has, on the whole, proved a good keeper; though, owing partly to a fault of her own, of which it appears nothing can cure her, and which is incident to her harassing profession, her vigilance has been more than once lulled and baffled.
The lunatic is both cunning and malignant; she has never failed to take advantage of her guardian's temporary lapses; once to secrete the knife with which she stabbed her brother, and twice to possess herself of the key of her cell, and issue therefrom in the night-time.
On the first of these occasions, she perpetrated the attempt to burn me in my bed; on the second, she paid that ghastly visit to you.
I thank Providence, who watched over you, that she then spent her fury on your wedding apparel, which perhaps brought back vague reminiscences of her own bridal days: but on what might have happened, I cannot endure to reflect.
"And what, sir," I asked, while he paused, "did you do when you had settled her here?
My fixed desire was to seek and find a good and intelligent woman, whom I could love: a contrast to the fury I left at Thornfield--"
I meant to tell my tale plainly, and make my proposals openly: and it appeared to me so absolutely rational that I should be considered free to love and be loved, I never doubted some woman might be found willing and able to understand my case and accept me, in spite of the curse with which I was burdened."
"Whether you found any one you liked: whether you asked her to marry you; and what she said."
"I can tell you whether I found any one I liked, and whether I asked her to marry me: but what she said is yet to be recorded in the book of Fate.
I sought my ideal of a woman amongst English ladies, French countesses, Italian signoras, and German grafinnen. I could not find her.
That was my Indian Messalina's attribute: rooted disgust at it and her restrained me much, even in pleasure.
Any enjoyment that bordered on riot seemed to approach me to her and her vices, and I eschewed it.
The first I chose was Celine Varens--another of those steps which make a man spurn himself when he recalls them.
You already know what she was, and how my liaison with her terminated.
Giacinta was unprincipled and violent: I tired of her in three months.
I was glad to give her a sufficient sum to set her up in a good line of business, and so get decently rid of her.
Adele claimed your outward attention for a while; yet I fancied your thoughts were elsewhere: but you were very patient with her, my little Jane; you talked to her and amused her a long time.
When at last she left you, you lapsed at once into deep reverie: you betook yourself slowly to pace the gallery.
"Don't talk any more of those days, sir," I interrupted, furtively dashing away some tears from my eyes; his language was torture to me; for I knew what I must do--and do soon--and all these reminiscences, and these revelations of his feelings only made my work more difficult.
"No, Jane," he returned: "what necessity is there to dwell on the Past, when the Present is so much surer--the Future so much brighter?"
"You see now how the case stands--do you not?" he continued.
"Jane!" recommenced he, with a gentleness that broke me down with grief, and turned me stone-cold with ominous terror--for this still voice was the pant of a lion rising--"Jane, do you mean to go one way in the world, and to let me go another?"
A wild look raised his brows--crossed his features: he rose; but he forebore yet.
Is it better to drive a fellow-creature to despair than to transgress a mere human law, no man being injured by the breach? for you have neither relatives nor acquaintances whom you need fear to offend by living with me?"
This was true: and while he spoke my very conscience and reason turned traitors against me, and charged me with crime in resisting him.
"Oh, comply!" it said. "Think of his misery; think of his danger--look at his state when left alone; remember his headlong nature; consider the recklessness following on despair--soothe him; save him; love him; tell him you love him and will be his.
I will keep the law given by God; sanctioned by man.
His fury was wrought to the highest: he must yield to it for a moment, whatever followed; he crossed the floor and seized my arm and grasped my waist.
He seemed to devour me with his flaming glance: physically, I felt, at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the draught and glow of a furnace: mentally, I still possessed my soul, and with it the certainty of ultimate safety.
My eye rose to his; and while I looked in his fierce face I gave an involuntary sigh; his gripe was painful, and my over-taxed strength almost exhausted.
"Never," said he, as he ground his teeth, "never was anything at once so frail and so indomitable.
A mere reed she feels in my hand!"
(And he shook me with the force of his hold.)
"I could bend her with my finger and thumb: and what good would it do if I bent, if I uptore, if I crushed her?
As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.
I had dared and baffled his fury; I must elude his sorrow: I retired to the door.
What unutterable pathos was in his voice!
He turned away; he threw himself on his face on the sofa.
"Oh, Jane! my hope--my love--my life!" broke in anguish from his lips.
I knelt down by him; I turned his face from the cushion to me; I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his hair with my hand.
"Little Jane's love would have been my best reward," he answered; "without it, my heart is broken.
But Jane will give me her love: yes--nobly, generously."
Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire from his eyes; erect he sprang; he held his arms out; but I evaded the embrace, and at once quitted the room.
I lifted up my head to look: the roof resolved to clouds, high and dim; the gleam was such as the moon imparts to vapours she is about to sever.
I watched her come--watched with the strangest anticipation; as though some word of doom were to be written on her disk.
"My daughter, flee temptation."
No thought could be admitted of entering to embrace her.
No sleep was there: the inmate was walking restlessly from wall to wall; and again and again he sighed while I listened.
He would feel himself forsaken; his love rejected: he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate.
He who is taken out to pass through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not of the flowers that smile on his road, but of the block and axe-edge; of the disseverment of bone and vein; of the grave gaping at the end: and I thought of drear flight and homeless wandering--and oh! with agony I thought of what I left.
I thought of him now--in his room--watching the sunrise; hoping I should soon come to say I would stay with him and be his.
I longed to be his; I panted to return: it was not too late; I could yet spare him the bitter pang of bereavement.
I could go back and be his comforter--his pride; his redeemer from misery, perhaps from ruin.
Oh, that fear of his self-abandonment--far worse than my abandonment--how it goaded me!
I asked for what sum he would take me there; he said thirty shillings; I answered I had but twenty; well, he would try to make it do.
It is a summer evening; the coachman has set me down at a place called Whitcross; he could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world. The coach is a mile off by this time; I am alone.
I have no relative but the universal mother, Nature: I will seek her breast and ask repose.
If a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a bull; if a plover whistled, I imagined it a man.
Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought she loved me, outcast as I was; and I, who from man could anticipate only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial fondness.
To-night, at least, I would be her guest, as I was her child: my mother would lodge me without money and without price.
It trembled for Mr. Rochester and his doom; it bemoaned him with bitter pity; it demanded him with ceaseless longing; and, impotent as a bird with both wings broken, it still quivered its shattered pinions in vain attempts to seek him.
Night was come, and her planets were risen: a safe, still night: too serene for the companionship of fear.
Mr. Rochester was safe; he was God's, and by God would he be guarded.
I entered the shop: a woman was there.
Seeing a respectably-dressed person, a lady as she supposed, she came forward with civility.
How could she serve me?
I dared not offer her the half-worn gloves, the creased handkerchief: besides, I felt it would be absurd.
Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request.
Soon I asked her "if there were any dressmaker or plain-workwoman in the village?"
"Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted?"
"Nay; she couldn't say."
She seemed to be tired of my questions: and, indeed, what claim had I to importune her?
A mild-looking, cleanly-attired young woman opened the door.
"No," said she; "we do not keep a servant."
But it was not her business to think for me, or to seek a place for me: besides, in her eyes, how doubtful must have appeared my character, position, tale.
She shook her head, she "was sorry she could give me no information," and the white door closed, quite gently and civilly: but it shut me out.
If she had held it open a little longer, I believe I should have begged a piece of bread; for I was now brought low.
An old woman opened: I asked was this the parsonage? "Yes."
"Would he be in soon?"
"No, he was gone from home."
He had been called away by the sudden death of his father: he was at Marsh End now, and would very likely stay there a fortnight longer."
"Nay, there was naught but her, and she was housekeeper;" and of her, reader, I could not bear to ask the relief for want of which I was sinking; I could not yet beg; and again I crawled away.
Instinctively I turned my face again to the village; I found the shop again, and I went in; and though others were there besides the woman I ventured the request--"Would she give me a roll for this handkerchief?"
She looked at me with evident suspicion: "Nay, she never sold stuff i' that way."
Almost desperate, I asked for half a cake; she again refused.
"How could she tell where I had got the handkerchief?" she said.
"Would she take my gloves?"
"No! what could she do with them?"
And as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief in exchange for her bread, why, she was right, if the offer appeared to her sinister or the exchange unprofitable.
A little before dark I passed a farm-house, at the open door of which the farmer was sitting, eating his supper of bread and cheese.
He cast on me a glance of surprise; but without answering, he cut a thick slice from his loaf, and gave it to me.
I imagine he did not think I was a beggar, but only an eccentric sort of lady, who had taken a fancy to his brown loaf. As soon as I was out of sight of his house, I sat down and ate it.
At the door of a cottage I saw a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough. "Will you give me that?"
"Mother!" she exclaimed, "there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge."
"Well lass," replied a voice within, "give it her if she's a beggar.
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I devoured it ravenously.
The candle, whose ray had been my beacon, burnt on the table; and by its light an elderly woman, somewhat rough-looking, but scrupulously clean, like all about her, was knitting a stocking.
Two young, graceful women--ladies in every point--sat, one in a low rocking-chair, the other on a lower stool; both wore deep mourning of crape and bombazeen, which sombre garb singularly set off very fair necks and faces: a large old pointer dog rested its massive head on the knee of one girl--in the lap of the other was cushioned a black cat.
They could not be the daughters of the elderly person at the table; for she looked like a rustic, and they were all delicacy and cultivation.
"Listen, Diana," said one of the absorbed students; "Franz and old Daniel are together in the night-time, and Franz is telling a dream from which he has awakened in terror--listen!"
And in a low voice she read something, of which not one word was intelligible to me; for it was in an unknown tongue--neither French nor Latin.
"That is strong," she said, when she had finished: "I relish it."
The other girl, who had lifted her head to listen to her sister, repeated, while she gazed at the fire, a line of what had been read.
Good! good!" she exclaimed, while her dark and deep eye sparkled.
"Is there ony country where they talk i' that way?" asked the old woman, looking up from her knitting.
"Surely he will not be long now: it is just ten (looking at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle).
The woman rose: she opened a door, through which I dimly saw a passage: soon I heard her stir a fire in an inner room; she presently came back.
"Ah, childer!" said she, "it fair troubles me to go into yond' room now: it looks so lonesome wi' the chair empty and set back in a corner."
She wiped her eyes with her apron: the two girls, grave before, looked sad now.
"But he is in a better place," continued Hannah: "we shouldn't wish him here again.
And then, nobody need to have a quieter death nor he had."
"You say he never mentioned us?" inquired one of the ladies.
"He hadn't time, bairn: he was gone in a minute, was your father.
He had been a bit ailing like the day before, but naught to signify; and when Mr. St. John asked if he would like either o' ye to be sent for, he fair laughed at him.
He began again with a bit of a heaviness in his head the next day--that is, a fortnight sin'--and he went to sleep and niver wakened: he wor a'most stark when your brother went into t' chamber and fand him.
Ah, childer! that's t' last o' t' old stock--for ye and Mr. St. John is like of different soart to them 'at's gone; for all your mother wor mich i' your way, and a'most as book-learned.
She wor the pictur' o' ye, Mary: Diana is more like your father."
I thought them so similar I could not tell where the old servant (for such I now concluded her to be) saw the difference.
One, to be sure, had hair a shade darker than the other, and there was a difference in their style of wearing it; Mary's pale brown locks were parted and braided smooth: Diana's duskier tresses covered her neck with thick curls.
"Ye'll want your supper, I am sure," observed Hannah; "and so will Mr. St. John when he comes in."
And she proceeded to prepare the meal.
"What do you want?" she inquired, in a voice of surprise, as she surveyed me by the light of the candle she held.
"I'll give you a piece of bread," she said, after a pause; "but we can't take in a vagrant to lodge. It isn't likely."
There has been a beggar-woman--I declare she is not gone yet!--laid down there.
I have a word to say to the woman.
You have done your duty in excluding, now let me do mine in admitting her.
I was near, and listened to both you and her.
Young woman, rise, and pass before me into the house."
"I cannot tell: I found her at the door," was the reply.
"As white as clay or death," was responded. "She will fall: let her sit."
"Perhaps a little water would restore her. Hannah, fetch some.
But she is worn to nothing.
"Is she ill, or only famished?"
Diana (I knew her by the long curls which I saw drooping between me and the fire as she bent over me) broke some bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips.
Her face was near mine: I saw there was pity in it, and I felt sympathy in her hurried breathing.
In her simple words, too, the same balm-like emotion spoke: "Try to eat."
"Not too much at first--restrain her," said the brother; "she has had enough." And he withdrew the cup of milk and the plate of bread.
"A little more, St. John--look at the avidity in her eyes."
Try if she can speak now--ask her her name."
"But what, then," said he, "do you expect me to do for you?"
"Do you mean," she asked, "that we have now given you what aid you require? and that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night?"
I looked at her. She had, I thought, a remarkable countenance, instinct both with power and goodness.
I took sudden courage. Answering her compassionate gaze with a smile, I said-
"Hannah," said Mr. St. John, at last, "let her sit there at present, and ask her no questions; in ten minutes more, give her the remainder of that milk and bread.
In an undertone she gave some directions to Hannah.
I had a feeling that she wished me away: that she did not understand me or my circumstances; that she was prejudiced against me.
"It is very well we took her in."
"Yes; she would certainly have been found dead at the door in the morning had she been left out all night.
I wonder what she has gone through?"
"She is not an uneducated person, I should think, by her manner of speaking; her accent was quite pure; and the clothes she took off, though splashed and wet, were little worn and fine."
"She has a peculiar face; fleshless and haggard as it is, I rather like it; and when in good health and animated, I can fancy her physiognomy would be agreeable."
Mr. St. John came but once: he looked at me, and said my state of lethargy was the result of reaction from excessive and protracted fatigue.
He pronounced it needless to send for a doctor: nature, he was sure, would manage best, left to herself.
These opinions he delivered in a few words, in a quiet, low voice; and added, after a pause, in the tone of a man little accustomed to expansive comment, "Rather an unusual physiognomy; certainly, not indicative of vulgarity or degradation."
I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently."
"That is hardly likely," was the reply. "You will find she is some young lady who has had a misunderstanding with her friends, and has probably injudiciously left them.
We may, perhaps, succeed in restoring her to them, if she is not obstinate: but I trace lines of force in her face which make me sceptical of her tractability." He stood considering me some minutes; then added, "She looks sensible, but not at all handsome."
"Ill or well, she would always be plain.
When she left me, I felt comparatively strong and revived: ere long satiety of repose and desire for action stirred me.
Hannah had been cold and stiff, indeed, at the first: latterly she had begun to relent a little; and when she saw me come in tidy and well-dressed, she even smiled.
"What, you have got up!" she said. "You are better, then.
She bustled about, examining me every now and then with the corner of her eye.
Turning to me, as she took some loaves from the oven, she asked bluntly--
I was indignant for a moment; but remembering that anger was out of the question, and that I had indeed appeared as a beggar to her, I answered quietly, but still not without a certain marked firmness--
After a pause she said, "I dunnut understand that: you've like no house, nor no brass, I guess?"
"Are you book-learned?" she inquired presently.
She opened her eyes wide.
What are you going to do with these gooseberries?" I inquired, as she brought out a basket of the fruit.
She consented; and she even brought me a clean towel to spread over my dress, "lest," as she said, "I should mucky it."
"Ye've not been used to sarvant's wark, I see by your hands," she remarked. "Happen ye've been a dressmaker?"
"Nay; he doesn't live here: he is only staying a while.
When he is at home, he is in his own parish at Morton."
"And what is he?"
"This, then, was his father's residence?"
"Aye; old Mr. Rivers lived here, and his father, and grandfather, and gurt (great) grandfather afore him."
"Aye; St. John is like his kirstened name."
"And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Rivers?"
"Their father is dead?"
"They have no mother?"
"I believe," she said, "I was quite mista'en in my thoughts of you: but there is so mony cheats goes about, you mun forgie me."
"You munnut think too hardly of me," she again remarked.
"No more I ought," said she: "Mr. St. John tells me so too; and I see I wor wrang--but I've clear a different notion on you now to what I had.
She put her floury and horny hand into mine; another and heartier smile illumined her rough face, and from that moment we were friends.
While I picked the fruit, and she made the paste for the pies, she proceeded to give me sundry details about her deceased master and mistress, and "the childer," as she called the young people.
Old Mr. Rivers, she said, was a plain man enough, but a gentleman, and of as ancient a family as could be found.
Marsh End had belonged to the Rivers ever since it was a house: and it was, she affirmed, "aboon two hundred year old--for all it looked but a small, humble place, naught to compare wi' Mr. Oliver's grand hall down i' Morton Vale.
But she could remember Bill Oliver's father a journeyman needlemaker; and th' Rivers wor gentry i' th' owd days o' th' Henrys, as onybody might see by looking into th' registers i' Morton Church vestry." Still, she allowed, "the owd maister was like other folk--naught mich out o' t' common way: stark mad o' shooting, and farming, and sich like."
She was a great reader, and studied a deal; and the "bairns" had taken after her.
There was nothing like them in these parts, nor ever had been; they had liked learning, all three, almost from the time they could speak; and they had always been "of a mak' of their own." Mr. St. John, when he grew up, would go to college and be a parson; and the girls, as soon as they left school, would seek places as governesses: for they had told her their father had some years ago lost a great deal of money by a man he had trusted turning bankrupt; and as he was now not rich enough to give them fortunes, they must provide for themselves.
They had lived very little at home for a long while, and were only come now to stay a few weeks on account of their father's death; but they did so like Marsh End and Morton, and all these moors and hills about.
Mr. St. John, when he saw me, merely bowed and passed through; the two ladies stopped: Mary, in a few words, kindly and calmly expressed the pleasure she felt in seeing me well enough to be able to come down; Diana took my hand: she shook her head at me.
"You should have waited for my leave to descend," she said. "You still look very pale--and so thin!
Poor child!--poor girl!"
Mary's countenance was equally intelligent--her features equally pretty; but her expression was more reserved, and her manners, though gentle, more distant.
Diana looked and spoke with a certain authority: she had a will, evidently.
"And what business have you here?" she continued.
"To be sure," added her sister.
And still holding my hand she made me rise, and led me into the inner room.
"Sit there," she said, placing me on the sofa, "while we take our things off and get the tea ready; it is another privilege we exercise in our little moorland home--to prepare our own meals when we are so inclined, or when Hannah is baking, brewing, washing, or ironing."
She closed the door, leaving me solus with Mr. St. John, who sat opposite, a book or newspaper in his hand.
Mr. St. John--sitting as still as one of the dusty pictures on the walls, keeping his eyes fixed on the page he perused, and his lips mutely sealed--was easy enough to examine.
Had he been a statue instead of a man, he could not have been easier.
He was young--perhaps from twenty- eight to thirty--tall, slender; his face riveted the eye; it was like a Greek face, very pure in outline: quite a straight, classic nose; quite an Athenian mouth and chin.
It is seldom, indeed, an English face comes so near the antique models as did his.
He might well be a little shocked at the irregularity of my lineaments, his own being so harmonious.
His eyes were large and blue, with brown lashes; his high forehead, colourless as ivory, was partially streaked over by careless locks of fair hair.
Yet he whom it describes scarcely impressed one with the idea of a gentle, a yielding, an impressible, or even of a placid nature.
Quiescent as he now sat, there was something about his nostril, his mouth, his brow, which, to my perceptions, indicated elements within either restless, or hard, or eager.
He did not speak to me one word, nor even direct to me one glance, till his sisters returned.
Diana, as she passed in and out, in the course of preparing tea, brought me a little cake, baked on the top of the oven.
"Eat that now," she said: "you must be hungry.
Mr. Rivers now closed his book, approached the table, and, as he took a seat, fixed his blue pictorial-looking eyes full on me.
There was an unceremonious directness, a searching, decided steadfastness in his gaze now, which told that intention, and not diffidence, had hitherto kept it averted from the stranger.
"You are very hungry," he said.
"No," he said coolly: "when you have indicated to us the residence of your friends, we can write to them, and you may be restored to home."
He seemed to use them rather as instruments to search other people's thoughts, than as agents to reveal his own: the which combination of keenness and reserve was considerably more calculated to embarrass than to encourage.
"Do you mean to say," he asked, "that you are completely isolated from every connection?"
Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were folded on the table before me.
I wondered what he sought there: his words soon explained the quest.
"Why, she can't be above seventeen or eighteen years old, St. John," said she.
Diana and Mary relieved me by turning their eyes elsewhere than to my crimsoned visage; but the colder and sterner brother continued to gaze, till the trouble he had excited forced out tears as well as colour.
"Where did you last reside?" he now asked.
"You are too inquisitive, St. John," murmured Mary in a low voice; but he leaned over the table and required an answer by a second firm and piercing look.
"Yet if I know nothing about you or your history, I cannot help you," he said. "And you need help, do you not?"
"Mr. Rivers," I said, turning to him, and looking at him, as he looked at me, openly and without diffidence, "you and your sisters have done me a great service--the greatest man can do his fellow-being; you have rescued me, by your noble hospitality, from death.
"I am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman.
"Don't make her talk any more now, St. John," said Diana, as I paused; "she is evidently not yet fit for excitement.
"You said your name was Jane Elliott?" he observed.
"Now do, brother, let her be at peace a while."
But when St. John had mused a few moments he recommenced as imperturbably and with as much acumen as ever.
"Indeed you _shall_ stay here," said Diana, putting her white hand on my head.
"You _shall_," repeated Mary, in the tone of undemonstrative sincerity which seemed natural to her.
"She has already said that she is willing to do anything honest she can do," answered Diana for me; "and you know, St. John, she has no choice of helpers: she is forced to put up with such crusty people as you."
He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied before tea.
Physically, she far excelled me: she was handsome; she was vigorous.
In her animal spirits there was an affluence of life and certainty of flow, such as excited my wonder, while it baffled my comprehension.
I could talk a while when the evening commenced, but the first gush of vivacity and fluency gone, I was fain to sit on a stool at Diana's feet, to rest my head on her knee, and listen alternately to her and Mary, while they sounded thoroughly the topic on which I had but touched.
I liked to learn of her: I saw the part of instructress pleased and suited her; that of scholar pleased and suited me no less.
Mary would sit and watch me by the hour together: then she would take lessons; and a docile, intelligent, assiduous pupil she made.
As to Mr. St John, the intimacy which had arisen so naturally and rapidly between me and his sisters did not extend to him.
One reason of the distance yet observed between us was, that he was comparatively seldom at home: a large proportion of his time appeared devoted to visiting the sick and poor among the scattered population of his parish.
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral excursions: rain or fair, he would, when his hours of morning study were over, take his hat, and, followed by his father's old pointer, Carlo, go out on his mission of love or duty--I scarcely know in which light he regarded it.
Sometimes, when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters would expostulate.
Diana and Mary's general answer to this question was a sigh, and some minutes of apparently mournful meditation.
But besides his frequent absences, there was another barrier to friendship with him: he seemed of a reserved, an abstracted, and even of a brooding nature.
Zealous in his ministerial labours, blameless in his life and habits, he yet did not appear to enjoy that mental serenity, that inward content, which should be the reward of every sincere Christian and practical philanthropist.
Often, of an evening, when he sat at the window, his desk and papers before him, he would cease reading or writing, rest his chin on his hand, and deliver himself up to I know not what course of thought; but that it was perturbed and exciting might be seen in the frequent flash and changeful dilation of his eye.
I think, moreover, that Nature was not to him that treasury of delight it was to his sisters.
He expressed once, and but once in my hearing, a strong sense of the rugged charm of the hills, and an inborn affection for the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home; but there was more of gloom than pleasure in the tone and words in which the sentiment was manifested; and never did he seem to roam the moors for the sake of their soothing silence--never seek out or dwell upon the thousand peaceful delights they could yield.
Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed before I had an opportunity of gauging his mind.
I first got an idea of its calibre when I heard him preach in his own church at Morton.
When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightened by his discourse, I experienced an inexpressible sadness; for it seemed to me--I know not whether equally so to others--that the eloquence to which I had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment--where moved troubling impulses of insatiate yearnings and disquieting aspirations.
I was sure St. John Rivers--pure-lived, conscientious, zealous as he was--had not yet found that peace of God which passeth all understanding: he had no more found it, I thought, than had I with my concealed and racking regrets for my broken idol and lost elysium--regrets to which I have latterly avoided referring, but which possessed me and tyrannised over me ruthlessly.
Mr. St. John had said nothing to me yet about the employment he had promised to obtain for me; yet it became urgent that I should have a vocation of some kind.
One morning, being left alone with him a few minutes in the parlour, I ventured to approach the window-recess--which his table, chair, and desk consecrated as a kind of study--and I was going to speak, though not very well knowing in what words to frame my inquiry--for it is at all times difficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such natures as his--when he saved me the trouble by being the first to commence a dialogue.
Looking up as I drew near--"You have a question to ask of me?" he said.
I waited a few moments, expecting he would go on with the subject first broached: but he seemed to have entered another train of reflection: his look denoted abstraction from me and my business.
I grew impatient: a restless movement or two, and an eager and exacting glance fastened on his face, conveyed the feeling to him as effectually as words could have done, and with less trouble.
"You need be in no hurry to hear," he said: "let me frankly tell you, I have nothing eligible or profitable to suggest.
Before I explain, recall, if you please, my notice, clearly given, that if I helped you, it must be as the blind man would help the lame.
I am poor; for I find that, when I have paid my father's debts, all the patrimony remaining to me will be this crumbling grange, the row of scathed firs behind, and the patch of moorish soil, with the yew-trees and holly-bushes in front.
I am obscure: Rivers is an old name; but of the three sole descendants of the race, two earn the dependant's crust among strangers, and the third considers himself an alien from his native country--not only for life, but in death.
Yes, and deems, and is bound to deem, himself honoured by the lot, and aspires but after the day when the cross of separation from fleshly ties shall be laid on his shoulders, and when the Head of that church-militant of whose humblest members he is one, shall give the word, 'Rise, follow Me!'"
St. John said these words as he pronounced his sermons, with a quiet, deep voice; with an unflushed cheek, and a coruscating radiance of glance.
I hold that the more arid and unreclaimed the soil where the Christian labourer's task of tillage is appointed him--the scantier the meed his toil brings--the higher the honour.
"Well?" I said, as he again paused--"proceed."
He looked at me before he proceeded: indeed, he seemed leisurely to read my face, as if its features and lines were characters on a page.
The conclusions drawn from this scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding observations.
"I believe you will accept the post I offer you," said he, "and hold it for a while: not permanently, though: any more than I could permanently keep the narrow and narrowing--the tranquil, hidden office of English country incumbent; for in your nature is an alloy as detrimental to repose as that in mine, though of a different kind."
"Do explain," I urged, when he halted once more.
I shall not stay long at Morton, now that my father is dead, and that I am my own master.
Her salary will be thirty pounds a year: her house is already furnished, very simply, but sufficiently, by the kindness of a lady, Miss Oliver; the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish--Mr. Oliver, the proprietor of a needle- factory and iron-foundry in the valley.
The same lady pays for the education and clothing of an orphan from the workhouse, on condition that she shall aid the mistress in such menial offices connected with her own house and the school as her occupation of teaching will prevent her having time to discharge in person.
He put the question rather hurriedly; he seemed half to expect an indignant, or at least a disdainful rejection of the offer: not knowing all my thoughts and feelings, though guessing some, he could not tell in what light the lot would appear to me.
"But you comprehend me?" he said.
Standing still, he again looked at me.
He shook his head.
I am sure you cannot long be content to pass your leisure in solitude, and to devote your working hours to a monotonous labour wholly void of stimulus: any more than I can be content," he added, with emphasis, "to live here buried in morass, pent in with mountains--my nature, that God gave me, contravened; my faculties, heaven-bestowed, paralysed--made useless.
I, who preached contentment with a humble lot, and justified the vocation even of hewers of wood and drawers of water in God's service--I, His ordained minister, almost rave in my restlessness.
In this brief hour I had learnt more of him than in the whole previous month: yet still he puzzled me.
"He will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves," she said: "natural affection and feelings more potent still.
St. John looks quiet, Jane; but he hides a fever in his vitals.
You would think him gentle, yet in some things he is inexorable as death; and the worst of it is, my conscience will hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severe decision: certainly, I cannot for a moment blame him for it.
And the tears gushed to her fine eyes.
Mary bent her head low over her work.
"We are now without father: we shall soon be without home and brother," she murmured.
"Our uncle John is dead," said he.
She riveted a searching gaze on her brother's face.
"And what then?" she demanded, in a low voice.
"What then, Die?" he replied, maintaining a marble immobility of feature.
He threw the letter into her lap.
Mary perused it in silence, and returned it to her brother.
He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and again went out.
"Jane, you will wonder at us and our mysteries," she said, "and think us hard-hearted beings not to be more moved at the death of so near a relation as an uncle; but we have never seen him or known him.
He was my mother's brother.
My father and he quarrelled long ago.
It was by his advice that my father risked most of his property in the speculation that ruined him.
My uncle engaged afterwards in more prosperous undertakings: it appears he realised a fortune of twenty thousand pounds.
My father always cherished the idea that he would atone for his error by leaving his possessions to us; that letter informs us that he has bequeathed every penny to the other relation, with the exception of thirty guineas, to be divided between St. John, Diana, and Mary Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings.
He had a right, of course, to do as he pleased: and yet a momentary damp is cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news.
This explanation given, the subject was dropped, and no further reference made to it by either Mr. Rivers or his sisters.
He was fond and proud of me--it is what no man besides will ever be.--But where am I wandering, and what am I saying, and above all, feeling?
A dog--old Carlo, Mr. Rivers' pointer, as I saw in a moment--was pushing the gate with his nose, and St. John himself leant upon it with folded arms; his brow knit, his gaze, grave almost to displeasure, fixed on me.
"Have you found your first day's work harder than you expected?" he asked.
My father, indeed, imposed the determination, but since his death, I have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with; some affairs settled, a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement or two of the feelings broken through or cut asunder--a last conflict with human weakness, in which I know I shall overcome, because I have vowed that I _will_ overcome--and I leave Europe for the East."
He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatic voice; looking, when he had ceased speaking, not at me, but at the setting sun, at which I looked too.
Both he and I had our backs towards the path leading up the field to the wicket.
Your dog is quicker to recognise his friends than you are, sir; he pricked his ears and wagged his tail when I was at the bottom of the field, and you have your back towards me now."
Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first of those musical accents, as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the close of the sentence, in the same attitude in which the speaker had surprised him--his arm resting on the gate, his face directed towards the west.
A vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his side.
There appeared, within three feet of him, a form clad in pure white--a youthful, graceful form: full, yet fine in contour; and when, after bending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head, and threw back a long veil, there bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty.
Perfect beauty is a strong expression; but I do not retrace or qualify it: as sweet features as ever the temperate clime of Albion moulded; as pure hues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury skies generated and screened, justified, in this instance, the term.
No charm was wanting, no defect was perceptible; the young girl had regular and delicate lineaments; eyes shaped and coloured as we see them in lovely pictures, large, and dark, and full; the long and shadowy eyelash which encircles a fine eye with so soft a fascination; the pencilled brow which gives such clearness; the white smooth forehead, which adds such repose to the livelier beauties of tint and ray; the cheek oval, fresh, and smooth; the lips, fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed; the even and gleaming teeth without flaw; the small dimpled chin; the ornament of rich, plenteous tresses--all advantages, in short, which, combined, realise the ideal of beauty, were fully hers.
I wondered, as I looked at this fair creature: I admired her with my whole heart.
Nature had surely formed her in a partial mood; and, forgetting her usual stinted step-mother dole of gifts, had endowed this, her darling, with a grand-dame's bounty.
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn to her and look at her; and, as naturally, I sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance.
He had already withdrawn his eye from the Peri, and was looking at a humble tuft of daisies which grew by the wicket.
"A lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone," he said, as he crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers with his foot.
Papa told me you had opened your school, and that the new mistress was come; and so I put on my bonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her: this is she?" pointing to me.
"Do you think you shall like Morton?" she asked of me, with a direct and naive simplicity of tone and manner, pleasing, if child-like.
What happy combination of the planets presided over her birth, I wonder?)
"I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes," she added. "It will be a change for me to visit you now and then; and I like a change.
It seemed to me that Mr. St. John's under lip protruded, and his upper lip curled a moment.
His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his face unusually stern and square, as the laughing girl gave him this information.
He lifted his gaze, too, from the daisies, and turned it on her.
She answered it with a second laugh, and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her dimples, her bright eyes.
As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing Carlo.
"Poor Carlo loves me," said she. "_He_ is not stern and distant to his friends; and if he could speak, he would not be silent."
As she patted the dog's head, bending with native grace before his young and austere master, I saw a glow rise to that master's face.
I saw his solemn eye melt with sudden fire, and flicker with resistless emotion.
Flushed and kindled thus, he looked nearly as beautiful for a man as she for a woman.
His chest heaved once, as if his large heart, weary of despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will, and made a vigorous bound for the attainment of liberty.
But he curbed it, I think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed.
It is just the hour when papa most wants company: when the works are closed and he has no business to occupy him.
She filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply of her own.
"I forgot!" she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself. "I am so giddy and thoughtless! _Do_ excuse me.
She held out her hand. He just touched it.
"Good evening!" he repeated, in a voice low and hollow as an echo.
"Are you well?" she asked.
Well might she put the question: his face was blanched as her gown.
"Quite well," he enunciated; and, with a bow, he left the gate. She went one way; he another.
She turned twice to gaze after him as she tripped fairy-like down the field; he, as he strode firmly across, never turned at all.
Diana Rivers had designated her brother "inexorable as death."
Their parents then (the farmer and his wife) loaded me with attentions.
Rosamond Oliver kept her word in coming to visit me.
Her call at the school was generally made in the course of her morning ride.
She would canter up to the door on her pony, followed by a mounted livery servant.
Anything more exquisite than her appearance, in her purple habit, with her Amazon's cap of black velvet placed gracefully above the long curls that kissed her cheek and floated to her shoulders, can scarcely be imagined: and it was thus she would enter the rustic building, and glide through the dazzled ranks of the village children.
She generally came at the hour when Mr. Rivers was engaged in giving his daily catechising lesson.
A sort of instinct seemed to warn him of her entrance, even when he did not see it; and when he was looking quite away from the door, if she appeared at it, his cheek would glow, and his marble-seeming features, though they refused to relax, changed indescribably, and in their very quiescence became expressive of a repressed fervour, stronger than working muscle or darting glance could indicate.
Of course, she knew her power: indeed, he did not, because he could not, conceal it from her.
In spite of his Christian stoicism, when she went up and addressed him, and smiled gaily, encouragingly, even fondly in his face, his hand would tremble and his eye burn.
He seemed to say, with his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it with his lips, "I love you, and I know you prefer me.
And then she would pout like a disappointed child; a pensive cloud would soften her radiant vivacity; she would withdraw her hand hastily from his, and turn in transient petulance from his aspect, at once so heroic and so martyr-like.
St. John, no doubt, would have given the world to follow, recall, retain her, when she thus left him; but he would not give one chance of heaven, nor relinquish, for the elysium of her love, one hope of the true, eternal Paradise.
Besides, he could not bind all that he had in his nature--the rover, the aspirant, the poet, the priest--in the limits of a single passion.
He could not--he would not--renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and the peace of Vale Hall.
I learnt so much from himself in an inroad I once, despite his reserve, had the daring to make on his confidence.
I had learnt her whole character, which was without mystery or disguise: she was coquettish but not heartless; exacting, but not worthlessly selfish.
She had been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutely spoilt.
She was hasty, but good-humoured; vain (she could not help it, when every glance in the glass showed her such a flush of loveliness), but not affected; liberal-handed; innocent of the pride of wealth; ingenuous; sufficiently intelligent; gay, lively, and unthinking: she was very charming, in short, even to a cool observer of her own sex like me; but she was not profoundly interesting or thoroughly impressive.
Still, I liked her almost as I liked my pupil Adele; except that, for a child whom we have watched over and taught, a closer affection is engendered than we can give an equally attractive adult acquaintance.
She said I was like Mr. Rivers, only, certainly, she allowed, "not one-tenth so handsome, though I was a nice neat little soul enough, but he was an angel."
I was, however, good, clever, composed, and firm, like him. I was a _lusus naturae_, she affirmed, as a village schoolmistress: she was sure my previous history, if known, would make a delightful romance.
One evening, while, with her usual child-like activity, and thoughtless yet not offensive inquisitiveness, she was rummaging the cupboard and the table-drawer of my little kitchen, she discovered first two French books, a volume of Schiller, a German grammar and dictionary, and then my drawing-materials and some sketches, including a pencil-head of a pretty little cherub-like girl, one of my scholars, and sundry views from nature, taken in the Vale of Morton and on the surrounding moors.
I drew better than her master in the first school in S-.
Would I sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa?"
She had then on a dark-blue silk dress; her arms and her neck were bare; her only ornament was her chestnut tresses, which waved over her shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curls.
I promised myself the pleasure of colouring it; and, as it was getting late then, I told her she must come and sit another day.
She made such a report of me to her father, that Mr. Oliver himself accompanied her next evening--a tall, massive-featured, middle-aged, and grey-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary turret.
He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps a proud personage; but he was very kind to me.
The sketch of Rosamond's portrait pleased him highly: he said I must make a finished picture of it.
Her father was affable; and when he entered into conversation with me after tea, he expressed in strong terms his approbation of what I had done in Morton school, and said he only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too good for the place, and would soon quit it for one more suitable.
He said it was a very old name in that neighbourhood; that the ancestors of the house were wealthy; that all Morton had once belonged to them; that even now he considered the representative of that house might, if he liked, make an alliance with the best.
He accounted it a pity that so fine and talented a young man should have formed the design of going out as a missionary; it was quite throwing a valuable life away.
It appeared, then, that her father would throw no obstacle in the way of Rosamond's union with St. John.
My little servant, after helping me to clean my house, was gone, well satisfied with the fee of a penny for her aid.
"I am come to see how you are spending your holiday," he said.
I have brought you a book for evening solace," and he laid on the table a new publication--a poem: one of those genuine productions so often vouchsafed to the fortunate public of those days--the golden age of modern literature.
His tall figure sprang erect again with a start: he said nothing.
I looked up at him: he shunned my eye.
I knew his thoughts well, and could read his heart plainly; at the moment I felt calmer and cooler than he: I had then temporarily the advantage of him, and I conceived an inclination to do him some good, if I could.
"With all his firmness and self-control," thought I, "he tasks himself too far: locks every feeling and pang within--expresses, confesses, imparts nothing.
I am sure it would benefit him to talk a little about this sweet Rosamond, whom he thinks he ought not to marry: I will make him talk."
I said first, "Take a chair, Mr. Rivers." But he answered, as he always did, that he could not stay.
He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness: he looked at me astonished.
"A well-executed picture," he said; "very soft, clear colouring; very graceful and correct drawing."
Mastering some hesitation, he answered, "Miss Oliver, I presume."
He continued to gaze at the picture: the longer he looked, the firmer he held it, the more he seemed to covet it.
"It is like!" he murmured; "the eye is well managed: the colour, light, expression, are perfect.
He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me, irresolute, disturbed: he again surveyed the picture.
Since I had ascertained that Rosamond really preferred him, and that her father was not likely to oppose the match, I--less exalted in my views than St. John--had been strongly disposed in my own heart to advocate their union.
It seemed to me that, should he become the possessor of Mr. Oliver's large fortune, he might do as much good with it as if he went and laid his genius out to wither, and his strength to waste, under a tropical sun.
By this time he had sat down: he had laid the picture on the table before him, and with his brow supported on both hands, hung fondly over it.
I discerned he was now neither angry nor shocked at my audacity.
I saw even that to be thus frankly addressed on a subject he had deemed unapproachable--to hear it thus freely handled--was beginning to be felt by him as a new pleasure--an unhoped-for relief.
"She likes you, I am sure," said I, as I stood behind his chair, "and her father respects you.
Moreover, she is a sweet girl--rather thoughtless; but you would have sufficient thought for both yourself and her.
You ought to marry her."
"_Does_ she like me?" he asked.
"Certainly; better than she likes any one else.
She talks of you continually: there is no subject she enjoys so much or touches upon so often."
"It is very pleasant to hear this," he said--"very: go on for another quarter of an hour." And he actually took out his watch and laid it upon the table to measure the time.
I humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast and low: I stood silent.
Amidst this hush the quartet sped; he replaced the watch, laid the picture down, rose, and stood on the hearth.
"Now," said he, "that little space was given to delirium and delusion.
I rested my temples on the breast of temptation, and put my neck voluntarily under her yoke of flowers. I tasted her cup.
The pillow was burning: there is an asp in the garland: the wine has a bitter taste: her promises are hollow--her offers false: I see and know all this."
"It is strange," pursued he, "that while I love Rosamond Oliver so wildly--with all the intensity, indeed, of a first passion, the object of which is exquisitely beautiful, graceful, fascinating--I experience at the same time a calm, unwarped consciousness that she would not make me a good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me; that I should discover this within a year after marriage; and that to twelve months' rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret.
"While something in me," he went on, "is acutely sensible to her charms, something else is as deeply impressed with her defects: they are such that she could sympathise in nothing I aspired to--co-operate in nothing I undertook.
Rosamond a sufferer, a labourer, a female apostle?
Are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you?"
"Miss Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterers: in less than a month, my image will be effaced from her heart. She will forget me; and will marry, probably, some one who will make her far happier than I should do."
Again the surprised expression crossed his face.
He had not imagined that a woman would dare to speak so to a man.
I could never rest in communication with strong, discreet, and refined minds, whether male or female, till I had passed the outworks of conventional reserve, and crossed the threshold of confidence, and won a place by their heart's very hearthstone.
"You are original," said he, "and not timid.
Know me to be what I am--a cold hard man."
"You have taken my confidence by storm," he continued, "and now it is much at your service.
I am simply, in my original state--stripped of that blood-bleached robe with which Christianity covers human deformity--a cold, hard, ambitious man.
I watch your career with interest, because I consider you a specimen of a diligent, orderly, energetic woman: not because I deeply compassionate what you have gone through, or what you still suffer."
Won in youth to religion, she has cultivated my original qualities thus:
--From the minute germ, natural affection, she has developed the overshadowing tree, philanthropy.
From the wild stringy root of human uprightness, she has reared a due sense of the Divine justice.
Of the ambition to win power and renown for my wretched self, she has formed the ambition to spread my Master's kingdom; to achieve victories for the standard of the cross.
But she could not eradicate nature: nor will it be eradicated 'till this mortal shall put on immortality.'"
Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside my palette.
Once more he looked at the portrait.
"She _is_ lovely," he murmured. "She is well named the Rose of the World, indeed!"
What he suddenly saw on this blank paper, it was impossible for me to tell; but something had caught his eye. He took it up with a snatch; he looked at the edge; then shot a glance at me, inexpressibly peculiar, and quite incomprehensible: a glance that seemed to take and make note of every point in my shape, face, and dress; for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning.
His lips parted, as if to speak: but he checked the coming sentence, whatever it was.
It disappeared in his glove; and, with one hasty nod and "good-afternoon," he vanished.
I heard a noise: the wind, I thought, shook the door. No; it was St. John Rivers, who, lifting the latch, came in out of the frozen hurricane--the howling darkness--and stood before me: the cloak that covered his tall figure all white as a glacier.
How very easily alarmed you are!" he answered, removing his cloak and hanging it up against the door, towards which he again coolly pushed the mat which his entrance had deranged.
He stamped the snow from his boots.
"I shall sully the purity of your floor," said he, "but you must excuse me for once." Then he approached the fire.
"I have had hard work to get here, I assure you," he observed, as he warmed his hands over the flame.
I recalled his singular conduct of yesterday, and really I began to fear his wits were touched.
If he were insane, however, his was a very cool and collected insanity: I had never seen that handsome-featured face of his look more like chiselled marble than it did just now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead and let the firelight shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, where it grieved me to discover the hollow trace of care or sorrow now so plainly graved.
I waited, expecting he would say something I could at least comprehend; but his hand was now at his chin, his finger on his lip: he was thinking.
It struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face.
"Not at all," said he: "I care for myself when necessary. I am well now.
This was said with a careless, abstracted indifference, which showed that my solicitude was, at least in his opinion, wholly superfluous.
He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip, and still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate; thinking it urgent to say something, I asked him presently if he felt any cold draught from the door, which was behind him.
"No, no!" he responded shortly and somewhat testily.
He soon stirred; my eye was instantly drawn to his movements; he only took out a morocco pocket-book, thence produced a letter, which he read in silence, folded it, put it back, relapsed into meditation.
It was vain to try to read with such an inscrutable fixture before me; nor could I, in impatience, consent to be dumb; he might rebuff me if he liked, but talk I would.
"Mary Garrett's mother is better, and Mary came back to the school this morning, and I shall have four new girls next week from the Foundry Close--they would have come to-day but for the snow."
"Does he?"
"His daughter's, I think."
"It is like her: she is so good-natured."
It aroused him; he uncrossed his legs, sat erect, turned to me.
"Leave your book a moment, and come a little nearer the fire," he said.
"Half-an-hour ago," he pursued, "I spoke of my impatience to hear the sequel of a tale: on reflection, I find the matter will be better managed by my assuming the narrator's part, and converting you into a listener.
"Twenty years ago, a poor curate--never mind his name at this moment--fell in love with a rich man's daughter; she fell in love with him, and married him, against the advice of all her friends, who consequently disowned her immediately after the wedding.
They left a daughter, which, at its very birth, Charity received in her lap--cold as that of the snow-drift I almost stuck fast in to-night.
Mrs. Reed kept the orphan ten years: whether it was happy or not with her, I cannot say, never having been told; but at the end of that time she transferred it to a place you know--being no other than Lowood School, where you so long resided yourself.
It seems her career there was very honourable: from a pupil, she became a teacher, like yourself--really it strikes me there are parallel points in her history and yours-- she left it to be a governess: there, again, your fates were analogous; she undertook the education of the ward of a certain Mr. Rochester."
"I can guess your feelings," he said, "but restrain them for a while: I have nearly finished; hear me to the end.
Of Mr. Rochester's character I know nothing, but the one fact that he professed to offer honourable marriage to this young girl, and that at the very altar she discovered he had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic.
What his subsequent conduct and proposals were is a matter of pure conjecture; but when an event transpired which rendered inquiry after the governess necessary, it was discovered she was gone--no one could tell when, where, or how.
She had left Thornfield Hall in the night; every research after her course had been vain: the country had been scoured far and wide; no vestige of information could be gathered respecting her.
Yet that she should be found is become a matter of serious urgency: advertisements have been put in all the papers; I myself have received a letter from one Mr. Briggs, a solicitor, communicating the details I have just imparted.
How and where is he?
What is he doing?
Is he well?"
You should rather ask the name of the governess--the nature of the event which requires her appearance."
"And what did he say?
Who has his letters?"
"Mr. Briggs intimates that the answer to his application was not from Mr. Rochester, but from a lady: it is signed 'Alice Fairfax.'"
I felt cold and dismayed: my worst fears then were probably true: he had in all probability left England and rushed in reckless desperation to some former haunt on the Continent. And what opiate for his severe sufferings--what object for his strong passions--had he sought there?
"He must have been a bad man," observed Mr. Rivers.
"Very well," he answered quietly: "and indeed my head is otherwise occupied than with him: I have my tale to finish.
"Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre:" he said, "the advertisements demanded a Jane Eyre: I knew a Jane Elliott.--I confess I had my suspicions, but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into certainty.
"Briggs is in London. I should doubt his knowing anything at all about Mr. Rochester; it is not in Mr. Rochester he is interested.
Meantime, you forget essential points in pursuing trifles: you do not inquire why Mr. Briggs sought after you--what he wanted with you."
"Well, what did he want?"
"Merely to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira, is dead; that he has left you all his property, and that you are now rich--merely that--nothing more."
My uncle I had heard was dead--my only relative; ever since being made aware of his existence, I had cherished the hope of one day seeing him: now, I never should.
"Well," said he, "if you had committed a murder, and I had told you your crime was discovered, you could scarcely look more aghast."
Mr. Rivers rose now and put his cloak on.
"If it were not such a very wild night," he said, "I would send Hannah down to keep you company: you look too desperately miserable to be left alone.
But Hannah, poor woman! could not stride the drifts so well as I: her legs are not quite so long: so I must e'en leave you to your sorrows.
"It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you about me; or how he knew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to aid in my discovery."
I am a clergyman," he said; "and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters." Again the latch rattled.
"No; to-night!--to-night!" and as he turned from the door, I placed myself between it and him.
"But I apprised you that I was a hard man," said he, "difficult to persuade."
"And I am a hard woman,--impossible to put off."
"And then," he pursued, "I am cold: no fervour infects me."
"Well, then," he said, "I yield; if not to your earnestness, to your perseverance: as stone is worn by continual dropping.
I knew, by instinct, how the matter stood, before St. John had said another word; but I cannot expect the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so I must repeat his explanation.
"My mother's name was Eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, who married Miss Jane Reed, of Gateshead; the other, John Eyre, Esq., merchant, late of Funchal, Madeira.
Mr. Briggs, being Mr. Eyre's solicitor, wrote to us last August to inform us of our uncle's death, and to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman's orphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, never forgiven, between him and my father.
He wrote again a few weeks since, to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anything of her.
A name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find her out.
Again he was going, but I set my back against the door.
"Your mother was my father's sister?"
You, Diana, and Mary are his sister's children, as I am his brother's child?"
"Did I not say you neglected essential points to pursue trifles?" he asked.
He also advised me to be composed; I scorned the insinuation of helplessness and distraction, shook off his hand, and began to walk about again.
Besides, the entire fortune is your right: my uncle gained it by his own efforts; he was free to leave it to whom he would: he left it to you.
He smiled approbation: we shook hands, and he took leave.
"Do you want her?"
"Tell her to be ready by to-morrow then; and here is the schoolroom key: I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning."
"You give it up very gleefully," said he; "I don't quite understand your light-heartedness, because I cannot tell what employment you propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you are relinquishing. What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have you now?"
St. John smiled slightly: still he was dissatisfied.
"It is all very well for the present," said he; "but seriously, I trust that when the first flush of vivacity is over, you will look a little higher than domestic endearments and household joys."
Happy at Moor House I was, and hard I worked; and so did Hannah: she was charmed to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-turvy--how I could brush, and dust, and clean, and cook.
Approaching the hearth, he asked, "If I was at last satisfied with housemaid's work?"
He just looked in at the doors I opened; and when he had wandered upstairs and downstairs, he said I must have gone through a great deal of fatigue and trouble to have effected such considerable changes in so short a time: but not a syllable did he utter indicating pleasure in the improved aspect of his abode.
I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed some old associations he valued.
"Not at all; he had, on the contrary, remarked that I had scrupulously respected every association: he feared, indeed, I must have bestowed more thought on the matter than it was worth.
I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it down, and withdrawing to his accustomed window recess, he began to read it.
St. John was a good man; but I began to feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard and cold.
Literally, he lived only to aspire--after what was good and great, certainly; but still he would never rest, nor approve of others resting round him.
As I looked at his lofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone--at his fine lineaments fixed in study--I comprehended all at once that he would hardly make a good husband: that it would be a trying thing to be his wife.
I understood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver; I agreed with him that it was but a love of the senses.
I comprehended how he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercised over him; how he should wish to stifle and destroy it; how he should mistrust its ever conducting permanently to his happiness or hers.
I saw he was of the material from which nature hews her heroes--Christian and Pagan--her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors: a steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon; but, at the fireside, too often a cold cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.
"This parlour is not his sphere," I reflected: "the Himalayan ridge or Caffre bush, even the plague-cursed Guinea Coast swamp would suit him better.
Well may he eschew the calm of domestic life; it is not his element: there his faculties stagnate--they cannot develop or appear to advantage.
It is in scenes of strife and danger--where courage is proved, and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked--that he will speak and move, the leader and superior.
At this moment he advanced from the parlour.
They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
He gave each one quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words of welcome, stood a while to be talked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they would soon rejoin him in the parlour, withdrew there as to a place of refuge.
My cousins, full of exhilaration, were so eloquent in narrative and comment, that their fluency covered St. John's taciturnity: he was sincerely glad to see his sisters; but in their glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathise.
The event of the day--that is, the return of Diana and Mary--pleased him; but the accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the garrulous glee of reception irked him: I saw he wished the calmer morrow was come.
Hannah entered with the intimation that "a poor lad was come, at that unlikely time, to fetch Mr. Rivers to see his mother, who was drawing away."
"Where does she live, Hannah?"
But he was already in the passage, putting on his cloak; and without one objection, one murmur, he departed.
It was then nine o'clock: he did not return till midnight.
Starved and tired enough he was: but he looked happier than when he set out.
He had performed an act of duty; made an exertion; felt his own strength to do and deny, and was on better terms with himself.
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
St. John did not rebuke our vivacity; but he escaped from it: he was seldom in the house; his parish was large, the population scattered, and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.
One morning at breakfast, Diana, after looking a little pensive for some minutes, asked him, "If his plans were yet unchanged."
And he proceeded to inform us that his departure from England was now definitively fixed for the ensuing year.
"And Rosamond Oliver?" suggested Mary, the words seeming to escape her lips involuntarily: for no sooner had she uttered them, than she made a gesture as if wishing to recall them.
St. John had a book in his hand--it was his unsocial custom to read at meals--he closed it, and looked up.
"Rosamond Oliver," said he, "is about to be married to Mr. Granby, one of the best connected and most estimable residents in S-, grandson and heir to Sir Frederic Granby: I had the intelligence from her father yesterday."
His sisters looked at each other and at me; we all three looked at him: he was serene as glass.
But where there are no obstacles to a union, as in the present case, where the connection is in every point desirable, delays are unnecessary: they will be married as soon as S--- Place, which Sir Frederic gives up to them, can he refitted for their reception."
The first time I found St. John alone after this communication, I felt tempted to inquire if the event distressed him: but he seemed so little to need sympathy, that, so far from venturing to offer him more, I experienced some shame at the recollection of what I had already hazarded.
Besides, I was out of practice in talking to him: his reserve was again frozen over, and my frankness was congealed beneath it.
He had not kept his promise of treating me like his sisters; he continually made little chilling differences between us, which did not at all tend to the development of cordiality: in short, now that I was acknowledged his kinswoman, and lived under the same roof with him, I felt the distance between us to be far greater than when he had known me only as the village schoolmistress.
When I remembered how far I had once been admitted to his confidence, I could hardly comprehend his present frigidity.
Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised when he raised his head suddenly from the desk over which he was stooping, and said--
So saying, he returned to his papers and his silence.
As our mutual happiness (_i.e._, Diana's, Mary's, and mine) settled into a quieter character, and we resumed our usual habits and regular studies, St. John stayed more at home: he sat with us in the same room, sometimes for hours together.
While Mary drew, Diana pursued a course of encyclopaedic reading she had (to my awe and amazement) undertaken, and I fagged away at German, he pondered a mystic lore of his own: that of some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary to his plans.
Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting in his own recess, quiet and absorbed enough; but that blue eye of his had a habit of leaving the outlandish- looking grammar, and wandering over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow-students, with a curious intensity of observation: if caught, it would be instantly withdrawn; yet ever and anon, it returned searchingly to our table.
I wondered what it meant: I wondered, too, at the punctual satisfaction he never failed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed to me of small moment, namely, my weekly visit to Morton school; and still more was I puzzled when, if the day was unfavourable, if there was snow, or rain, or high wind, and his sisters urged me not to go, he would invariably make light of their solicitude, and encourage me to accomplish the task without regard to the elements.
"Jane is not such a weakling as you would make her," he would say: "she can bear a mountain blast, or a shower, or a few flakes of snow, as well as any of us.
His sisters were gone to Morton in my stead: I sat reading Schiller; he, deciphering his crabbed Oriental scrolls.
As I exchanged a translation for an exercise, I happened to look his way: there I found myself under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye.
He then went on to explain that Hindostanee was the language he was himself at present studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget the commencement; that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and again go over the elements, and so fix them thoroughly in his mind; that his choice had hovered for some time between me and his sisters; but that he had fixed on me because he saw I could sit at a task the longest of the three.
Would I do him this favour? I should not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long, as it wanted now barely three months to his departure.
St. John was not a man to be lightly refused: you felt that every impression made on him, either for pain or pleasure, was deep-graved and permanent.
When Diana and Mary returned, the former found her scholar transferred from her to her brother: she laughed, and both she and Mary agreed that St. John should never have persuaded them to such a step.
I found him a very patient, very forbearing, and yet an exacting master: he expected me to do a great deal; and when I fulfilled his expectations, he, in his own way, fully testified his approbation.
By degrees, he acquired a certain influence over me that took away my liberty of mind: his praise and notice were more restraining than his indifference.
I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by, because a tiresomely importunate instinct reminded me that vivacity (at least in me) was distasteful to him.
I was so fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were acceptable, that in his presence every effort to sustain or follow any other became vain: I fell under a freezing spell.
When he said "go," I went; "come," I came; "do this," I did it.
But I did not love my servitude: I wished, many a time, he had continued to neglect me.
One evening when, at bedtime, his sisters and I stood round him, bidding him good-night, he kissed each of them, as was his custom; and, as was equally his custom, he gave me his hand.
Diana, who chanced to be in a frolicsome humour (_she_ was not painfully controlled by his will; for hers, in another way, was as strong), exclaimed--
"St. John! you used to call Jane your third sister, but you don't treat her as such: you should kiss her too."
I thought Diana very provoking, and felt uncomfortably confused; and while I was thus thinking and feeling, St. John bent his head; his Greek face was brought to a level with mine, his eyes questioned my eyes piercingly--he kissed me.
There are no such things as marble kisses or ice kisses, or I should say my ecclesiastical cousin's salute belonged to one of these classes; but there may be experiment kisses, and his was an experiment kiss.
When given, he viewed me to learn the result; it was not striking: I am sure I did not blush; perhaps I might have turned a little pale, for I felt as if this kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters.
He wanted to train me to an elevation I could never reach; it racked me hourly to aspire to the standard he uplifted.
The thing was as impossible as to mould my irregular features to his correct and classic pattern, to give to my changeable green eyes the sea-blue tint and solemn lustre of his own.
Not his ascendancy alone, however, held me in thrall at present.
In the course of my necessary correspondence with Mr. Briggs about the will, I had inquired if he knew anything of Mr. Rochester's present residence and state of health; but, as St. John had conjectured, he was quite ignorant of all concerning him.
Summer approached; Diana tried to cheer me: she said I looked ill, and wished to accompany me to the sea-side.
This St. John opposed; he said I did not want dissipation, I wanted employment; my present life was too purposeless, I required an aim; and, I suppose, by way of supplying deficiencies, he prolonged still further my lessons in Hindostanee, and grew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment: and I, like a fool, never thought of resisting him--I could not resist him.
St. John called me to his side to read; in attempting to do this my voice failed me: words were lost in sobs.
He and I were the only occupants of the parlour: Diana was practising her music in the drawing-room, Mary was gardening--it was a very fine May day, clear, sunny, and breezy.
My companion expressed no surprise at this emotion, nor did he question me as to its cause; he only said--
And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm and patient, leaning on his desk, and looking like a physician watching with the eye of science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient's malady.
St. John put away my books and his, locked his desk, and said-- "Now, Jane, you shall take a walk; and with me."
I have always faithfully observed the one, up to the very moment of bursting, sometimes with volcanic vehemence, into the other; and as neither present circumstances warranted, nor my present mood inclined me to mutiny, I observed careful obedience to St. John's directions; and in ten minutes I was treading the wild track of the glen, side by side with him.
He looked up the pass and down the hollow; his glance wandered away with the stream, and returned to traverse the unclouded heaven which coloured it: he removed his hat, let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow.
He seemed in communion with the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade farewell to something.
"And I shall see it again," he said aloud, "in dreams when I sleep by the Ganges: and again in a more remote hour--when another slumber overcomes me--on the shore of a darker stream!"
An austere patriot's passion for his fatherland!
He sat down; for half-an-hour we never spoke; neither he to me nor I to him: that interval past, he recommenced--
"Yes," said he, "there is my glory and joy.
But I was no apostle,--I could not behold the herald,--I could not receive his call.
I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed his duty, knew neither mercy nor remorse.
He had calculated on these first objections: he was not irritated by them.
Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded his arms on his chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared for a long and trying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience to last him to its close--resolved, however, that that close should be conquest for him.
"Humility, Jane," said he, "is the groundwork of Christian virtues: you say right that you are not fit for the work.
Shut my eyes as I would, these last words of his succeeded in making the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear.
My work, which had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse, condensed itself as he proceeded, and assumed a definite form under his shaping hand.
"Very willingly," he rejoined; and rising, he strode a little distance up the pass, threw himself down on a swell of heath, and there lay still.
"I _can_ do what he wants me to do: I am forced to see and acknowledge that," I meditated,--"that is, if life be spared me.
He does not care for that: when my time came to die, he would resign me, in all serenity and sanctity, to the God who gave me.
In leaving England, I should leave a loved but empty land--Mr. Rochester is not there; and if he were, what is, what can that ever be to me?
Of course (as St. John once said) I must seek another interest in life to replace the one lost: is not the occupation he now offers me truly the most glorious man can adopt or God assign?
That, too, is very clear to my vision. By straining to satisfy St. John till my sinews ache, I _shall_ satisfy him--to the finest central point and farthest outward circle of his expectations.
If I _do_ go with him--if I _do_ make the sacrifice he urges, I will make it absolutely: I will throw all on the altar--heart, vitals, the entire victim.
He will never love me; but he shall approve me; I will show him energies he has not yet seen, resources he has never suspected.
Yes, I can work as hard as he can, and with as little grudging.
"Consent, then, to his demand is possible: but for one item--one dreadful item.
It is--that he asks me to be his wife, and has no more of a husband's heart for me than that frowning giant of a rock, down which the stream is foaming in yonder gorge.
Unmarried to him, this would never grieve me; but can I let him complete his calculations--coolly put into practice his plans--go through the wedding ceremony?
Can I receive from him the bridal ring, endure all the forms of love (which I doubt not he would scrupulously observe) and know that the spirit was quite absent?
Can I bear the consciousness that every endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
I will never undergo it. As his sister, I might accompany him--not as his wife: I will tell him so."
I looked towards the knoll: there he lay, still as a prostrate column; his face turned to me: his eye beaming watchful and keen.
He started to his feet and approached me.
"Your answer requires a commentary," he said; "it is not clear."
He shook his head.
I did consider; and still my sense, such as it was, directed me only to the fact that we did not love each other as man and wife should: and therefore it inferred we ought not to marry.
"We cannot--we cannot," he answered, with short, sharp determination: "it would not do.
I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my marrow--his hold on my limbs.
Again I tell you it is not the insignificant private individual--the mere man, with the man's selfish senses--I wish to mate: it is the missionary."
"And I will give the missionary my energies--it is all he wants--but not myself: that would be only adding the husk and shell to the kernel.
For them he has no use: I retain them."
Will He accept a mutilated sacrifice? It is the cause of God I advocate: it is under His standard I enlist you.
He had held me in awe, because he had held me in doubt.
How much of him was saint, how much mortal, I could not heretofore tell: but revelations were being made in this conference: the analysis of his nature was proceeding before my eyes.
I saw his fallibilities: I comprehended them.
I understood that, sitting there where I did, on the bank of heath, and with that handsome form before me, I sat at the feet of a man, caring as I. The veil fell from his hardness and despotism.
Having felt in him the presence of these qualities, I felt his imperfection and took courage.
He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, and I presently risked an upward glance at his countenance.
"Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to _me_!" it seemed to say.
"Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter," he said ere long; "one of which we may neither think nor talk lightly without sin.
Once wrench your heart from man, and fix it on your Maker, the advancement of that Maker's spiritual kingdom on earth will be your chief delight and endeavour; you will be ready to do at once whatever furthers that end.
I said briefly; and I looked at his features, beautiful in their harmony, but strangely formidable in their still severity; at his brow, commanding but not open; at his eyes, bright and deep and searching, but never soft; at his tall imposing figure; and fancied myself in idea _his wife_.
As his curate, his comrade, all would be right: I would cross oceans with him in that capacity; toil under Eastern suns, in Asian deserts with him in that office; admire and emulate his courage and devotion and vigour; accommodate quietly to his masterhood; smile undisturbed at his ineradicable ambition; discriminate the Christian from the man: profoundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other.
There would be recesses in my mind which would be only mine, to which he never came, and sentiments growing there fresh and sheltered which his austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior-march trample down: but as his wife--at his side always, and always restrained, and always checked--forced to keep the fire of my nature continually low, to compel it to burn inwardly and never utter a cry, though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after vital--_this_ would be unendurable.
"Well?" he answered icily.
"A part of me you must become," he answered steadily; "otherwise the whole bargain is void.
How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out with me to India a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me?
"Very well," I said shortly; "under the circumstances, quite as well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman like yourself."
And for the rest, though you have a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's heart and--it would not do."
I have a woman's heart, but not where you are concerned; for you I have only a comrade's constancy; a fellow-soldier's frankness, fidelity, fraternity, if you like; a neophyte's respect and submission to his hierophant: nothing more--don't fear."
"It is what I want," he said, speaking to himself; "it is just what I want.
He looked at me fixedly, compressing his well-cut lips while he did so.
Whether he was incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell: he could command his countenance thoroughly.
"I scarcely expected to hear that expression from you," he said: "I think I have done and uttered nothing to deserve scorn."
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.
"No," said he; "it is a long-cherished scheme, and the only one which can secure my great end: but I shall urge you no further at present.
Turning from me, he once more "Looked to river, looked to hill."
But this time his feelings were all pent in his heart: I was not worthy to hear them uttered.
As I walked by his side homeward, I read well in his iron silence all he felt towards me: the disappointment of an austere and despotic nature, which has met resistance where it expected submission--the disapprobation of a cool, inflexible judgment, which has detected in another feelings and views in which it has no power to sympathise: in short, as a man, he would have wished to coerce me into obedience: it was only as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently with my perversity, and allowed so long a space for reflection and repentance.
That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought proper to forget even to shake hands with me, but left the room in silence.
"I see you and St. John have been quarrelling, Jane," said Diana, "during your walk on the moor. But go after him; he is now lingering in the passage expecting you--he will make it up."
"Good-night, Jane," he replied calmly.
What a cold, loose touch, he impressed on my fingers!
No happy reconciliation was to be had with him--no cheering smile or generous word: but still the Christian was patient and placid; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he answered that he was not in the habit of cherishing the remembrance of vexation; that he had nothing to forgive, not having been offended.
And with that answer he left me.
I would much rather he had knocked me down.
He did not leave for Cambridge the next day, as he had said he would.
He deferred his departure a whole week, and during that time he made me feel what severe punishment a good yet stern, a conscientious yet implacable man can inflict on one who has offended him.
Without one overt act of hostility, one upbraiding word, he contrived to impress me momently with the conviction that I was put beyond the pale of his favour.
Not that St. John harboured a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness--not that he would have injured a hair of my head, if it had been fully in his power to do so.
Both by nature and principle, he was superior to the mean gratification of vengeance: he had forgiven me for saying I scorned him and his love, but he had not forgotten the words; and as long as he and I lived he never would forget them.
I saw by his look, when he turned to me, that they were always written on the air between me and him; whenever I spoke, they sounded in my voice to his ear, and their echo toned every answer he gave me.
He did not abstain from conversing with me: he even called me as usual each morning to join him at his desk; and I fear the corrupt man within him had a pleasure unimparted to, and unshared by, the pure Christian, in evincing with what skill he could, while acting and speaking apparently just as usual, extract from every deed and every phrase the spirit of interest and approval which had formerly communicated a certain austere charm to his language and manner.
To me, he was in reality become no longer flesh, but marble; his eye was a cold, bright, blue gem; his tongue a speaking instrument--nothing more.
I felt how--if I were his wife, this good man, pure as the deep sunless source, could soon kill me, without drawing from my veins a single drop of blood, or receiving on his own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime.
No ruth met my ruth. _He_ experienced no suffering from estrangement--no yearning after reconciliation; and though, more than once, my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal.
To his sisters, meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: as if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince me how completely I was banished and banned, he added the force of contrast; and this I am sure he did not by force, but on principle.
The night before he left home, happening to see him walking in the garden about sunset, and remembering, as I looked at him, that this man, alienated as he now was, had once saved my life, and that we were near relations, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain his friendship.
I went out and approached him as he stood leaning over the little gate; I spoke to the point at once.
"I hope we are friends," was the unmoved reply; while he still watched the rising of the moon, which he had been contemplating as I approached.
"Of course," he said. "Your wish is reasonable, and I am far from regarding you as a stranger."
"Once more, why this refusal?" he asked.
They betray an unfortunate state of mind: they merit severe reproof: they would seem inexcusable, but that it is the duty of man to forgive his fellow even until seventy-and-seven times."
While earnestly wishing to erase from his mind the trace of my former offence, I had stamped on that tenacious surface another and far deeper impression, I had burnt it in.
"You utterly misinterpret my words," I said, at once seizing his hand: "I have no intention to grieve or pain you--indeed, I have not."
Most bitterly he smiled--most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine.
"And now you recall your promise, and will not go to India at all, I presume?" said he, after a considerable pause.
What struggle there was in him between Nature and Grace in this interval, I cannot tell: only singular gleams scintillated in his eyes, and strange shadows passed over his face.
"I before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman of your age proposing to accompany abroad a single man of mine.
Again he turned lividly pale; but, as before, controlled his passion perfectly.
"A female curate, who is not my wife, would never suit me.
"Ah! you are afraid of yourself," he said, curling his lip.
"It remains for me, then," he said, "to remember you in my prayers, and to entreat God for you, in all earnestness, that you may not indeed become a castaway.
But God sees not as man sees: _His_ will be done--"
Diana was a great deal taller than I: she put her hand on my shoulder, and, stooping, examined my face.
"Jane," she said, "you are always agitated and pale now.
St. John is a strange being--" She paused--I did not speak: soon she resumed--
"That brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some sort respecting you, I am sure: he has long distinguished you by a notice and interest he never showed to any one else--to what end?
I wish he loved you--does he, Jane?"
I put her cool hand to my hot forehead; "No, Die, not one whit."
"Then why does he follow you so with his eyes, and get you so frequently alone with him, and keep you so continually at his side?
Mary and I had both concluded he wished you to marry him."
"He does--he has asked me to be his wife."
Diana clapped her hands. "That is just what we hoped and thought!
And then he will stay in England."
"Far from that, Diana; his sole idea in proposing to me is to procure a fitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils."
"Madness!" she exclaimed. "You would not live three months there, I am certain.
"And have consequently displeased him?" she suggested.
"Deeply: he will never forgive me, I fear: yet I offered to accompany him as his sister."
St. John--you know him--would urge you to impossibilities: with him there would be no permission to rest during the hot hours; and unfortunately, I have noticed, whatever he exacts, you force yourself to perform.
I am astonished you found courage to refuse his hand.
"Yet he is a handsome fellow."
And again she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts of going out with her brother.
"I must indeed," I said; "for when just now I repeated the offer of serving him for a deacon, he expressed himself shocked at my want of decency.
"What makes you say he does not love you, Jane?"
He has again and again explained that it is not himself, but his office he wishes to mate.
Would it not be strange, Die, to be chained for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful tool?"
"And then," I continued, "though I have only sisterly affection for him now, yet, if forced to be his wife, I can imagine the possibility of conceiving an inevitable, strange, torturing kind of love for him, because he is so talented; and there is often a certain heroic grandeur in his look, manner, and conversation.
He would not want me to love him; and if I showed the feeling, he would make me sensible that it was a superfluity, unrequired by him, unbecoming in me.
I know he would."
"And yet St. John is a good man," said Diana.
"He is a good and a great man; but he forgets, pitilessly, the feelings and claims of little people, in pursuing his own large views.
It is better, therefore, for the insignificant to keep out of his way, lest, in his progress, he should trample them down.
Here he comes!
During that meal he appeared just as composed as usual.
I had thought he would hardly speak to me, and I was certain he had given up the pursuit of his matrimonial scheme: the sequel showed I was mistaken on both points.
He addressed me precisely in his ordinary manner, or what had, of late, been his ordinary manner--one scrupulously polite.
No doubt he had invoked the help of the Holy Spirit to subdue the anger I had roused in him, and now believed he had forgiven me once more.
For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the twenty-first chapter of Revelation.
It was at all times pleasant to listen while from his lips fell the words of the Bible: never did his fine voice sound at once so sweet and full--never did his manner become so impressive in its noble simplicity, as when he delivered the oracles of God:
and to-night that voice took a more solemn tone--that manner a more thrilling meaning--as he sat in the midst of his household circle (the May moon shining in through the uncurtained window, and rendering almost unnecessary the light of the candle on the table): as he sat there, bending over the great old Bible, and described from its page the vision of the new heaven and the new earth--told how God would come to dwell with men, how He would wipe away all tears from their eyes, and promised that there should be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, nor any more pain, because the former things were passed away.
The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them: especially as I felt, by the slight, indescribable alteration in sound, that in uttering them, his eye had turned on me.
"He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.
A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing earnestness, marked his enunciation of the last glorious verses of that chapter.
The reader believed his name was already written in the Lamb's book of life, and he yearned after the hour which should admit him to the city to which the kings of the earth bring their glory and honour; which has no need of sun or moon to shine in it, because the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
In the prayer following the chapter, all his energy gathered--all his stern zeal woke: he was in deep earnest, wrestling with God, and resolved on a conquest.
He asked, he urged, he claimed the boon of a brand snatched from the burning.
Earnestness is ever deeply solemn: first, as I listened to that prayer, I wondered at his; then, when it continued and rose, I was touched by it, and at last awed.
He felt the greatness and goodness of his purpose so sincerely: others who heard him plead for it, could not but feel it too.
The prayer over, we took leave of him: he was to go at a very early hour in the morning.
Remember, we are bid to work while it is day--warned that 'the night cometh when no man shall work.'
Remember the fate of Dives, who had his good things in this life.
He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words.
He had spoken earnestly, mildly: his look was not, indeed, that of a lover beholding his mistress, but it was that of a pastor recalling his wandering sheep--or better, of a guardian angel watching the soul for which he is responsible.
I was tempted to cease struggling with him--to rush down the torrent of his will into the gulf of his existence, and there lose my own.
The inquiry was put in gentle tones: he drew me to him as gently.
I could resist St. John's wrath: I grew pliant as a reed under his kindness.
He pressed his hand firmer on my head, as if he claimed me: he surrounded me with his arm, _almost_ as if he loved me (I say _almost_--I knew the difference--for I had felt what it was to be loved; but, like him, I had now put love out of the question, and thought only of duty). I contended with my inward dimness of vision, before which clouds yet rolled.
She was roused, and did--no miracle--but her best."
Meantime, I heard St. John quit his room.
He stopped at my door: I feared he would knock--no, but a slip of paper was passed under the door.
He took the way over the misty moors in the direction of Whitcross--there he would meet the coach.
It fell again: the thought struck it:-- "Your master himself may be beyond the British Channel, for aught you know: and then, if he is at Thornfield Hall, towards which you hasten, who besides him is there?
His lunatic wife: and you have nothing to do with him: you dare not speak to him or seek his presence.
Go up to that man, and inquire if Mr. Rochester be at home."
I might yet once more see the Hall under the ray of her star.
"My first view of it shall be in front," I determined, "where its bold battlements will strike the eye nobly at once, and where I can single out my master's very window: perhaps he will be standing at it--he rises early: perhaps he is now walking in the orchard, or on the pavement in front.
What then? Who would be hurt by my once more tasting the life his glance can give me?
I rave: perhaps at this moment he is watching the sun rise over the Pyrenees, or on the tideless sea of the south."
A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank; he wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without waking her.
He steals softly over the grass, careful to make no sound; he pauses--fancying she has stirred: he withdraws: not for worlds would he be seen.
All is still: he again advances: he bends above her; a light veil rests on her features: he lifts it, bends lower; now his eyes anticipate the vision of beauty--warm, and blooming, and lovely, in rest.
How he starts!
How he suddenly and vehemently clasps in both arms the form he dared not, a moment since, touch with his finger!
How he calls aloud a name, and drops his burden, and gazes on it wildly!
He thus grasps and cries, and gazes, because he no longer fears to waken by any sound he can utter--by any movement he can make.
He thought his love slept sweetly: he finds she is stone dead.
My eye involuntarily wandered to the grey church tower near the gates, and I asked, "Is he with Damer de Rochester, sharing the shelter of his narrow marble house?"
But when he complied, I scarcely knew how to begin; such horror had I of the possible answers.
The host was a respectable-looking, middle-aged man.
"I was the late Mr. Rochester's butler," he added.
I gasped. "Is he dead?"
"I mean the present gentleman, Mr. Edward's father," he explained.
Fully assured by these words that Mr. Edward--_my_ Mr. Rochester (God bless him, wherever he was!)--was at least alive: was, in short, "the present gentleman."
Since he was not in the grave, I could bear, I thought, to learn that he was at the Antipodes.
I asked, knowing, of course, what the answer would be, but yet desirous of deferring the direct question as to where he really was.
You are not perhaps aware," he continued, edging his chair a little nearer the table, and speaking low, "that there was a lady--a--a lunatic, kept in the house?"
"She was kept in very close confinement, ma'am: people even for some years was not absolutely certain of her existence.
No one saw her: they only knew by rumour that such a person was at the Hall; and who or what she was it was difficult to conjecture.
They said Mr. Edward had brought her from abroad, and some believed she had been his mistress.
"This lady, ma'am," he answered, "turned out to be Mr. Rochester's wife!
The servants say they never saw anybody so much in love as he was: he was after her continually.
They used to watch him--servants will, you know, ma'am--and he set store on her past everything: for all, nobody but him thought her so very handsome.
I never saw her myself; but I've heard Leah, the house-maid, tell of her.
Leah liked her well enough.
Mr. Rochester was about forty, and this governess not twenty; and you see, when gentlemen of his age fall in love with girls, they are often like as if they were bewitched.
Well, he would marry her."
"You've hit it, ma'am: it's quite certain that it was her, and nobody but her, that set it going.
She had a woman to take care of her called Mrs. Poole--an able woman in her line, and very trustworthy, but for one fault--a fault common to a deal of them nurses and matrons--she _kept a private bottle of gin by her_, and now and then took a drop over-much.
It is excusable, for she had a hard life of it: but still it was dangerous; for when Mrs. Poole was fast asleep after the gin and water, the mad lady, who was as cunning as a witch, would take the keys out of her pocket, let herself out of her chamber, and go roaming about the house, doing any wild mischief that came into her head.
They say she had nearly burnt her husband in his bed once: but I don't know about that.
However, on this night, she set fire first to the hangings of the room next her own, and then she got down to a lower storey, and made her way to the chamber that had been the governess's--(she was like as if she knew somehow how matters had gone on, and had a spite at her)--and she kindled the bed there; but there was nobody sleeping in it, fortunately.
The governess had run away two months before; and for all Mr. Rochester sought her as if she had been the most precious thing he had in the world, he never could hear a word of her; and he grew savage--quite savage on his disappointment: he never was a wild man, but he got dangerous after he lost her.
He sent Mrs. Fairfax, the housekeeper, away to her friends at a distance; but he did it handsomely, for he settled an annuity on her for life: and she deserved it--she was a very good woman.
Miss Adele, a ward he had, was put to school.
"What! did he not leave England?"
He would not cross the door-stones of the house, except at night, when he walked just like a ghost about the grounds and in the orchard as if he had lost his senses--which it is my opinion he had; for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than he was before that midge of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma'am.
He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, and he was not so very handsome; but he had a courage and a will of his own, if ever man had.
I knew him from a boy, you see: and for my part, I have often wished that Miss Eyre had been sunk in the sea before she came to Thornfield Hall."
"Yes, indeed was he; and he went up to the attics when all was burning above and below, and got the servants out of their beds and helped them down himself, and went back to get his mad wife out of her cell.
And then they called out to him that she was on the roof, where she was standing, waving her arms, above the battlements, and shouting out till they could hear her a mile off: I saw her and heard her with my own eyes.
She was a big woman, and had long black hair: we could see it streaming against the flames as she stood.
We saw him approach her; and then, ma'am, she yelled and gave a spring, and the next minute she lay smashed on the pavement."
Ay, dead as the stones on which her brains and blood were scattered."
"Poor Mr. Edward!" he ejaculated, "I little thought ever to have seen it!
Some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his first marriage secret, and wanting to take another wife while he had one living: but I pity him, for my part."
"You said he was alive?" I exclaimed.
"Yes, yes: he is alive; but many think he had better be dead."
My blood was again running cold. "Where is he?"
"Ay--ay--he's in England; he can't get out of England, I fancy--he's a fixture now."
And the man seemed resolved to protract it.
"He is stone-blind," he said at last. "Yes, he is stone-blind, is Mr. Edward."
I had dreaded he was mad.
"It was all his own courage, and a body may say, his kindness, in a way, ma'am: he wouldn't leave the house till every one else was out before him.
As he came down the great staircase at last, after Mrs. Rochester had flung herself from the battlements, there was a great crash--all fell.
The other eye inflamed: he lost the sight of that also.
"Where is he?
Where does he now live?" "At Ferndean, a manor-house on a farm he has, about thirty miles off: quite a desolate spot."
"Old John and his wife: he would have none else.
His father had purchased the estate for the sake of the game covers.
Ferndean then remained uninhabited and unfurnished, with the exception of some two or three rooms fitted up for the accommodation of the squire when he went there in the season to shoot.
It opened slowly: a figure came out into the twilight and stood on the step; a man without a hat: he stretched forth his hand as if to feel whether it rained.
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever: his port was still erect, his hair was still raven black; nor were his features altered or sunk: not in one year's space, by any sorrow, could his athletic strength be quelled or his vigorous prime blighted.
But in his countenance I saw a change: that looked desperate and brooding--that reminded me of some wronged and fettered wild beast or bird, dangerous to approach in his sullen woe.
And, reader, do you think I feared him in his blind ferocity?--if you do, you little know me.
Where was his daring stride now?
Then he paused, as if he knew not which way to turn.
He lifted his hand and opened his eyelids; gazed blank, and with a straining effort, on the sky, and toward the amphitheatre of trees: one saw that all to him was void darkness.
He stretched his right hand (the left arm, the mutilated one, he kept hidden in his bosom); he seemed to wish by touch to gain an idea of what lay around him: he met but vacancy still; for the trees were some yards off where he stood.
He relinquished the endeavour, folded his arms, and stood quiet and mute in the rain, now falling fast on his uncovered head.
"Will you take my arm, sir?" he said; "there is a heavy shower coming on: had you not better go in?"
He groped his way back to the house, and, re-entering it, closed the door.
She started as if she had seen a ghost: I calmed her.
To her hurried "Is it really you, miss, come at this late hour to this lonely place?"
I answered by taking her hand; and then I followed her into the kitchen, where John now sat by a good fire.
"I don't think he will see you," she answered; "he refuses everybody."
When she returned, I inquired what he had said.
"You are to send in your name and your business," she replied.
"Is that what he rang for?" I asked.
"Yes: he always has candles brought in at dark, though he is blind."
I took it from her hand: she pointed me out the parlour door.
This parlour looked gloomy: a neglected handful of fire burnt low in the grate; and, leaning over it, with his head supported against the high, old-fashioned mantelpiece, appeared the blind tenant of the room.
Pilot pricked up his ears when I came in: then he jumped up with a yelp and a whine, and bounded towards me: he almost knocked the tray from my hands.
Mr. Rochester turned mechanically to _see_ what the commotion was: but as he _saw_ nothing, he returned and sighed.
"Give me the water, Mary," he said.
"What is the matter?" he inquired.
He checked the water on its way to his lips, and seemed to listen: he drank, and put the glass down.
He put out his hand with a quick gesture, but not seeing where I stood, he did not touch me.
"Who is this? Who is this?" he demanded, trying, as it seemed, to _see_ with those sightless eyes--unavailing and distressing attempt!
"Answer me--speak again!" he ordered, imperiously and aloud.
He groped; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.
"Her very fingers!" he cried; "her small, slight fingers!
If so there must be more of her."
This is her shape--this is her size--"
"And this her voice," I added.
"She is all here: her heart, too.
"Jane Eyre!--Jane Eyre," was all he said.
These are certainly her limbs, and these her features; but I cannot be so blest, after all my misery.
It is a dream; such dreams as I have had at night when I have clasped her once more to my heart, as I do now; and kissed her, as thus--and felt that she loved me, and trusted that she would not leave me."
I pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless eyes--I swept his hair from his brow, and kissed that too.
"No, sir! I am an independent woman now."
"My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand pounds."
"Ah! this is practical--this is real!" he cried: "I should never dream that.
Are you an independent woman? A rich woman?"
He replied not: he seemed serious--abstracted; he sighed; he half-opened his lips as if to speak: he closed them again.
Perhaps I had too rashly over-leaped conventionalities; and he, like St. John, saw impropriety in my inconsiderateness.
I had indeed made my proposal from the idea that he wished and would ask me to be his wife: an expectation, not the less certain because unexpressed, had buoyed me up, that he would claim me at once as his own.
But no hint to that effect escaping him and his countenance becoming more overcast, I suddenly remembered that I might have been all wrong, and was perhaps playing the fool unwittingly; and I began gently to withdraw myself from his arms--but he eagerly snatched me closer.
"It is time some one undertook to rehumanise you," said I, parting his thick and long uncut locks; "for I see you are being metamorphosed into a lion, or something of that sort.
"On this arm, I have neither hand nor nails," he said, drawing the mutilated limb from his breast, and showing it to me. "It is a mere stump--a ghastly sight!
It brought to life and light my whole nature: in his presence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine.
Blind as he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him only very partial replies: it was too late to enter into particulars that night.
Besides, I wished to touch no deep-thrilling chord--to open no fresh well of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim was to cheer him.
Cheered, as I have said, he was: and yet but by fits.
If a moment's silence broke the conversation, he would turn restless, touch me, then say, "Jane."
Yes: for her restoration I longed, far more than for that of my lost sight.
How can it be that Jane is with me, and says she loves me?
Will she not depart as suddenly as she came?
To-morrow, I fear I shall find her no more."
A commonplace, practical reply, out of the train of his own disturbed ideas, was, I was sure, the best and most reassuring for him in this frame of mind.
I passed my finger over his eyebrows, and remarked that they were scorched, and that I would apply something which would make them grow as broad and black as ever.
If Saul could have had you for his David, the evil spirit would have been exorcised without the aid of the harp."
I thought with glee. "I see I have the means of fretting him out of his melancholy for some time to come."
Then: "Which room did you put her into?
Is she up?
Go and ask if she wants anything; and when she will come down."
Entering the room very softly, I had a view of him before he discovered my presence.
He sat in his chair--still, but not at rest: expectant evidently; the lines of now habitual sadness marking his strong features.
His countenance reminded one of a lamp quenched, waiting to be re-lit--and alas! it was not himself that could now kindle the lustre of animated expression: he was dependent on another for that office!
I had meant to be gay and careless, but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart to the quick: still I accosted him with what vivacity I could.
I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.
All the melody on earth is concentrated in my Jane's tongue to my ear (I am glad it is not naturally a silent one): all the sunshine I can feel is in her presence."
The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his dependence; just as if a royal eagle, chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor.
I sought a seat for him in a hidden and lovely spot, a dry stump of a tree; nor did I refuse to let him, when seated, place me on his knee.
Why should I, when both he and I were happier near than apart?
He broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms--
And what did she do?
I softened considerably what related to the three days of wandering and starvation, because to have told him all would have been to inflict unnecessary pain: the little I did say lacerated his faithful heart deeper than I wished.
I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of making my way: I should have told him my intention.
I should have confided in him: he would never have forced me to be his mistress.
Violent as he had seemed in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant: he would have given me half his fortune, without demanding so much as a kiss in return, rather than I should have flung myself friendless on the wide world.
I had endured, he was certain, more than I had confessed to him.
"He was a very good man, sir; I could not help liking him."
"A good man.
Does that mean a respectable well-conducted man of fifty? Or what does it mean?"
Is he a person of low stature, phlegmatic, and plain.
A person whose goodness consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice, than in his prowess in virtue."
Great and exalted deeds are what he lives to perform."
"But his brain?
"He talks little, sir: what he does say is ever to the point.
"Is he an able man, then?"
"A thoroughly educated man?"
"His manners, I think, you said are not to your taste?--priggish and parsonic?"
"I never mentioned his manners; but, unless I had a very bad taste, they must suit it; they are polished, calm, and gentlemanlike."
"His appearance,--I forget what description you gave of his appearance;--a sort of raw curate, half strangled with his white neckcloth, and stilted up on his thick-soled high-lows, eh?"
He is a handsome man: tall, fair, with blue eyes, and a Grecian profile."
Jealousy had got hold of him: she stung him; but the sting was salutary: it gave him respite from the gnawing fang of melancholy.
Your words have delineated very prettily a graceful Apollo: he is present to your imagination,--tall, fair, blue- eyed, and with a Grecian profile.
"Well, you can leave me, ma'am: but before you go" (and he retained me by a firmer grasp than ever), "you will be pleased just to answer me a question or two." He paused.
"St. John made you schoolmistress of Morton before he knew you were his cousin?"
"He would discover many things in you he could not have expected to find?
"You had a little cottage near the school, you say: did he ever come there to see you?"
"How long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinship was discovered?"
"Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family?"
"Yes; the back parlour was both his study and ours: he sat near the window, and we by the table."
"Did he study much?"
"Did he teach you?"
"Did he teach you nothing?"
"And his sisters also?"
"Why did he wish it?
"I beg your pardon, it is the literal truth: he asked me more than once, and was as stiff about urging his point as ever you could be."
I had a belief she loved me even when she left me: that was an atom of sweet in much bitter.
Long as we have been parted, hot tears as I have wept over our separation, I never thought that while I was mourning her, she was loving another!
He loves (as he _can_ love, and that is not as you love) a beautiful young lady called Rosamond.
He wanted to marry me only because he thought I should make a suitable missionary's wife, which she would not have done.
He is not like you, sir: I am not happy at his side, nor near him, nor with him.
Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.
My crippled strength!" he murmured regretfully.
I knew of what he was thinking, and wanted to speak for him, but dared not.
As he turned aside his face a minute, I saw a tear slide from under the sealed eyelid, and trickle down the manly cheek.
"I am no better than the old lightning-struck chestnut-tree in Thornfield orchard," he remarked ere long.
Again he smiled: I gave him comfort.
"You speak of friends, Jane?" he asked.
"A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about by the hand?"
"A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom you will have to wait on?"
Jane suits me: do I suit her?"
He looked and spoke with eagerness: his old impetuosity was rising.
"Mr. Rochester, I have just discovered the sun is far declined from its meridian, and Pilot is actually gone home to his dinner.
I have worn it since the day I lost my only treasure, as a memento of her."
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
He sees not as man sees, but far clearer: judges not as man judges, but far more wisely.
If any listener had heard me, he would have thought me mad: I pronounced them with such frantic energy."
Yes, I thank God!" He put me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting his hat from his brow, and bending his sightless eyes to the earth, he stood in mute devotion.
"I thank my Maker, that, in the midst of judgment, he has remembered mercy.
Then he stretched his hand out to be led. I took that dear hand, held it a moment to my lips, then let it pass round my shoulder: being so much lower of stature than he, I served both for his prop and guide.
A quiet wedding we had: he and I, the parson and clerk, were alone present.
When we got back from church, I went into the kitchen of the manor-house, where Mary was cooking the dinner and John cleaning the knives, and I said--
The housekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic order of people, to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable piece of news without incurring the danger of having one's ears pierced by some shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent of wordy wonderment.
Mary did look up, and she did stare at me: the ladle with which she was basting a pair of chickens roasting at the fire, did for some three minutes hang suspended in air; and for the same space of time John's knives also had rest from the polishing process: but Mary, bending again over the roast, said only--
A short time after she pursued--"I seed you go out with the master, but I didn't know you were gone to church to be wed;" and she basted away.
"I telled Mary how it would be," he said: "I knew what Mr. Edward" (John was an old servant, and had known his master when he was the cadet of the house, therefore, he often gave him his Christian name)--"I knew what Mr. Edward would do; and I was certain he would not wait long neither: and he's done right, for aught I know.
I wish you joy, Miss!" and he politely pulled his forelock.
I put into his hand a five-pound note.
And again, "If she ben't one o' th' handsomest, she's noan faal and varry good-natured; and i' his een she's fair beautiful, onybody may see that."
Diana announced that she would just give me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she would come and see me.
"She had better not wait till then, Jane," said Mr. Rochester, when I read her letter to him; "if she does, she will be too late, for our honeymoon will shine our life long: its beams will only fade over your grave or mine."
How St. John received the news, I don't know: he never answered the letter in which I communicated it: yet six months after he wrote to me, without, however, mentioning Mr. Rochester's name or alluding to my marriage.
He has maintained a regular, though not frequent, correspondence ever since: he hopes I am happy, and trusts I am not of those who live without God in the world, and only mind earthly things.
I had not; I soon asked and obtained leave of Mr. Rochester, to go and see her at the school where he had placed her.
She looked pale and thin: she said she was not happy.
I found the rules of the establishment were too strict, its course of study too severe for a child of her age: I took her home with me.
I meant to become her governess once more, but I soon found this impracticable; my time and cares were now required by another--my husband needed them all.
So I sought out a school conducted on a more indulgent system, and near enough to permit of my visiting her often, and bringing her home sometimes.
I took care she should never want for anything that could contribute to her comfort: she soon settled in her new abode, became very happy there, and made fair progress in her studies.
As she grew up, a sound English education corrected in a great measure her French defects; and when she left school, I found in her a pleasing and obliging companion: docile, good-tempered, and well-principled.
By her grateful attention to me and mine, she has long since well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my power to offer her.
I hold myself supremely blest--blest beyond what language can express; because I am my husband's life as fully as he is mine.
No woman was ever nearer to her mate than I am: ever more absolutely bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.
I know no weariness of my Edward's society: he knows none of mine, any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats in our separate bosoms; consequently, we are ever together.
All my confidence is bestowed on him, all his confidence is devoted to me; we are precisely suited in character--perfect concord is the result.
Mr. Rochester continued blind the first two years of our union; perhaps it was that circumstance that drew us so very near--that knit us so very close: for I was then his vision, as I am still his right hand.
Literally, I was (what he often called me) the apple of his eye.
He saw nature--he saw books through me; and never did I weary of gazing for his behalf, and of putting into words the effect of field, tree, town, river, cloud, sunbeam--of the landscape before us; of the weather round us--and impressing by sound on his ear what light could no longer stamp on his eye.
Never did I weary of reading to him; never did I weary of conducting him where he wished to go: of doing for him what he wished to be done.
And there was a pleasure in my services, most full, most exquisite, even though sad--because he claimed these services without painful shame or damping humiliation.
He loved me so truly, that he knew no reluctance in profiting by my attendance: he felt I loved him so fondly, that to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetest wishes.
One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing a letter to his dictation, he came and bent over me, and said--
He informed me then, that for some time he had fancied the obscurity clouding one eye was becoming less dense; and that now he was sure of it.
He had the advice of an eminent oculist; and he eventually recovered the sight of that one eye.
He cannot now see very distinctly: he cannot read or write much; but he can find his way without being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank to him--the earth no longer a void.
When his first-born was put into his arms, he could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes, as they once were--large, brilliant, and black.
On that occasion, he again, with a full heart, acknowledged that God had tempered judgment with mercy.
Diana's husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a good man.
Mary's is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother's, and, from his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.
As to St. John Rivers, he left England: he went to India.
He entered on the path he had marked for himself; he pursues it still.
Firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he labours for his race; he clears their painful way to improvement; he hews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber it.
He may be stern; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; but his is the sternness of the warrior Greatheart, who guards his pilgrim convoy from the onslaught of Apollyon.
His is the exaction of the apostle, who speaks but for Christ, when he says--"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me." His is the ambition of the high master-spirit, which aims to fill a place in the first rank of those who are redeemed from the earth--who stand without fault before the throne of God, who share the last mighty victories of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, and faithful.
St. John is unmarried: he never will marry now.
Himself has hitherto sufficed to the toil, and the toil draws near its close: his glorious sun hastens to its setting.
The last letter I received from him drew from my eyes human tears, and yet filled my heart with divine joy: he anticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown.
I know that a stranger's hand will write to me next, to say that the good and faithful servant has been called at length into the joy of his Lord.
No fear of death will darken St. John's last hour: his mind will be unclouded, his heart will be undaunted, his hope will be sure, his faith steadfast.
His own words are a pledge of this-- "My Master," he says, "has forewarned me.
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, 'and what is the use of a book,' thought Alice 'without pictures or conversation?'
So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.
I shall be late!' (when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well.
Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next.
First, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.
She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled 'ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.
'I wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. 'I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.
(for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) '--yes, that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)
Presently she began again. 'I wonder if I shall fall right through the earth!
Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy curtseying as you're falling through the air!
Do you think you could manage it?) 'And what an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!
'I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah my dear!
Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, 'Do bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.
She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, 'Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, 'Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting!' She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.
There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head though the doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, 'it would be of very little use without my shoulders.
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, ('which certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words 'DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in large letters.
It was all very well to say 'Drink me,' but the wise little Alice was not going to do that in a hurry. 'No, I'll look first,' she said, 'and see whether it's marked "poison" or not'; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 'poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; 'for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, 'in my going out altogether, like a candle.
I wonder what I should be like then?' And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
'Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to herself, rather sharply; 'I advise you to leave off this minute!' She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words 'EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. 'Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, 'and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!'
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, 'Which way? Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.
So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
'Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); 'now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was!
Good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). 'Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?
And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. 'They must go by the carrier,' she thought; 'and how funny it'll seem, sending presents to one's own feet!
Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.
'You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, 'a great girl like you,' (she might well say this), 'to go on crying in this way!
Stop this moment, I tell you!' But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.
After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, 'Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting!'
Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, 'If you please, sir--' The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.
Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: 'Dear, dear! How queer everything is to-day!
And she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.
'I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, 'for her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a very little!
Besides, she's she, and I'm I, and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!
I'll try and say "How doth the little--"' and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--
Improve his shining tail,
'How cheerfully he seems to grin,
How neatly spread his claws,
'I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, 'I must be Mabel after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn!
'I must be growing small again.' She got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.
'That was a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; 'and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, 'and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child, 'for I never was so small as this before, never!
As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, 'and in that case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself.
(Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.
'I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out. 'I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!
Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.
(Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, 'A mouse--of a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!') The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.
'Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; 'I daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.' (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)
The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. 'Oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal's feelings.
And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, 'and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. 'We won't talk about her any more if you'd rather not.'
'We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail. 'As if I would talk on such a subject!
He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a sorrowful tone, 'I'm afraid I've offended it again!' For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.
So she called softly after it, 'Mouse dear!
Do come back again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them!' When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, 'Let us get to the shore, and then I'll tell you my history, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'
The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life.
Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, 'I am older than you, and must know better'; and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.
They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.
William's conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his Normans--" How are you getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke.
'What is a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.
'But who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices asked. 'Why, she, of course,' said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, 'Prizes!
Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece all round. 'But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the Mouse.
'Of course,' the Dodo replied very gravely. 'What else have you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.
Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying 'We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.
Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.
'You promised to tell me your history, you know,' said Alice, 'and why it is you hate--C and D,' she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.
'It is a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse's tail; 'but why do you call it sad?' And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this:-- 'Fury said to a mouse, That he met in the house, "Let us both go to law: I will prosecute you. --Come, I'll take no denial; We must have a trial: For really this morning I've nothing to do."
'A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
'What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter 'Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!'
Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: 'Dinah's our cat.
And she's such a capital one for catching mice you can't think!
And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds!
Why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!'
'I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a melancholy tone. 'Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the best cat in the world!
I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!' And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story.
It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself 'The Duchess! The Duchess!
Alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door, had vanished completely.
Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry tone, 'Why, Mary Ann, what are you doing out here?
And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it had made.
'He took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran. 'How surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am!
But I'd better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.' As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate with the name 'W. RABBIT' engraved upon it.
She went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and gloves.
And she began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: '"Miss Alice! Come here directly, and get ready for your walk!"
By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking- glass.
There was no label this time with the words 'DRINK ME,' but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips. 'I know something interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself, 'whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what this bottle does.
It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken.
She went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself 'Now I can do no more, whatever happens.
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.
And when I grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now,' she added in a sorrowful tone; 'at least there's no room to grow up any more here.''But then,' thought Alice, 'shall I never get any older than I am now? That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman-- but then--always to have lessons to learn!
Oh, I shouldn't like that!''Oh, you foolish Alice!' she answered herself. 'How can you learn lessons in here?
And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.
'That you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.
She did not get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.
And then a voice she had never heard before, 'Sure then I'm here! Digging for apples, yer honour!'
There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers now and then; such as, 'Sure, I don't like it, yer honour, at all, at all!' 'Do as I tell you, you coward!' and at last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in the air.
She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: 'Where's the other ladder?--Why, I hadn't to bring but one; Bill's got the other--Bill! fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up at this corner--No, tie 'em together first--they don't reach half high enough yet--Oh! they'll do well enough; don't be particular-- Here, Bill! catch hold of this rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it's coming down! Heads below!' (a loud crash)--'Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I fancy--Who's to go down the chimney?--Nay, I shan't! you do it!--That I won't, then!--Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you're to go down the chimney!'
She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself 'This is Bill,' she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.
The first thing she heard was a general chorus of 'There goes Bill!' then the Rabbit's voice along--'Catch him, you by the hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices--'Hold up his head--Brandy now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow?
'We must burn the house down!' said the Rabbit's voice; and Alice called out as loud as she could, 'If you do. I'll set Dinah at you!'
'A barrowful of what?' thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. 'I'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out, 'You'd better not do that again!' which produced another dead silence.
Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head. 'If I eat one of these cakes,' she thought, 'it's sure to make some change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I suppose.'
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly.
As soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood.
'The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, 'is to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great hurry.
An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. 'Poor little thing!' said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.
Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.
This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the distance.
'And yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said Alice, as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: 'I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I'd only been the right size to do it!
Alice looked all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.
She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.
The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, 'I think, you ought to tell me who you are, first.'
Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.
'Come back!' the Caterpillar called after her. 'I've something important to say!'
'Is that all?' said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she could.
Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing.
Alice folded her hands, and began:--
'You are old, Father William,' the young man said,
'In my youth,' Father William replied to his son,
'In my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
'In my youth,' said his father, 'I took to the law,
'I have answered three questions, and that is enough,' Said his father; 'don't give yourself airs! Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.
And she thought of herself, 'I wish the creatures wouldn't be so easily offended!'
'Of the mushroom,' said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.
Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.
'And now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!
She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.
'Come, my head's free at last!' said Alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.
And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't see you?' She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.
As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent.
She had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.
'I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've tried hedges,' the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; 'but those serpents!
Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.
'I--I'm a little girl,' said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.
This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, 'You're looking for eggs, I know that well enough; and what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a serpent?'
Alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it.
After a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.
It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. 'Come, there's half my plan done now!
However, I've got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how is that to be done, I wonder?' As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
'Whoever lives there,' thought Alice, 'it'll never do to come upon them this size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!' So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.
For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles.
The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, 'For the Duchess.
Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.
'There might be some sense in your knocking,' the Footman went on without attending to her, 'if we had the door between us. For instance, if you were inside, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.'
He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. 'But perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; 'his eyes are so very nearly at the top of his head.
But at any rate he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?' she repeated, aloud.
At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming out, straight at the Footman's head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.
It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. 'It's really dreadful,' she muttered to herself, 'the way all the creatures argue.
The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations. 'I shall sit here,' he said, 'on and off, for days and days.'
'Oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately: 'he's perfectly idiotic!' And she opened the door and went in.
'There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' Alice said to herself, as well as she could for sneezing.
'Please would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, 'why your cat grins like that?'
She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--
While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby --the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes.
The Duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.
'Oh, please mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror. 'Oh, there goes his precious nose'; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.
'Which would not be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. 'Just think of what work it would make with the day and night!
'Talking of axes,' said the Duchess, 'chop off her head!'
Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: 'Twenty-four hours, I think; or is it twelve?
'Oh, don't bother me,' said the Duchess; 'I never could abide figures!' And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line:
'Speak roughly to your little boy,
And beat him when he sneezes:
Because he knows it teases.'
While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:--
'I speak severely to my boy,
I beat him when he sneezes;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases!'
'Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the Duchess said to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. 'I must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen,' and she hurried out of the room.
The cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.
The poor little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.
As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air. 'If I don't take this child away with me,' thought Alice, 'they're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave it behind?'
There could be no doubt that it had a very turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at all. 'But perhaps it was only sobbing,' she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.
Alice was just beginning to think to herself, 'Now, what am I to do with this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm.
This time there could be no mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.
'If it had grown up,' she said to herself, 'it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.' And she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, 'if one only knew the right way to change them--' when she was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.
The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good- natured, she thought: still it had very long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.
'Cheshire Puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider. 'Come, it's pleased so far,' thought Alice, and she went on.
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question. 'What sort of people live about here?'
Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on 'And how do you know that you're mad?'
Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things happening.
While she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.
Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the March Hare was said to live. 'I've seen hatters before,' she said to herself; 'the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in March.'
She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur.
It was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself 'Suppose it should be raving mad after all!
No room!' they cried out when they saw Alice coming. 'There's plenty of room!' said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.
Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea. 'I don't see any wine,' she remarked.
He had been looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.
The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he said was, 'Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'
'Come, we shall have some fun now!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad they've begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,' she added aloud.
'You might just as well say,' added the Dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, 'that "I breathe when I sleep" is the same thing as "I sleep when I breathe"!'
'It is the same thing with you,' said the Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks, which wasn't much.
The Hatter was the first to break the silence. 'What day of the month is it?' he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.
Alice considered a little, and then said 'The fourth.''Two days wrong!' sighed the Hatter. 'I told you butter wouldn't suit the works!' he added looking angrily at the March Hare.
The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, 'It was the best butter, you know.'
'What a funny watch!' she remarked. 'It tells the day of the month, and doesn't tell what o'clock it is!'
The Hatter's remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. 'I don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she could.
'The Dormouse is asleep again,' said the Hatter, and he poured a little hot tea upon its nose.
Alice sighed wearily. 'I think you might do something better with the time,' she said, 'than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.'
'Of course you don't!' the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously. 'I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anything you liked with the clock.
'Not I!' he replied. 'We quarrelled last March--just before he went mad, you know--' (pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) '--it was at the great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing
Off with his head!"'
'And ever since that,' the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, 'he won't do a thing I ask!
A bright idea came into Alice's head. 'Is that the reason so many tea-things are put out here?' she asked.
The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. 'I wasn't asleep,' he said in a hoarse, feeble voice: 'I heard every word you fellows were saying.'
Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: 'But why did they live at the bottom of a well?'
Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her question. 'Why did they live at the bottom of a well?'
However, he consented to go on. 'And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw, you know--'
'What did they draw?' said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.
The Hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very cautiously: 'But I don't understand.
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.
'At any rate I'll never go there again!' said Alice as she picked her way through the wood. 'It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all my life!'
Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it. 'That's very curious!' she thought.
Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table. 'Now, I'll manage better this time,' she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and then--she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.
Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, 'Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over me like that!'
'Yes, it is his business!' said Five, 'and I'll tell him--it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'
Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun 'Well, of all the unjust things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.
So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--' At this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out 'The Queen! The Queen!' and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces.
Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her.
Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; 'and besides, what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, 'if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?' So she stood still where she was, and waited.
When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said severely 'Who is this?' She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.
'Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went on, 'What's your name, child?'
'My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself, 'Why, they're only a pack of cards, after all.
'And who are these?' said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.
'How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage. 'It's no business of mine.'
The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed 'Off with her head! Off--'
The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 'Consider, my dear: she is only a child!'
'You make me giddy.' And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, 'What have you been doing here?'
'May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, 'we were trying--'
'You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a large flower-pot that stood near.
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.
'It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.
He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered 'She's under sentence of execution.'
You see, she came rather late, and the Queen said--'
Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.
The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.
The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her head!' about once in a minute.
Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, 'and then,' thought she, 'what would become of me? They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'
She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself 'It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.'
'It's no use speaking to it,' she thought, 'till its ears have come, or at least one of them.' In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.
'Not at all,' said Alice: 'she's so extremely--' Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, '--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.'
'Don't be impertinent,' said the King, 'and don't look at me like that!' He got behind Alice as he spoke.
'Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, 'My dear! I wish you would have this cat removed!'
The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. 'Off with his head!' she said, without even looking round.
'I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and he hurried off.
Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with passion.
She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not.
So she went in search of her hedgehog.
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: 'but it doesn't matter much,' thought Alice, 'as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.' So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.
When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.
The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.
The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at his time of life.
The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round.
Alice could think of nothing else to say but 'It belongs to the Duchess: you'd better ask her about it.'
'She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner: 'fetch her here.' And the executioner went off like an arrow.
The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.
'You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!' said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's, and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen. 'When I'm a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), 'I won't have any pepper in my kitchen at all.
Soup does very well without--Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, 'and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children sweet-tempered.
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 'You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk.
'Everything's got a moral, if only you can find it.' And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's side as she spoke.
Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the Duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.
However, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.
'The game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of keeping up the conversation a little.
'Ah, well! It means much the same thing,' said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added, 'and the moral of that is--"Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves."'
'How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to herself.
'I'm glad they don't give birthday presents like that!' But she did not venture to say it out loud.
'Thinking again?' the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little chin.
'I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a little worried.
But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word 'moral,' and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.
Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.
'Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; 'either you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time!
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
'Let's go on with the game,' the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquet-ground.
The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would cost them their lives.
All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her head!' Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.
'I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice. 'Come on, then,' said the Queen, 'and he shall tell you his history,'
As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to the company generally, 'You are all pardoned.' 'Come, that's a good thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.
(If you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) 'Up, lazy thing!' said the Queen, 'and take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history.
I must go back and see after some executions I have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon.
Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. 'What fun!' said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.
'Why, she,' said the Gryphon. 'It's all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you know.
'Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went slowly after it: 'I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!'
They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break.
She pitied him deeply. 'What is his sorrow?' she asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, 'It's all his fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know.
'This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, 'she wants for to know your history, she do.'
'I'll tell it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: 'sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished.'
Alice thought to herself, 'I don't see how he can even finish, if he doesn't begin.' But she waited patiently.
Alice was very nearly getting up and saying, 'Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there must be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.
Alice asked. 'We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock Turtle angrily: 'really you are very dull!'
Don't be all day about it!' and he went on in these words:
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said 'What else had you to learn?'
'Well, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, '--Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel, that used to come once a week: He taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.'
He was an old crab, he was.' 'I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: 'he taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'
'So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark. 'Then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?'
'That's enough about lessons,' the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided tone: 'tell her something about the games now.'
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes.
He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice. 'Same as if he had a bone in his throat,' said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back.
At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again:--
'Back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.
So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:
"There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.
"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!" But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance-- Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
'"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied. "There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
'Yes,' said Alice, 'I've often seen them at dinn--' she checked herself hastily.
'You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle: 'crumbs would all wash off in the sea. But they have their tails in their mouths; and the reason is--' here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--'Tell her about the reason and all that,' he said to the Gryphon.
Alice was thoroughly puzzled. 'Does the boots and shoes!' she repeated in a wondering tone.
Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer. 'They're done with blacking, I believe.'
'Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle: 'why, if a fish came to me, and told me he was going a journey, I should say "With what porpoise?"'
So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White Rabbit.
She was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she gained courage as she went on.
Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating 'You are old, Father William,' to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said 'That's very curious.'
'It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. 'I should like to hear her try and repeat something now.
Tell her to begin.' He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.
'How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!' thought Alice; 'I might as well be at school at once.' However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed:--
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'
Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way again.
'But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted. 'How could he turn them out with his nose, you know?'
'Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it begins "I passed by his garden."'
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--
'I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'
Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old fellow?'
'What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only answered 'Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--
In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--'I wish they'd get the trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round the refreshments!' But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time.
Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly everything there. 'That's the judge,' she said to herself, 'because of his great wig.'
The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.
'And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, 'and those twelve creatures,' (she was obliged to say 'creatures,' you see, because some of them were animals, and some were birds,) 'I suppose they are the jurors.'
She said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. However, 'jury-men' would have done just as well.
'Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, 'Silence in the court!' and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was talking.
Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down 'stupid things!' on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell 'stupid,' and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. 'A nice muddle their slates'll be in before the trial's over!' thought Alice.
This of course, Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away.
She did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.
'The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts, All on a summer day: The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts, And took them quite away!'
He came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. 'I beg pardon, your Majesty,' he began, 'for bringing these in: but I hadn't quite finished my tea when I was sent for.'
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. 'Fourteenth of March, I think it was,' he said.
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.
This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her.
'I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the Dormouse, who was sitting next to her. 'I can hardly breathe.'
'Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse: 'not in that ridiculous fashion.' And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court.
All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the court, 'Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!' on which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.
'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' the Hatter began, in a trembling voice, '--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--'
'I'm a poor man,' the Hatter went on, 'and most things twinkled after that--only the March Hare said--'
'Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--' the Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.
The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went down on one knee. 'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he began.
'You may go,' said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.
'--and just take his head off outside,' the Queen added to one of the officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door.
She carried the pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.
'Well, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice,
'Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.
Off with his whiskers!'
And he added in an undertone to the Queen, 'Really, my dear, you must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead ache!'
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, '--for they haven't got much evidence yet,' she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the name 'Alice!'
'Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.
'Oh, I beg your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.
'The trial cannot proceed,' said the King in a very grave voice, 'until all the jurymen are back in their proper places-- all,' he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move.
She soon got it out again, and put it right; 'not that it signifies much,' she said to herself; 'I should think it would be quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other.'
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted: 'Unimportant, your Majesty means, of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.
'Unimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and went on to himself in an undertone, 'important--unimportant-- unimportant--important--' as if he were trying which word sounded best.
Some of the jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.' Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; 'but it doesn't matter a bit,' she thought to herself.
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his note-book, cackled out 'Silence!' and read out from his book, 'Rule Forty-two.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 'Consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.
'It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit; 'in fact, there's nothing written on the outside.' He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added 'It isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.'
You must have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your name like an honest man.'
'That proves his guilt,' said the Queen.
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. 'Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?' he asked.
'They told me you had been to her, And mentioned me to him: She gave me a good character, But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone (We know it to be true): If she should push the matter on, What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two, You gave us three or more; They all returned from him to you, Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be Involved in this affair, He trusts to you to set them free, Exactly as we were.
My notion was that you had been (Before she had this fit) An obstacle that came between Him, and ourselves, and it.
Don't let him know she liked them best, For this must ever be A secret, kept from all the rest, Between yourself and me.'
'That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' said the King, rubbing his hands; 'so now let the jury--'
'If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting him,) 'I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe there's an atom of meaning in it.'
The jury all wrote down on their slates, 'She doesn't believe there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to explain the paper.
And yet I don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; 'I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. "-said I could not swim--" you can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the Knave.
'Do I look like it?' he said. (Which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
'All right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: '"We know it to be true--" that's the jury, of course-- "I gave her one, they gave him two--" why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know--'
Then again--"before she had this fit--" you never had fits, my dear, I think?' he said to the Queen.
'Never!' said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke.
(The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)
'Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody moved.
'Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this time.) 'You're nothing but a pack of cards!'
At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.
'Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; 'Why, what a long sleep you've had!' 'Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said,
'It was a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late.' So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.
But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:--
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that would always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive the strange creatures of her little sister's dream.
The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock Turtle.
So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's heavy sobs.
Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.
We were in class when the head-master came in, followed by a "new fellow," not wearing the school uniform, and a school servant carrying a large desk. Those who had been asleep woke up, and every one rose as if just surprised at his work.
Then, turning to the class-master, he said to him in a low voice
"Monsieur Roger, here is a pupil whom I recommend to your care; he'll be in the second.
If his work and conduct are satisfactory, he will go into one of the upper classes, as becomes his age."
The "new fellow," standing in the corner behind the door so that he could hardly be seen, was a country lad of about fifteen, and taller than any of us.
His hair was cut square on his forehead like a village chorister's; he looked reliable, but very ill at ease.
Although he was not broad-shouldered, his short school jacket of green cloth with black buttons must have been tight about the arm-holes, and showed at the opening of the cuffs red wrists accustomed to being bare.
He listened with all his ears, as attentive as if at a sermon, not daring even to cross his legs or lean on his elbow; and when at two o'clock the bell rang, the master was obliged to tell him to fall into line with the rest of us.
But, whether he had not noticed the trick, or did not dare to attempt it, the "new fellow," was still holding his cap on his knees even after prayers were over.
He stood up; his cap fell.
A neighbor knocked it down again with his elbow; he picked it up once more.
There was a burst of laughter from the boys, which so thoroughly put the poor lad out of countenance that he did not know whether to keep his cap in his hand, leave it on the ground, or put it on his head.
He sat down again and placed it on his knee.
The new boy articulated in a stammering voice an unintelligible name.
The "new fellow" then took a supreme resolution, opened an inordinately large mouth, and shouted at the top of his voice as if calling someone in the word "Charbovari."
"Five hundred lines for all the class!" shouted in a furious voice stopped, like the Quos ego*, a fresh outburst. "Silence!" continued the master indignantly, wiping his brow with his handkerchief, which he had just taken from his cap.
Heads bent over desks, and the "new fellow" remained for two hours in an exemplary attitude, although from time to time some paper pellet flipped from the tip of a pen came bang in his face.
But he wiped his face with one hand and continued motionless, his eyes lowered.
In the evening, at preparation, he pulled out his pens from his desk, arranged his small belongings, and carefully ruled his paper.
Thanks, no doubt, to the willingness he showed, he had not to go down to the class below. But though he knew his rules passably, he had little finish in composition.
It was the cure of his village who had taught him his first Latin; his parents, from motives of economy, having sent him to school as late as possible.
His father, Monsieur Charles Denis Bartolome Bovary, retired assistant-surgeon-major, compromised about 1812 in certain conscription scandals, and forced at this time to leave the service, had taken advantage of his fine figure to get hold of a dowry of sixty thousand francs that offered in the person of a hosier's daughter who had fallen in love with his good looks. A fine man, a great talker, making his spurs ring as he walked, wearing whiskers that ran into his moustache, his fingers always garnished with rings and dressed in loud colours, he had the dash of a military man with the easy go of a commercial traveller. Once married, he lived for three or four years on his wife's fortune, dining well, rising late, smoking long porcelain pipes, not coming in at night till after the theatre, and haunting cafes. The father-in-law died, leaving little; he was indignant at this, "went in for the business," lost some money in it, then retired to the country, where he thought he would make money. But, as he knew no more about farming than calico, as he rode his horses instead of sending them to plough, drank his cider in bottle instead of selling it in cask, ate the finest poultry in his farmyard, and greased his hunting-boots with the fat of his pigs, he was not long in finding out that he would do better to give up all speculation.
For two hundred francs a year he managed to live on the border of the provinces of Caux and Picardy, in a kind of place half farm, half private house; and here, soured, eaten up with regrets, cursing his luck, jealous of everyone, he shut himself up at the age of forty-five, sick of men, he said, and determined to live at peace.
His wife had adored him once on a time; she had bored him with a thousand servilities that had only estranged him the more.
Lively once, expansive and affectionate, in growing older she had become (after the fashion of wine that, exposed to air, turns to vinegar) ill-tempered, grumbling, irritable.
She had suffered so much without complaint at first, until she had seem him going after all the village drabs, and until a score of bad houses sent him back to her at night, weary, stinking drunk. Then her pride revolted.
After that she was silent, burying her anger in a dumb stoicism that she maintained till her death.
She called on the lawyers, the president, remembered when bills fell due, got them renewed, and at home ironed, sewed, washed, looked after the workmen, paid the accounts, while he, troubling himself about nothing, eternally besotted in sleepy sulkiness, whence he only roused himself to say disagreeable things to her, sat smoking by the fire and spitting into the cinders.
When she had a child, it had to be sent out to nurse. When he came home, the lad was spoilt as if he were a prince.
His mother stuffed him with jam; his father let him run about barefoot, and, playing the philosopher, even said he might as well go about quite naked like the young of animals.
As opposed to the maternal ideas, he had a certain virile idea of childhood on which he sought to mould his son, wishing him to be brought up hardily, like a Spartan, to give him a strong constitution.
But, peaceable by nature, the lad answered only poorly to his notions.
His mother always kept him near her; she cut out cardboard for him, told him tales, entertained him with endless monologues full of melancholy gaiety and charming nonsense.
In her life's isolation she centered on the child's head all her shattered, broken little vanities.
She dreamed of high station; she already saw him, tall, handsome, clever, settled as an engineer or in the law.
She taught him to read, and even, on an old piano, she had taught him two or three little songs.
Besides, with cheek a man always gets on in the world."
Madame Bovary bit her lips, and the child knocked about the village.
When he was twelve years old his mother had her own way; he began lessons.
They were given at spare moments in the sacristy, standing up, hurriedly, between a baptism and a burial; or else the cure, if he had not to go out, sent for his pupil after the Angelus*.
They went up to his room and settled down; the flies and moths fluttered round the candle.
It was close, the child fell asleep, and the good man, beginning to doze with his hands on his stomach, was soon snoring with his mouth wide open.
On other occasions, when Monsieur le Cure, on his way back after administering the viaticum to some sick person in the neighbourhood, caught sight of Charles playing about the fields, he called him, lectured him for a quarter of an hour and took advantage of the occasion to make him conjugate his verb at the foot of a tree.
All the same he was always pleased with him, and even said the "young man" had a very good memory.
Madame Bovary took strong steps. Ashamed, or rather tired out, Monsieur Bovary gave in without a struggle, and they waited one year longer, so that the lad should take his first communion.
Six months more passed, and the year after Charles was finally sent to school at Rouen, where his father took him towards the end of October, at the time of the St. Romain fair.
He had in loco parentis* a wholesale ironmonger in the Rue Ganterie, who took him out once a month on Sundays after his shop was shut, sent him for a walk on the quay to look at the boats, and then brought him back to college at seven o'clock before supper.
Every Thursday evening he wrote a long letter to his mother with red ink and three wafers; then he went over his history note-books, or read an old volume of "Anarchasis" that was knocking about the study.
When he went for walks he talked to the servant, who, like himself, came from the country.
By dint of hard work he kept always about the middle of the class; once even he got a certificate in natural history.
But at the end of his third year his parents withdrew him from the school to make him study medicine, convinced that he could even take his degree by himself.
His mother chose a room for him on the fourth floor of a dyer's she knew, overlooking the Eau-de-Robec.
She made arrangements for his board, got him furniture, table and two chairs, sent home for an old cherry-tree bedstead, and bought besides a small cast-iron stove with the supply of wood that was to warm the poor child.
Then at the end of a week she departed, after a thousand injunctions to be good now that he was going to be left to himself.
The syllabus that he read on the notice-board stunned him; lectures on anatomy, lectures on pathology, lectures on physiology, lectures on pharmacy, lectures on botany and clinical medicine, and therapeutics, without counting hygiene and materia medicaall names of whose etymologies he was ignorant, and that were to him as so many doors to sanctuaries filled with magnificent darkness.
Still he worked; he had bound note-books, he attended all the courses, never missed a single lecture.
He did his little daily task like a mill-horse, who goes round and round with his eyes bandaged, not knowing what work he is doing.
To spare him expense his mother sent him every week by the carrier a piece of veal baked in the oven, with which he lunched when he came back from the hospital, while he sat kicking his feet against the wall.
After this he had to run off to lectures, to the operation-room, to the hospital, and return to his home at the other end of the town.
In the evening, after the poor dinner of his landlord, he went back to his room and set to work again in his wet clothes, which smoked as he sat in front of the hot stove.
On the fine summer evenings, at the time when the close streets are empty, when the servants are playing shuttle-cock at the doors, he opened his window and leaned out.
And he expanded his nostrils to breathe in the sweet odours of the country which did not reach him.
He grew thin, his figure became taller, his face took a saddened look that made it nearly interesting.
Naturally, through indifference, he abandoned all the resolutions he had made.
Once he missed a lecture; the next day all the lectures; and, enjoying his idleness, little by little, he gave up work altogether.
To shut himself up every evening in the dirty public room, to push about on marble tables the small sheep bones with black dots, seemed to him a fine proof of his freedom, which raised him in his own esteem.
It was beginning to see life, the sweetness of stolen pleasures; and when he entered, he put his hand on the door-handle with a joy almost sensual.
Then many things hidden within him came out; he learnt couplets by heart and sang them to his boon companions, became enthusiastic about Beranger, learnt how to make punch, and, finally, how to make love.
Thanks to these preparatory labours, he failed completely in his examination for an ordinary degree.
He was expected home the same night to celebrate his success.
He started on foot, stopped at the beginning of the village, sent for his mother, and told her all.
She excused him, threw the blame of his failure on the injustice of the examiners, encouraged him a little, and took upon herself to set matters straight.
It was only five years later that Monsieur Bovary knew the truth; it was old then, and he accepted it.
Moreover, he could not believe that a man born of him could be a fool.
So Charles set to work again and crammed for his examination, ceaselessly learning all the old questions by heart.
What a happy day for his mother!
Where should he go to practice?
For a long time Madame Bovary had been on the look-out for his death, and the old fellow had barely been packed off when Charles was installed, opposite his place, as his successor.
But it was not everything to have brought up a son, to have had him taught medicine, and discovered Tostes, where he could practice it; he must have a wife.
Though she was ugly, as dry as a bone, her face with as many pimples as the spring has buds, Madame Dubuc had no lack of suitors.
To attain her ends Madame Bovary had to oust them all, and she even succeeded in very cleverly baffling the intrigues of a port-butcher backed up by the priests.
Charles had seen in marriage the advent of an easier life, thinking he would be more free to do as he liked with himself and his money. But his wife was master; he had to say this and not say that in company, to fast every Friday, dress as she liked, harass at her bidding those patients who did not pay. She opened his letter, watched his comings and goings, and listened at the partition-wall when women came to consult him in his surgery.
She must have her chocolate every morning, attentions without end.
She constantly complained of her nerves, her chest, her liver.
The noise of footsteps made her ill; when people left her, solitude became odious to her; if they came back, it was doubtless to see her die.
When Charles returned in the evening, she stretched forth two long thin arms from beneath the sheets, put them round his neck, and having made him sit down on the edge of the bed, began to talk to him of her troubles: he was neglecting her, he loved another.
She had been warned she would be unhappy; and she ended by asking him for a dose of medicine and a little more love.
The servant opened the garret-window and parleyed for some time with a man in the street below.
The man left his horse, and, following the servant, suddenly came in behind her.
He pulled out from his wool cap with grey top-knots a letter wrapped up in a rag and presented it gingerly to Charles, who rested on his elbow on the pillow to read it.
Madame in modesty had turned to the wall and showed only her back.
It was a dark night; Madame Bovary junior was afraid of accidents for her husband.
A boy was to be sent to meet him, and show him the way to the farm, and open the gates for him.
Towards four o'clock in the morning, Charles, well wrapped up in his cloak, set out for the Bertaux.
Still sleepy from the warmth of his bed, he let himself be lulled by the quiet trot of his horse.
When it stopped of its own accord in front of those holes surrounded with thorns that are dug on the margin of furrows, Charles awoke with a start, suddenly remembered the broken leg, and tried to call to mind all the fractures he knew.
Charles from time to time opened his eyes, his mind grew weary, and, sleep coming upon him, he soon fell into a doze wherein, his recent sensations blending with memories, he became conscious of a double self, at once student and married man, lying in his bed as but now, and crossing the operation theatre as of old.
The warm smell of poultices mingled in his brain with the fresh odour of dew; he heard the iron rings rattling along the curtain-rods of the bed and saw his wife sleeping.
As he passed Vassonville he came upon a boy sitting on the grass at the edge of a ditch.
And on Charles's answer he took his wooden shoes in his hands and ran on in front of him.
The general practitioner, riding along, gathered from his guide's talk that Monsieur Rouault must be one of the well-to-do farmers.
He had broken his leg the evening before on his way home from a Twelfth-night feast at a neighbour's.
There was with him only his daughter, who helped him to keep house.
The little lad, slipping through a hole in the hedge, disappeared; then he came back to the end of a courtyard to open the gate.
As he entered the Bertaux, the horse took fright and stumbled.
A young woman in a blue merino dress with three flounces came to the threshold of the door to receive Monsieur Bovary, whom she led to the kitchen, where a large fire was blazing.
He found him in his bed, sweating under his bed-clothes, having thrown his cotton nightcap right away from him.
He was a fat little man of fifty, with white skin and blue eyes, the forepart of his head bald, and he wore earrings.
By his side on a chair stood a large decanter of brandy, whence he poured himself a little from time to time to keep up his spirits; but as soon as he caught sight of the doctor his elation subsided, and instead of swearing, as he had been doing for the last twelve hours, began to groan freely.
Then calling to mind the devices of his masters at the bedsides of patients, he comforted the sufferer with all sorts of kindly remarks, those Caresses of the surgeon that are like the oil they put on bistouries.
As she was a long time before she found her work-case, her father grew impatient; she did not answer, but as she sewed she pricked her fingers, which she then put to her mouth to suck them.
Charles was surprised at the whiteness of her nails.
Yet her hand was not beautiful, perhaps not white enough, and a little hard at the knuckles; besides, it was too long, with no soft inflections in the outlines.
Her real beauty was in her eyes.
Although brown, they seemed black because of the lashes, and her look came at you frankly, with a candid boldness.
Mademoiselle Rouault did not at all like the country, especially now that she had to look after the farm almost alone.
As the room was chilly, she shivered as she ate.
This showed something of her full lips, that she had a habit of biting when silent.
The upper part of her cheek was rose-coloured.
She had, like a man, thrust in between two buttons of her bodice a tortoise-shell eyeglass.
When Charles, after bidding farewell to old Rouault, returned to the room before leaving, he found her standing, her forehead against the window, looking into the garden, where the bean props had been knocked down by the wind.
"Are you looking for anything?" she asked.
"My whip, if you please," he answered.
Charles out of politeness made a dash also, and as he stretched out his arm, at the same moment felt his breast brush against the back of the young girl bending beneath him.
She drew herself up, scarlet, and looked at him over her shoulder as she handed him his whip.
Instead of returning to the Bertaux in three days as he had promised, he went back the very next day, then regularly twice a week, without counting the visits he paid now and then as if by accident.
As to Charles, he did not stop to ask himself why it was a pleasure to him to go to the Bertaux. Had he done so, he would, no doubt, have attributed his zeal to the importance of the case, or perhaps to the money he hoped to make by it. Was it for this, however, that his visits to the farm formed a delightful exception to the meagre occupations of his life? On these days he rose early, set off at a gallop, urging on his horse, then got down to wipe his boots in the grass and put on black gloves before entering. He liked going into the courtyard, and noticing the gate turn against his shoulder, the cock crow on the wall, the lads run to meet him. He liked the granary and the stables; he liked old Rouault, who pressed his hand and called him his saviour; he like the small wooden shoes of Mademoiselle Emma on the scoured flags of the kitchenher high heels made her a little taller; and when she walked in front of him, the wooden soles springing up quickly struck with a sharp sound against the leather of her boots.
During the first period of Charles's visits to the Bertaux, Madame Bovary junior never failed to inquire after the invalid, and she had even chosen in the book that she kept on a system of double entry a clean blank page for Monsieur Rouault.
But when she heard he had a daughter, she began to make inquiries, and she learnt the Mademoiselle Rouault, brought up at the Ursuline Convent, had received what is called "a good education"; and so knew dancing, geography, drawing, how to embroider and play the piano.
"So it is for this," she said to herself, "that his face beams when he goes to see her, and that he puts on his new waistcoat at the risk of spoiling it with the rain. Ah! that woman!
That woman!"
And she detested her instinctively.
At first she solaced herself by allusions that Charles did not understand, then by casual observations that he let pass for fear of a storm, finally by open apostrophes to which he knew not what to answer.
"Why did he go back to the Bertaux now that Monsieur Rouault was cured and that these folks hadn't paid yet?
That was what he cared about; he wanted town misses." And she went on
"The daughter of old Rouault a town miss!
Besides, the poor old chap, if it hadn't been for the colza last year, would have had much ado to pay up his arrears."
Heloise made him swear, his hand on the prayer-book, that he would go there no more after much sobbing and many kisses, in a great outburst of love.
He obeyed then, but the strength of his desire protested against the servility of his conduct; and he thought, with a kind of naive hypocrisy, that his interdict to see her gave him a sort of right to love her.
And then the widow was thin; she had long teeth; wore in all weathers a little black shawl, the edge of which hung down between her shoulder-blades; her bony figure was sheathed in her clothes as if they were a scabbard; they were too short, and displayed her ankles with the laces of her large boots crossed over grey stockings.
Charles's mother came to see them from time to time, but after a few days the daughter-in-law seemed to put her own edge on her, and then, like two knives, they scarified him with their reflections and observations. It was wrong of him to eat so much.
Why did he always offer a glass of something to everyone who came? What obstinacy not to wear flannels!
In the spring it came about that a notary at Ingouville, the holder of the widow Dubuc's property, one fine day went off, taking with him all the money in his office.
Heloise, it is true, still possessed, besides a share in a boat valued at six thousand francs, her house in the Rue St. Francois; and yet, with all this fortune that had been so trumpeted abroad, nothing, excepting perhaps a little furniture and a few clothes, had appeared in the household.
The matter had to be gone into. The house at Dieppe was found to be eaten up with mortgages to its foundations; what she had placed with the notary God only knew, and her share in the boat did not exceed one thousand crowns.
In his exasperation, Monsieur Bovary the elder, smashing a chair on the flags, accused his wife of having caused misfortune to the son by harnessing him to such a harridan, whose harness wasn't worth her hide.
Heloise in tears, throwing her arms about her husband, implored him to defend her from his parents.
Charles tried to speak up for her.
A week after, as she was hanging up some washing in her yard, she was seized with a spitting of blood, and the next day, while Charles had his back turned to her drawing the window-curtain, she said, "O God!" gave a sigh and fainted. She was dead!
When all was over at the cemetery Charles went home. He found no one downstairs; he went up to the first floor to their room; say her dress still hanging at the foot of the alcove; then, leaning against the writing-table, he stayed until the evening, buried in a sorrowful reverie.
One morning old Rouault brought Charles the money for setting his legseventy-five francs in forty-sou pieces, and a turkey.
He had heard of his loss, and consoled him as well as he could.
"I know what it is," said he, clapping him on the shoulder; "I've been through it. When I lost my dear departed, I went into the fields to be quite alone. I fell at the foot of a tree; I cried; I called on God; I talked nonsense to Him. I wanted to be like the moles that I saw on the branches, their insides swarming with worms, dead, and an end of it. And when I thought that there were others at that very moment with their nice little wives holding them in their embrace, I struck great blows on the earth with my stick. I was pretty well mad with not eating; the very idea of going to a cafe disgusted meyou wouldn't believe it. Well, quite softly, one day following another, a spring on a winter, and an autumn after a summer, this wore away, piece by piece, crumb by crumb; it passed away, it is gone, I should say it has sunk; for something always remains at the bottom as one would saya weight here, at one's heart. But since it is the lot of all of us, one must not give way altogether, and, because others have died, want to die too. You must pull yourself together, Monsieur Bovary. It will pass away. Come to see us; my daughter thinks of you now and again, d'ye know, and she says you are forgetting her. Spring will soon be here. We'll have some rabbit-shooting in the warrens to amuse you a bit."
Charles followed his advice.
He went back to the Bertaux. He found all as he had left it, that is to say, as it was five months ago.
The pear trees were already in blossom, and Farmer Rouault, on his legs again, came and went, making the farm more full of life.
Thinking it his duty to heap the greatest attention upon the doctor because of his sad position, he begged him not to take his hat off, spoke to him in an undertone as if he had been ill, and even pretended to be angry because nothing rather lighter had been prepared for him than for the others, such as a little clotted cream or stewed pears.
Charles found himself laughing, but the remembrance of his wife suddenly coming back to him depressed him.
Coffee was brought in; he thought no more about her.
He thought less of her as he grew accustomed to living alone.
The new delight of independence soon made his loneliness bearable.
He could now change his meal-times, go in or out without explanation, and when he was very tired stretch himself at full length on his bed.
So he nursed and coddled himself and accepted the consolations that were offered him.
On the other hand, the death of his wife had not served him ill in his business, since for a month people had been saying, "The poor young man! what a loss!"
His name had been talked about, his practice had increased; and moreover, he could go to the Bertaux just as he liked.
He had an aimless hope, and was vaguely happy; he thought himself better looking as he brushed his whiskers before the looking-glass.
One day he got there about three o'clock.
Between the window and the hearth Emma was sewing; she wore no fichu; he could see small drops of perspiration on her bare shoulders.
After the fashion of country folks she asked him to have something to drink.
He said no; she insisted, and at last laughingly offered to have a glass of liqueur with him.
So she went to fetch a bottle of curacao from the cupboard, reached down two small glasses, filled one to the brim, poured scarcely anything into the other, and, after having clinked glasses, carried hers to her mouth.
As it was almost empty she bent back to drink, her head thrown back, her lips pouting, her neck on the strain. She laughed at getting none of it, while with the tip of her tongue passing between her small teeth she licked drop by drop the bottom of her glass.
She sat down again and took up her work, a white cotton stocking she was darning.
She worked with her head bent down; she did not speak, nor did Charles.
The air coming in under the door blew a little dust over the flags; he watched it drift along, and heard nothing but the throbbing in his head and the faint clucking of a hen that had laid an egg in the yard.
Emma from time to time cooled her cheeks with the palms of her hands, and cooled these again on the knobs of the huge fire-dogs.
She complained of suffering since the beginning of the season from giddiness; she asked if sea-baths would do her any good; she began talking of her convent, Charles of his school; words came to them.
They went up into her bedroom.
She showed him her old music-books, the little prizes she had won, and the oak-leaf crowns, left at the bottom of a cupboard.
She spoke to him, too, of her mother, of the country, and even showed him the bed in the garden where, on the first Friday of every month, she gathered flowers to put on her mother's tomb.
And, according to what she was saying, her voice was clear, sharp, or, on a sudden all languor, drawn out in modulations that ended almost in murmurs as she spoke to herself, now joyous, opening big naive eyes, then with her eyelids half closed, her look full of boredom, her thoughts wandering.
Going home at night, Charles went over her words one by one, trying to recall them, to fill out their sense, that he might piece out the life she had lived before he knew her.
But he never saw her in his thoughts other than he had seen her the first time, or as he had just left her. Then he asked himself what would become of herif she would be married, and to whom!
Old Rouault was rich, and she!so beautiful! But Emma's face always rose before his eyes, and a monotone, like the humming of a top, sounded in his ears, "If you should marry after all!
If you should marry!" At night he could not sleep; his throat was parched; he was athirst.
The night was covered with stars, a warm wind blowing in the distance; the dogs were barking. He turned his head towards the Bertaux.
Thinking that, after all, he should lose nothing, Charles promised himself to ask her in marriage as soon as occasion offered, but each time such occasion did offer the fear of not finding the right words sealed his lips.
Old Rouault would not have been sorry to be rid of his daughter, who was of no use to him in the house.
In his heart he excused her, thinking her too clever for farming, a calling under the ban of Heaven, since one never saw a millionaire in it.
Far from having made a fortune by it, the good man was losing every year; for if he was good in bargaining, in which he enjoyed the dodges of the trade, on the other hand, agriculture properly so called, and the internal management of the farm, suited him less than most people.
He did not willingly take his hands out of his pockets, and did not spare expense in all that concerned himself, liking to eat well, to have good fires, and to sleep well.
He liked old cider, underdone legs of mutton, glorias* well beaten up.
He took his meals in the kitchen alone, opposite the fire, on a little table brought to him all ready laid as on the stage.
When, therefore, he perceived that Charles's cheeks grew red if near his daughter, which meant that he would propose for her one of these days, he chewed the cud of the matter beforehand. He certainly thought him a little meagre, and not quite the son-in-law he would have liked, but he was said to be well brought-up, economical, very learned, and no doubt would not make too many difficulties about the dowry. Now, as old Rouault would soon be forced to sell twenty-two acres of "his property," as he owed a good deal to the mason, to the harness-maker, and as the shaft of the cider-press wanted renewing, "If he asks for her," he said to himself, "I'll give her to him."
"Monsieur Rouault," he murmured, "I should like to say something to you."
"I ask nothing better", the farmer went on. "Although, no doubt, the little one is of my mind, still we must ask her opinion.
If it is 'yes', you needn't return because of all the people about, and besides it would upset her too much.
And he went off.
Charles fastened his horse to a tree; he ran into the road and waited.
Half an hour passed, then he counted nineteen minutes by his watch.
The next day by nine o'clock he was at the farm.
Emma blushed as he entered, and she gave a little forced laugh to keep herself in countenance.
Old Rouault embraced his future son-in-law.
Mademoiselle Rouault was busy with her trousseau.
Part of it was ordered at Rouen, and she made herself chemises and nightcaps after fashion-plates that she borrowed.
Everyone had just had his hair cut; ears stood out from the heads; they had been close-shaved; a few, even, who had had to get up before daybreak, and not been able to see to shave, had diagonal gashes under their noses or cuts the size of a three-franc piece along the jaws, which the fresh air en route had enflamed, so that the great white beaming faces were mottled here and there with red dabs.
The fiddler walked in front with his violin, gay with ribbons at its pegs.
Emma's dress, too long, trailed a little on the ground; from time to time she stopped to pull it up, and then delicately, with her gloved hands, she picked off the coarse grass and the thistledowns, while Charles, empty handed, waited till she had finished.
Old Rouault, with a new silk hat and the cuffs of his black coat covering his hands up to the nails, gave his arm to Madame Bovary senior.
When he saw that the rest were far behind he stopped to take breath, slowly rosined his bow, so that the strings should sound more shrilly, then set off again, by turns lowering and raising his neck, the better to mark time for himself.
As he had only just set up on the place, he had taken a lot of trouble, and at dessert he himself brought in a set dish that evoked loud cries of wonderment.
The bride had begged her father to be spared the usual marriage pleasantries.
However, a fishmonger, one of their cousins (who had even brought a pair of soles for his wedding present), began to squirt water from his mouth through the keyhole, when old Rouault came up just in time to stop him, and explain to him that the distinguished position of his son-in-law would not allow of such liberties.
In his heart he accused old Rouault of being proud, and he joined four or five other guests in a corner, who having, through mere chance, been several times running served with the worst helps of meat, also were of opinion they had been badly used, and were whispering about their host, and with covered hints hoping he would ruin himself.
Madame Bovary, senior, had not opened her mouth all day. She had been consulted neither as to the dress of her daughter-in-law nor as to the arrangement of the feast; she went to bed early. Her husband, instead of following her, sent to Saint-Victor for some cigars, and smoked till daybreak, drinking kirsch-punch, a mixture unknown to the company. This added greatly to the consideration in which he was held.
The next day, on the other hand, he seemed another man. It was he who might rather have been taken for the virgin of the evening before, whilst the bride gave no sign that revealed anything. The shrewdest did not know what to make of it, and they looked at her when she passed near them with an unbounded concentration of mind. But Charles concealed nothing. He called her "my wife", tutoyed* her, asked for her of everyone, looked for her everywhere, and often he dragged her into the yards, where he could be seen from far between the trees, putting his arm around her waist, and walking half-bending over her, ruffling the chemisette of her bodice with his head.
Two days after the wedding the married pair left. Charles, on account of his patients, could not be away longer.
Old Rouault had them driven back in his cart, and himself accompanied them as far as Vassonville. Here he embraced his daughter for the last time, got down, and went his way.
When he had gone about a hundred paces he stopped, and as he saw the cart disappearing, its wheels turning in the dust, he gave a deep sigh. Then he remembered his wedding, the old times, the first pregnancy of his wife; he, too, had been very happy the day when he had taken her from her father to his home, and had carried her off on a pillion, trotting through the snow, for it was near Christmas-time, and the country was all white.
She held him by one arm, her basket hanging from the other; the wind blew the long lace of her Cauchois headdress so that it sometimes flapped across his mouth, and when he turned his head he saw near him, on his shoulder, her little rosy face, smiling silently under the gold bands of her cap. To warm her hands she put them from time to time in his breast.
Their son would have been thirty by now. Then he looked back and saw nothing on the road.
He felt dreary as an empty house; and tender memories mingling with the sad thoughts in his brain, addled by the fumes of the feast, he felt inclined for a moment to take a turn towards the church. As he was afraid, however, that this sight would make him yet more sad, he went right away home.
The old servant presented herself, curtsied to her, apologised for not having dinner ready, and suggested that madame, in the meantime, should look over her house.
The smell of melted butter penetrated through the walls when he saw patients, just as in the kitchen one could hear the people coughing in the consulting room and recounting their histories.
Right at the bottom, under the spruce bushes, was a cure in plaster reading his breviary.
Charles noticed it; he took it and carried it up to the attic, while Emma seated in an arm-chair (they were putting her things down around her) thought of her bridal flowers packed up in a bandbox, and wondered, dreaming, what would be done with them if she were to die.
During the first days she occupied herself in thinking about changes in the house.
She took the shades off the candlesticks, had new wallpaper put up, the staircase repainted, and seats made in the garden round the sundial; she even inquired how she could get a basin with a jet fountain and fishes.
Finally her husband, knowing that she liked to drive out, picked up a second-hand dogcart, which, with new lamps and splashboard in striped leather, looked almost like a tilbury.
A meal together, a walk in the evening on the highroad, a gesture of her hands over her hair, the sight of her straw hat hanging from the window-fastener, and many another thing in which Charles had never dreamed of pleasure, now made up the endless round of his happiness.
In bed, in the morning, by her side, on the pillow, he watched the sunlight sinking into the down on her fair cheek, half hidden by the lappets of her night-cap.
Seen thus closely, her eyes looked to him enlarged, especially when, on waking up, she opened and shut them rapidly many times.
His own eyes lost themselves in these depths; he saw himself in miniature down to the shoulders, with his handkerchief round his head and the top of his shirt open.
He rose. She came to the window to see him off, and stayed leaning on the sill between two pots of geranium, clad in her dressing gown hanging loosely about her.
Charles, in the street buckled his spurs, his foot on the mounting stone, while she talked to him from above, picking with her mouth some scrap of flower or leaf that she blew out at him.
Charles from horseback threw her a kiss; she answered with a nod; she shut the window, and he set off.
And then along the highroad, spreading out its long ribbon of dust, along the deep lanes that the trees bent over as in arbours, along paths where the corn reached to the knees, with the sun on his back and the morning air in his nostrils, his heart full of the joys of the past night, his mind at rest, his flesh at ease, he went on, re-chewing his happiness, like those who after dinner taste again the truffles which they are digesting.
Until now what good had he had of his life?
His time at school, when he remained shut up within the high walls, alone, in the midst of companions richer than he or cleverer at their work, who laughed at his accent, who jeered at his clothes, and whose mothers came to the school with cakes in their muffs?
Later on, when he studied medicine, and never had his purse full enough to treat some little work-girl who would have become his mistress?
Afterwards, he had lived fourteen months with the widow, whose feet in bed were cold as icicles.
But now he had for life this beautiful woman whom he adored.
For him the universe did not extend beyond the circumference of her petticoat, and he reproached himself with not loving her.
He wanted to see her again; he turned back quickly, ran up the stairs with a beating heart.
Emma, in her room, was dressing; he came up on tiptoe, kissed her back; she gave a cry.
He could not keep from constantly touching her comb, her ring, her fichu; sometimes he gave her great sounding kisses with all his mouth on her cheeks, or else little kisses in a row all along her bare arm from the tip of her fingers up to her shoulder, and she put him away half-smiling, half-vexed, as you do a child who hangs about you.
Before marriage she thought herself in love; but the happiness that should have followed this love not having come, she must, she thought, have been mistaken.
And Emma tried to find out what one meant exactly in life by the words felicity, passion, rapture, that had seemed to her so beautiful in books.
She had read "Paul and Virginia," and she had dreamed of the little bamboo-house, the nigger Domingo, the dog Fidele, but above all of the sweet friendship of some dear little brother, who seeks red fruit for you on trees taller than steeples, or who runs barefoot over the sand, bringing you a bird's nest.
When she was thirteen, her father himself took her to town to place her in the convent.
Far from being bored at first at the convent, she took pleasure in the society of the good sisters, who, to amuse her, took her to the chapel, which one entered from the refectory by a long corridor.
She played very little during recreation hours, knew her catechism well, and it was she who always answered Monsieur le Vicaire's difficult questions.
Living thus, without every leaving the warm atmosphere of the classrooms, and amid these pale-faced women wearing rosaries with brass crosses, she was softly lulled by the mystic languor exhaled in the perfumes of the altar, the freshness of the holy water, and the lights of the tapers.
Instead of attending to mass, she looked at the pious vignettes with their azure borders in her book, and she loved the sick lamb, the sacred heart pierced with sharp arrows, or the poor Jesus sinking beneath the cross he carries.
She puzzled her head to find some vow to fulfil.
When she went to confession, she invented little sins in order that she might stay there longer, kneeling in the shadow, her hands joined, her face against the grating beneath the whispering of the priest.
The comparisons of betrothed, husband, celestial lover, and eternal marriage, that recur in sermons, stirred within her soul depths of unexpected sweetness.
How she listened at first to the sonorous lamentations of its romantic melancholies reechoing through the world and eternity!
If her childhood had been spent in the shop-parlour of some business quarter, she might perhaps have opened her heart to those lyrical invasions of Nature, which usually come to us only through translation in books.
But she knew the country too well; she knew the lowing of cattle, the milking, the ploughs.
Accustomed to calm aspects of life, she turned, on the contrary, to those of excitement.
She wanted to get some personal profit out of things, and she rejected as useless all that did not contribute to the immediate desires of her heart, being of a temperament more sentimental than artistic, looking for emotions, not landscapes.
Patronized by the clergy, because she belonged to an ancient family of noblemen ruined by the Revolution, she dined in the refectory at the table of the good sisters, and after the meal had a bit of chat with them before going back to her work.
The girls often slipped out from the study to go and see her.
She knew by heart the love songs of the last century, and sang them in a low voice as she stitched away.
She told stories, gave them news, went errands in the town, and on the sly lent the big girls some novel, that she always carried in the pockets of her apron, and of which the good lady herself swallowed long chapters in the intervals of her work.
For six months, then, Emma, at fifteen years of age, made her hands dirty with books from old lending libraries.
Through Walter Scott, later on, she fell in love with historical events, dreamed of old chests, guard-rooms and minstrels.
She would have liked to live in some old manor-house, like those long-waisted chatelaines who, in the shade of pointed arches, spent their days leaning on the stone, chin in hand, watching a cavalier with white plume galloping on his black horse from the distant fields.
At this time she had a cult for Mary Stuart and enthusiastic veneration for illustrious or unhappy women.
Joan of Arc, Heloise, Agnes Sorel, the beautiful Ferroniere, and Clemence Isaure stood out to her like comets in the dark immensity of heaven, where also were seen, lost in shadow, and all unconnected, St. Louis with his oak, the dying Bayard, some cruelties of Louis XI, a little of St. Bartholomew's Day, the plume of the Bearnais, and always the remembrance of the plates painted in honour of Louis XIV.
In the music class, in the ballads she sang, there was nothing but little angels with golden wings, madonnas, lagunes, gondoliers;-mild compositions that allowed her to catch a glimpse athwart the obscurity of style and the weakness of the music of the attractive phantasmagoria of sentimental realities. Some of her companions brought "keepsakes" given them as new year's gifts to the convent. These had to be hidden; it was quite an undertaking; they were read in the dormitory. Delicately handling the beautiful satin bindings, Emma looked with dazzled eyes at the names of the unknown authors, who had signed their verses for the most part as counts or viscounts.
And the shade of the argand lamp fastened to the wall above Emma's head lighted up all these pictures of the world, that passed before her one by one in the silence of the dormitory, and to the distant noise of some belated carriage rolling over the Boulevards.
When her mother died she cried much the first few days.
She had a funeral picture made with the hair of the deceased, and, in a letter sent to the Bertaux full of sad reflections on life, she asked to be buried later on in the same grave. The goodman thought she must be ill, and came to see her.
Emma was secretly pleased that she had reached at a first attempt the rare ideal of pale lives, never attained by mediocre hearts.
The good nuns, who had been so sure of her vocation, perceived with great astonishment that Mademoiselle Rouault seemed to be slipping from them. They had indeed been so lavish to her of prayers, retreats, novenas, and sermons, they had so often preached the respect due to saints and martyrs, and given so much good advice as to the modesty of the body and the salvation of her soul, that she did as tightly reined horses; she pulled up short and the bit slipped from her teeth.
Emma, at home once more, first took pleasure in looking after the servants, then grew disgusted with the country and missed her convent.
When Charles came to the Bertaux for the first time, she thought herself quite disillusioned, with nothing more to learn, and nothing more to feel.
But the uneasiness of her new position, or perhaps the disturbance caused by the presence of this man, had sufficed to make her believe that she at last felt that wondrous passion which, till then, like a great bird with rose-coloured wings, hung in the splendour of the skies of poesy; and now she could not think that the calm in which she lived was the happiness she had dreamed.
She thought, sometimes, that, after all, this was the happiest time of her lifethe honeymoon, as people called it.
In post chaises behind blue silken curtains to ride slowly up steep road, listening to the song of the postilion re-echoed by the mountains, along with the bells of goats and the muffled sound of a waterfall; at sunset on the shores of gulfs to breathe in the perfume of lemon trees; then in the evening on the villa-terraces above, hand in hand to look at the stars, making plans for the future. It seemed to her that certain places on earth must bring happiness, as a plant peculiar to the soil, and that cannot thrive elsewhere.
Why could not she lean over balconies in Swiss chalets, or enshrine her melancholy in a Scotch cottage, with a husband dressed in a black velvet coat with long tails, and thin shoes, a pointed hat and frills? Perhaps she would have liked to confide all these things to someone.
But how tell an undefinable uneasiness, variable as the clouds, unstable as the winds? Words failed herthe opportunity, the courage.
If Charles had but wished it, if he had guessed it, if his look had but once met her thought, it seemed to her that a sudden plenty would have gone out from her heart, as the fruit falls from a tree when shaken by a hand. But as the intimacy of their life became deeper, the greater became the gulf that separated her from him.
He had never had the curiosity, he said, while he lived at Rouen, to go to the theatre to see the actors from Paris.
He could neither swim, nor fence, nor shoot, and one day he could not explain some term of horsemanship to her that she had come across in a novel.
Sometimes she would draw; and it was great amusement to Charles to stand there bolt upright and watch her bend over her cardboard, with eyes half-closed the better to see her work, or rolling, between her fingers, little bread-pellets.
As to the piano, the more quickly her fingers glided over it the more he wondered.
Thus shaken up, the old instrument, whose strings buzzed, could be heard at the other end of the village when the window was open, and often the bailiff's clerk, passing along the highroad bare-headed and in list slippers, stopped to listen, his sheet of paper in his hand.
Emma, on the other hand, knew how to look after her house. She sent the patients' accounts in well-phrased letters that had no suggestion of a bill. When they had a neighbour to dinner on Sundays, she managed to have some tasty dishpiled up pyramids of greengages on vine leaves, served up preserves turned out into platesand even spoke of buying finger-glasses for dessert. From all this much consideration was extended to Bovary.
Then he asked for something to eat, and as the servant had gone to bed, Emma waited on him.
He took off his coat to dine more at his ease.
He told her, one after the other, the people he had met, the villages where he had been, the prescriptions he had written, and, well pleased with himself, he finished the remainder of the boiled beef and onions, picked pieces off the cheese, munched an apple, emptied his water-bottle, and then went to bed, and lay on his back and snored.
As he had been for a time accustomed to wear nightcaps, his handkerchief would not keep down over his ears, so that his hair in the morning was all tumbled pell-mell about his face and whitened with the feathers of the pillow, whose strings came untied during the night.
His mother approved of his economy, for she came to see him as formerly when there had been some violent row at her place; and yet Madame Bovary senior seemed prejudiced against her daughter-in-law.
She put her linen in order for her in the presses, and taught her to keep an eye on the butcher when he brought the meat.
In Madame Dubuc's time the old woman felt that she was still the favorite; but now the love of Charles for Emma seemed to her a desertion from her tenderness, an encroachment upon what was hers, and she watched her son's happiness in sad silence, as a ruined man looks through the windows at people dining in his old house.
She recalled to him as remembrances her troubles and her sacrifices, and, comparing these with Emma's negligence, came to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to adore her so exclusively.
Charles knew not what to answer: he respected his mother, and he loved his wife infinitely; he considered the judgment of the one infallible, and yet he thought the conduct of the other irreproachable.
When Madam Bovary had gone, he tried timidly and in the same terms to hazard one or two of the more anodyne observations he had heard from his mamma.
Emma proved to him with a word that he was mistaken, and sent him off to his patients.
And yet, in accord with theories she believed right, she wanted to make herself in love with him.
By moonlight in the garden she recited all the passionate rhymes she knew by heart, and, sighing, sang to him many melancholy adagios; but she found herself as calm after as before, and Charles seemed no more amorous and no more moved.
When she had thus for a while struck the flint on her heart without getting a spark, incapable, moreover, of understanding what she did not experience as of believing anything that did not present itself in conventional forms, she persuaded herself without difficulty that Charles's passion was nothing very exorbitant.
His outbursts became regular; he embraced her at certain fixed times.
A gamekeeper, cured by the doctor of inflammation of the lungs, had given madame a little Italian greyhound; she took her out walking, for she went out sometimes in order to be alone for a moment, and not to see before her eyes the eternal garden and the dusty road.
She began by looking round her to see if nothing had changed since last she had been there.
Her thoughts, aimless at first, wandered at random, like her greyhound, who ran round and round in the fields, yelping after the yellow butterflies, chasing the shrew-mice, or nibbling the poppies on the edge of a cornfield.
Then gradually her ideas took definite shape, and, sitting on the grass that she dug up with little prods of her sunshade, Emma repeated to herself,
She asked herself if by some other chance combination it would have not been possible to meet another man; and she tried to imagine what would have been these unrealised events, this different life, this unknown husband.
He might have been handsome, witty, distinguished, attractive, such as, no doubt, her old companions of the convent had married.
But sheher life was cold as a garret whose dormer window looks on the north, and ennui, the silent spider, was weaving its web in the darkness in every corner of her heart.
She recalled the prize days, when she mounted the platform to receive her little crowns, with her hair in long plaits.
In her white frock and open prunella shoes she had a pretty way, and when she went back to her seat, the gentlemen bent over her to congratulate her; the courtyard was full of carriages; farewells were called to her through their windows; the music master with his violin case bowed in passing by.
She called Djali, took her between her knees, and smoothed the long delicate head, saying, "Come, kiss mistress; you have no troubles."
Then noting the melancholy face of the graceful animal, who yawned slowly, she softened, and comparing her to herself, spoke to her aloud as to somebody in trouble whom one is consoling.
Emma drew her shawl round her shoulders and rose.
In the avenue a green light dimmed by the leaves lit up the short moss that crackled softly beneath her feet.
A fear took hold of her; she called Djali, and hurriedly returned to Tostes by the high road, threw herself into an armchair, and for the rest of the evening did not speak.
But towards the end of September something extraordinary fell upon her life; she was invited by the Marquis d'Andervilliers to Vaubyessard.
Secretary of State under the Restoration, the Marquis, anxious to re-enter political life, set about preparing for his candidature to the Chamber of Deputies long beforehand.
In the winter he distributed a great deal of wood, and in the Conseil General always enthusiastically demanded new roads for his arrondissement.
During the dog-days he had suffered from an abscess, which Charles had cured as if by miracle by giving a timely little touch with the lancet.
The steward sent to Tostes to pay for the operation reported in the evening that he had seen some superb cherries in the doctor's little garden.
Now cherry trees did not thrive at Vaubyessard; the Marquis asked Bovary for some slips; made it his business to thank his personally; saw Emma; thought she had a pretty figure, and that she did not bow like a peasant; so that he did not think he was going beyond the bounds of condescension, nor, on the other hand, making a mistake, in inviting the young couple.
Besides these Charles held a bandbox between his knees.
Charles's dog-cart pulled up before the middle flight of steps; servants appeared; the Marquis came forward, and, offering his arm to the doctor's wife, conducted her to the vestibule.
Opposite rose a straight staircase, and on the left a gallery overlooking the garden led to the billiard room, through whose door one could hear the click of the ivory balls. As she crossed it to go to the drawing room, Emma saw standing round the table men with grave faces, their chins resting on high cravats.
She made her sit down by her on an ottoman, and began talking to her as amicably as if she had known her a long time.
She was a woman of about forty, with fine shoulders, a hook nose, a drawling voice, and on this evening she wore over her brown hair a simple guipure fichu that fell in a point at the back.
A fair young woman sat in a high-backed chair in a corner; and gentlemen with flowers in their buttonholes were talking to ladies round the fire.
But at the upper end of the table, alone amongst all these women, bent over his full plate, and his napkin tied round his neck like a child, an old man sat eating, letting drops of gravy drip from his mouth.
His eyes were bloodshot, and he wore a little queue tied with black ribbon.
He was the Marquis's father-in-law, the old Duke de Laverdiere, once on a time favourite of the Count d'Artois, in the days of the Vaudreuil hunting-parties at the Marquis de Conflans', and had been, it was said, the lover of Queen Marie Antoinette, between Monsieur de Coigny and Monsieur de Lauzun.
He had lived a life of noisy debauch, full of duels, bets, elopements; he had squandered his fortune and frightened all his family.
A servant behind his chair named aloud to him in his ear the dishes that he pointed to stammering, and constantly Emma's eyes turned involuntarily to this old man with hanging lips, as to something extraordinary. He had lived at court and slept in the bed of queens!
Emma shivered all over as she felt it cold in her mouth.
The powdered sugar even seemed to her whiter and finer than elsewhere.
Emma made her toilet with the fastidious care of an actress on her debut.
She did her hair according to the directions of the hairdresser, and put on the barege dress spread out upon the bed. Charles's trousers were tight across the belly.
"My trouser-straps will be rather awkward for dancing," he said.
Besides, it is more becoming for a doctor," she added.
Charles came and kissed her on her shoulder.
"Let me alone!" she said; "you are tumbling me."
Emma's heart beat rather faster when, her partner holding her by the tips of the fingers, she took her place in a line with the dancers, and waited for the first note to start. But her emotion soon vanished, and, swaying to the rhythm of the orchestra, she glided forward with slight movements of the neck. A smile rose to her lips at certain delicate phrases of the violin, that sometimes played alone while the other instruments were silent; one could hear the clear clink of the louis d'or that were being thrown down upon the card tables in the next room; then all struck again, the cornet-a-piston uttered its sonorous note, feet marked time, skirts swelled and rustled, hands touched and parted; the same eyes falling before you met yours again.
A few steps from Emma a gentleman in a blue coat was talking of Italy with a pale young woman wearing a parure of pearls.
They were praising the breadth of the columns of St. Peter's, Tivoly, Vesuvius, Castellamare, and Cassines, the roses of Genoa, the Coliseum by moonlight. With her other ear Emma was listening to a conversation full of words she did not understand.
A circle gathered round a very young man who the week before had beaten "Miss Arabella" and "Romolus," and won two thousand louis jumping a ditch in England.
One complained that his racehorses were growing fat; another of the printers' errors that had disfigured the name of his horse.
At the crash of the glass Madame Bovary turned her head and saw in the garden the faces of peasants pressed against the window looking in at them.
Then the memory of the Bertaux came back to her.
She saw the farm again, the muddy pond, her father in a blouse under the apple trees, and she saw herself again as formerly, skimming with her finger the cream off the milk-pans in the dairy.
But in the refulgence of the present hour her past life, so distinct until then, faded away completely, and she almost doubted having lived it. She was there; beyond the ball was only shadow overspreading all the rest.
She was just eating a maraschino ice that she held with her left hand in a silver-gilt cup, her eyes half-closed, and the spoon between her teeth.
A lady near her dropped her fan.
The gentleman bowed, and as he moved to stretch out his arm, Emma saw the hand of a young woman throw something white, folded in a triangle, into his hat.
The gentleman, picking up the fan, offered it to the lady respectfully; she thanked him with an inclination of the head, and began smelling her bouquet.
Charles was half asleep, his back propped against a door.
One of the waltzers, however, who was familiarly called Viscount, and whose low cut waistcoat seemed moulded to his chest, came a second time to ask Madame Bovary to dance, assuring her that he would guide her, and that she would get through it very well.
On passing near the doors the bottom of Emma's dress caught against his trousers.
Their legs commingled; he looked down at her; she raised her eyes to his.
A torpor seized her; she stopped.
They started again, and with a more rapid movement; the Viscount, dragging her along disappeared with her to the end of the gallery, where panting, she almost fell, and for a moment rested her head upon his breast.
And then, still turning, but more slowly, he guided her back to her seat.
She leaned back against the wall and covered her eyes with her hands.
When she opened them again, in the middle of the drawing room three waltzers were kneeling before a lady sitting on a stool.
They passed and re-passed, she with rigid body, her chin bent down, and he always in the same pose, his figure curved, his elbow rounded, his chin thrown forward.
That woman knew how to waltz!
His "knees were going up into his body." He had spent five consecutive hours standing bolt upright at the card tables, watching them play whist, without understanding anything about it, and it was with a deep sigh of relief that he pulled off his boots.
Emma threw a shawl over her shoulders, opened the window, and leant out.
She breathed in the damp wind that refreshed her eyelids. The music of the ball was still murmuring in her ears.
And she tried to keep herself awake in order to prolong the illusion of this luxurious life that she would soon have to give up.
She looked long at the windows of the chateau, trying to guess which were the rooms of all those she had noticed the evening before. She would fain have known their lives, have penetrated, blended with them.
But she was shivering with cold. She undressed, and cowered down between the sheets against Charles, who was asleep.
The Marquis, to amuse the young woman, took her to see the stables.
Charles, meanwhile, went to ask a groom to put his horse to. The dog-cart was brought to the foot of the steps, and, all the parcels being crammed in, the Bovarys paid their respects to the Marquis and Marchioness and set out again for Tostes.
Charles, on the extreme edge of the seat, held the reins with his two arms wide apart, and the little horse ambled along in the shafts that were too big for him.
The loose reins hanging over his crupper were wet with foam, and the box fastened on behind the chaise gave great regular bumps against it.
Emma thought she recognized the Viscount, turned back, and caught on the horizon only the movement of the heads rising or falling with the unequal cadence of the trot or gallop.
"There are even two cigars in it," said he; "they'll do for this evening after dinner."
"Why, do you smoke?" she asked.
He put his find in his pocket and whipped up the nag.
Madame lost her temper.
Charles, seated opposite Emma, rubbed his hands gleefully.
He was rather fond of the poor girl.
She had formerly, during the wearisome time of his widowhood, kept him company many an evening.
She had been his first patient, his oldest acquaintance in the place.
"Have you given her warning for good?" he asked at last.
Who is to prevent me?" she replied.
"You'll make yourself ill," she said scornfully.
He put down his cigar and ran to swallow a glass of cold water at the pump.
She walked about her little garden, up and down the same walks, stopping before the beds, before the espalier, before the plaster curate, looking with amazement at all these things of once-on-a-time that she knew so well.
Her journey to Vaubyessard had made a hole in her life, like one of those great crevices that a storm will sometimes make in one night in mountains.
Still she was resigned.
She devoutly put away in her drawers her beautiful dress, down to the satin shoes whose soles were yellowed with the slippery wax of the dancing floor.
Whenever the Wednesday came round she said to herself as she awoke, "Ah! I was there a weeka fortnightthree weeks ago."
And little by little the faces grew confused in her remembrance.
She forgot the tune of the quadrilles; she no longer saw the liveries and appointments so distinctly; some details escaped her, but the regret remained with her.
Often when Charles was out she took from the cupboard, between the folds of the linen where she had left it, the green silk cigar case.
Perhaps it was a present from his mistress.
She was at Tostes; he was at Paris now, far away! What was this Paris like?
What a vague name! She repeated it in a low voice, for the mere pleasure of it; it rang in her ears like a great cathedral bell; it shone before her eyes, even on the labels of her pomade-pots.
At night, when the carriers passed under her windows in their carts singing the "Marjolaine," she awoke, and listened to the noise of the iron-bound wheels, which, as they gained the country road, was soon deadened by the soil. "They will be there to-morrow!" she said to herself.
And she followed them in thought up and down the hills, traversing villages, gliding along the highroads by the light of the stars.
At the end of some indefinite distance there was always a confused spot, into which her dream died.
She bought a plan of Paris, and with the tip of her finger on the map she walked about the capital.
At last she would close the lids of her weary eyes, and see in the darkness the gas jets flaring in the wind and the steps of carriages lowered with much noise before the peristyles of theatres.
In Eugene Sue she studied descriptions of furniture; she read Balzac and George Sand, seeking in them imaginary satisfaction for her own desires.
Even at table she had her book by her, and turned over the pages while Charles ate and talked to her.
The memory of the Viscount always returned as she read.
Between him and the imaginary personages she made comparisons.
But the circle of which he was the centre gradually widened round him, and the aureole that he bore, fading from his form, broadened out beyond, lighting up her other dreams.
Emma perceived only two or three that hid from her all the rest, and in themselves represented all humanity.
The nearer things were, moreover, the more her thoughts turned away from them.
All her immediate surroundings, the wearisome country, the middle-class imbeciles, the mediocrity of existence, seemed to her exceptional, a peculiar chance that had caught hold of her, while beyond stretched, as far as eye could see, an immense land of joys and passions.
She confused in her desire the sensualities of luxury with the delights of the heart, elegance of manners with delicacy of sentiment.
The lad from the posting house who came to groom the mare every morning passed through the passage with his heavy wooden shoes; there were holes in his blouse; his feet were bare in list slippers.
And this was the groom in knee-britches with whom she had to be content!
His work done, he did not come back again all day, for Charles on his return put up his horse himself, unsaddled him and put on the halter, while the servant-girl brought a bundle of straw and threw it as best she could into the manger.
To replace Nastasie (who left Tostes shedding torrents of tears) Emma took into her service a young girl of fourteen, an orphan with a sweet face. She forbade her wearing cotton caps, taught her to address her in the third person, to bring a glass of water on a plate, to knock before coming into a room, to iron, starch, and to dress herwanted to make a lady's-maid of her. The new servant obeyed without a murmur, so as not to be sent away; and as madame usually left the key in the sideboard, Felicite every evening took a small supply of sugar that she ate alone in her bed after she had said her prayers.
Madame was in her room upstairs. She wore an open dressing gown that showed between the shawl facings of her bodice a pleated chamisette with three gold buttons.
Her belt was a corded girdle with great tassels, and her small garnet coloured slippers had a large knot of ribbon that fell over her instep.
She had bought herself a blotting book, writing case, pen-holder, and envelopes, although she had no one to write to; she dusted her what-not, looked at herself in the glass, picked up a book, and then, dreaming between the lines, let it drop on her knees.
She longed to travel or to go back to her convent. She wished at the same time to die and to live in Paris.
He ate omelettes on farmhouse tables, poked his arm into damp beds, received the tepid spurt of blood-lettings in his face, listened to death-rattles, examined basins, turned over a good deal of dirty linen; but every evening he found a blazing fire, his dinner ready, easy-chairs, and a well-dressed woman, charming with an odour of freshness, though no one could say whence the perfume came, or if it were not her skin that made odorous her chemise.
She charmed him by numerous attentions; now it was some new way of arranging paper sconces for the candles, a flounce that she altered on her gown, or an extraordinary name for some very simple dish that the servant had spoilt, but that Charles swallowed with pleasure to the last mouthful.
At Rouen she saw some ladies who wore a bunch of charms on the watch-chains; she bought some charms.
She wanted for her mantelpiece two large blue glass vases, and some time after an ivory necessaire with a silver-gilt thimble.
They added something to the pleasure of the senses and to the comfort of his fireside.
It was like a golden dust sanding all along the narrow path of his life.
He was well, looked well; his reputation was firmly established.
The country-folk loved him because he was not proud.
He petted the children, never went to the public house, and, moreover, his morals inspired confidence.
Being much afraid of killing his patients, Charles, in fact only prescribed sedatives, from time to time and emetic, a footbath, or leeches.
It was not that he was afraid of surgery; he bled people copiously like horses, and for the taking out of teeth he had the "devil's own wrist."
Finally, to keep up with the times, he took in "La Ruche Medicale," a new journal whose prospectus had been sent him.
He read it a little after dinner, but in about five minutes the warmth of the room added to the effect of his dinner sent him to sleep; and he sat there, his chin on his two hands and his hair spreading like a mane to the foot of the lamp.
Emma looked at him and shrugged her shoulders.
Why, at least, was not her husband one of those men of taciturn passions who work at their books all night, and at last, when about sixty, the age of rheumatism sets in, wear a string of orders on their ill-fitting black coat?
An Yvetot doctor whom he had lately met in consultation had somewhat humiliated him at the very bedside of the patient, before the assembled relatives.
When, in the evening, Charles told her this anecdote, Emma inveighed loudly against his colleague.
He kissed her forehead with a tear in his eyes.
But she was angered with shame; she felt a wild desire to strike him; she went to open the window in the passage and breathed in the fresh air to calm herself.
"What a man! What a man!" she said in a low voice, biting her lips.
Besides, she was becoming more irritated with him.
As he grew older his manner grew heavier; at dessert he cut the corks of the empty bottles; after eating he cleaned his teeth with his tongue; in taking soup he made a gurgling noise with every spoonful; and, as he was getting fatter, the puffed-out cheeks seemed to push the eyes, always small, up to the temples.
Sometimes Emma tucked the red borders of his under-vest unto his waistcoat, rearranged his cravat, and threw away the dirty gloves he was going to put on; and this was not, as he fancied, for himself; it was for herself, by a diffusion of egotism, of nervous irritation.
Sometimes, too, she told him of what she had read, such as a passage in a novel, of a new play, or an anecdote of the "upper ten" that she had seen in a feuilleton; for, after all, Charles was something, an ever-open ear, and ever-ready approbation.
She confided many a thing to her greyhound. She would have done so to the logs in the fireplace or to the pendulum of the clock.
At the bottom of her heart, however, she was waiting for something to happen.
Like shipwrecked sailors, she turned despairing eyes upon the solitude of her life, seeking afar off some white sail in the mists of the horizon.
She did not know what this chance would be, what wind would bring it her, towards what shore it would drive her, if it would be a shallop or a three-decker, laden with anguish or full of bliss to the portholes.
But each morning, as she awoke, she hoped it would come that day; she listened to every sound, sprang up with a start, wondered that it did not come; then at sunset, always more saddened, she longed for the morrow.
Spring came round. With the first warm weather, when the pear trees began to blossom, she suffered from dyspnoea.
After the ennui of this disappointment her heart once more remained empty, and then the same series of days recommenced.
But nothing happened to her; God had willed it so! The future was a dark corridor, with its door at the end shut fast.
Who would hear her?
Since she could never, in a velvet gown with short sleeves, striking with her light fingers the ivory keys of an Erard at a concert, feel the murmur of ecstasy envelop her like a breeze, it was not worth while boring herself with practicing.
Her drawing cardboard and her embroidery she left in the cupboard.
Sewing irritated her. "I have read everything," she said to herself.
And she sat there making the tongs red-hot, or looked at the rain falling.
How sad she was on Sundays when vespers sounded!
A cat slowly walking over some roof put up his back in the pale rays of the sun.
On fine days she went down into the garden.
Under the spruce by the hedgerow, the curie in the three-cornered hat reading his breviary had lost his right foot, and the very plaster, scaling off with the frost, had left white scabs on his face.
Then she went up again, shut her door, put on coals, and fainting with the heat of the hearth, felt her boredom weigh more heavily than ever.
She would have liked to go down and talk to the servant, but a sense of shame restrained her.
Every day at the same time the schoolmaster in a black skullcap opened the shutters of his house, and the rural policeman, wearing his sabre over his blouse, passed by.
This shop had as decoration an old engraving of a fashion-plate stuck against a windowpane and the wax bust of a woman with yellow hair.
He, too, the hairdresser, lamented his wasted calling, his hopeless future, and dreaming of some shop in a big townat Rouen, for example, overlooking the harbour, near the theatrehe walked up and down all day from the mairie to the church, sombre and waiting for customers.
When Madame Bovary looked up, she always saw him there, like a sentinel on duty, with his skullcap over his ears and his vest of lasting.
Sometimes in the afternoon outside the window of her room, the head of a man appeared, a swarthy head with black whiskers, smiling slowly, with a broad, gentle smile that showed his white teeth.
The man turned his handle, looking to the right and left, and up at the windows.
Now and again, while he shot out a long squirt of brown saliva against the milestone, with his knee raised his instrument, whose hard straps tired his shoulder; and now, doleful and drawling, or gay and hurried, the music escaped from the box, droning through a curtain of pink taffeta under a brass claw in arabesque.
Endless sarabands ran through her head, and, like an Indian dancing girl on the flowers of a carpet, her thoughts leapt with the notes, swung from dream to dream, from sadness to sadness.
When the man had caught some coppers in his cap, he drew down an old cover of blue cloth, hitched his organ on to his back, and went off with a heavy tread.
But it was above all the meal-times that were unbearable to her, in this small room on the ground floor, with its smoking stove, its creaking door, the walls that sweated, the damp flags; all the bitterness in life seemed served up on her plate, and with smoke of the boiled beef there rose from her secret soul whiffs of sickliness.
Charles was a slow eater; she played with a few nuts, or, leaning on her elbow, amused herself with drawing lines along the oilcloth table cover with the point of her knife.
She now let everything in her household take care of itself, and Madame Bovary senior, when she came to spend part of Lent at Tostes, was much surprised at the change.
She kept saying they must be economical since they were not rich, adding that she was very contented, very happy, that Tostes pleased her very much, with other speeches that closed the mouth of her mother-in-law.
Besides, Emma no longer seemed inclined to follow her advice; once even, Madame Bovary having thought fit to maintain that mistresses ought to keep an eye on the religion of their servants, she had answered with so angry a look and so cold a smile that the good woman did not interfere again.
She ordered dishes for herself, then she did not touch them; one day drank only pure milk, the next cups of tea by the dozen.
Often she persisted in not going out, then, stifling, threw open the windows and put on light dresses.
After she had well scolded her servant she gave her presents or sent her out to see neighbours, just as she sometimes threw beggars all the silver in her purse, although she was by no means tender-hearted or easily accessible to the feelings of others, like most country-bred people, who always retain in their souls something of the horny hardness of the paternal hands.
Towards the end of February old Rouault, in memory of his cure, himself brought his son-in-law a superb turkey, and stayed three days at Tostes.
Charles being with his patients, Emma kept him company.
He smoked in the room, spat on the firedogs, talked farming, calves, cows, poultry, and municipal council, so that when he left she closed the door on him with a feeling of satisfaction that surprised even herself.
Moreover she no longer concealed her contempt for anything or anybody, and at times she set herself to express singular opinions, finding fault with that which others approved, and approving things perverse and immoral, all of which made her husband open his eyes widely.
Would she never issue from it?
Yet she was as good as all the women who were living happily.
She had seen duchesses at Vaubyessard with clumsier waists and commoner ways, and she execrated the injustice of God.
She leant her head against the walls to weep; she envied lives of stir; longed for masked balls, for violent pleasures, with all the wildness that she did not know, but that these must surely yield.
Everything that was tried only seemed to irritate her the more.
On certain days she chatted with feverish rapidity, and this over-excitement was suddenly followed by a state of torpor, in which she remained without speaking, without moving.
What then revived her was pouring a bottle of eau-de-cologne over her arms.
As she was constantly complaining about Tostes, Charles fancied that her illness was no doubt due to some local cause, and fixing on this idea, began to think seriously of setting up elsewhere.
From that moment she drank vinegar, contracted a sharp little cough, and completely lost her appetite.
It cost Charles much to give up Tostes after living there four years and "when he was beginning to get on there."
He took her to Rouen to see his old master.
Then he wrote to the chemist of the place to ask the number of the population, the distance from the nearest doctor, what his predecessor had made a year, and so forth; and the answer being satisfactory, he made up his mind to move towards the spring, if Emma's health did not improve.
One day when, in view of her departure, she was tidying a drawer, something pricked her finger.
It was a wire of her wedding bouquet.
Then across an open space appears a white house beyond a grass mound ornamented by a Cupid, his finger on his lips; two brass vases are at each end of a flight of steps; scutcheons* blaze upon the door.
In the evening especially its argand lamp is lit up and the red and green jars that embellish his shop-front throw far across the street their two streams of colour; then across them as if in Bengal lights is seen the shadow of the chemist leaning over his desk.
From year to year, however, his small field grows smaller, and when there is an epidemic, he does not know whether to rejoice at the deaths or regret the burials.
"You live on the dead, Lestiboudois!" the curie at last said to him one day. This grim remark made him reflect; it checked him for some time; but to this day he carries on the cultivation of his little tubers, and even maintains stoutly that they grow naturally.
On the evening when the Bovarys were to arrive at Yonville, Widow Lefrancois, the landlady of this inn, was so very busy that she sweated great drops as she moved her saucepans.
Moreover, she had the boarders' meal to see to, and that of the doctor, his wife, and their servant; the billiard-room was echoing with bursts of laughter; three millers in a small parlour were calling for brandy; the wood was blazing, the brazen pan was hissing, and on the long kitchen table, amid the quarters of raw mutton, rose piles of plates that rattled with the shaking of the block on which spinach was being chopped.
A man slightly marked with small-pox, in green leather slippers, and wearing a velvet cap with a gold tassel, was warming his back at the chimney. His face expressed nothing but self-satisfaction, and he appeared to take life as calmly as the goldfinch suspended over his head in its wicker cage: this was the chemist.
Why, they'll tear my cloth for me," she went on, looking at them from a distance, her strainer in her hand.
"You may say what you like; his table is better than yours; and if one were to think, for example, of getting up a patriotic pool for Poland or the sufferers from the Lyons floods"
"It isn't beggars like him that'll frighten us," interrupted the landlady, shrugging her fat shoulders. "Come, come, Monsieur Homais; as long as the 'Lion d'Or' exists people will come to it. We've feathered our nest; while one of these days you'll find the 'Cafe Francais' closed with a big placard on the shutters. Change my billiard-table!" she went on, speaking to herself, "the table that comes in so handy for folding the washing, and on which, in the hunting season, I have slept six visitors! But that dawdler, Hivert, doesn't come!"
As the clock strikes six you'll see him come in, for he hasn't his equal under the sun for punctuality.
He must always have his seat in the small parlour.
And so squeamish as he is, and so particular about the cider!
Not like Monsieur Leon; he sometimes comes at seven, or even half-past, and he doesn't so much as look at what he eats.
Such a nice young man!
"Well, you see, there's a great difference between an educated man and an old carabineer who is now a tax-collector."
He wore a blue frock-coat falling in a straight line round his thin body, and his leather cap, with its lappets knotted over the top of his head with string, showed under the turned-up peak a bald forehead, flattened by the constant wearing of a helmet.
He wore a black cloth waistcoat, a hair collar, grey trousers, and, all the year round, well-blacked boots, that had two parallel swellings due to the sticking out of his big-toes.
Not a hair stood out from the regular line of fair whiskers, which, encircling his jaws, framed, after the fashion of a garden border, his long, wan face, whose eyes were small and the nose hooked.
Clever at all games of cards, a good hunter, and writing a fine hand, he had at home a lathe, and amused himself by turning napkin rings, with which he filled up his house, with the jealousy of an artist and the egotism of a bourgeois.
He went to the small parlour, but the three millers had to be got out first, and during the whole time necessary for laying the cloth, Binet remained silent in his place near the stove.
Then he shut the door and took off his cap in his usual way.
"It isn't with saying civil things that he'll wear out his tongue," said the chemist, as soon as he was along with the landlady.
"He never talks more," she replied.
"Last week two travelers in the cloth line were heresuch clever chaps who told such jokes in the evening, that I fairly cried with laughing; and he stood there like a dab fish and never said a word."
"Yet they say he has parts," objected the landlady.
"Parts!" replied Monsieur Homais; "he, parts! In his own line it is possible," he added in a calmer tone.
And he went on
A man dressed in black suddenly came into the kitchen.
By the last gleam of the twilight one could see that his face was rubicund and his form athletic.
"What can I do for you, Monsieur le Curie?" asked the landlady, as she reached down from the chimney one of the copper candlesticks placed with their candles in a row. "Will you take something?
He had come for his umbrella, that he had forgotten the other day at the Ernemont convent, and after asking Madame Lefrancois to have it sent to him at the presbytery in the evening, he left for the church, from which the Angelus was ringing.
When the chemist no longer heard the noise of his boots along the square, he thought the priest's behaviour just now very unbecoming.
The landlady took up the defence of her curie.
"Besides, he could double up four men like you over his knee.
Last year he helped our people to bring in the straw; he carried as many as six trusses at once, he is so strong."
I believe in the Supreme Being, in a Creator, whatever he may be.
And I can't admit of an old boy of a God who takes walks in his garden with a cane in his hand, who lodges his friends in the belly of whales, dies uttering a cry, and rises again at the end of three days; things absurd in themselves, and completely opposed, moreover, to all physical laws, which prove to us, by the way, that priests have always wallowed in turpid ignorance, in which they would fain engulf the people with them."
He ceased, looking round for an audience, for in his bubbling over the chemist had for a moment fancied himself in the midst of the town council.
But the landlady no longer heeded him; she was listening to a distant rolling.
It was he who did the errands of the place in town.
He went to the shops and brought back rolls of leather for the shoemaker, old iron for the farrier, a barrel of herrings for his mistress, caps from the milliner's, locks from the hair-dresser's and all along the road on his return journey he distributed his parcels, which he threw, standing upright on his seat and shouting at the top of his voice, over the enclosures of the yards.
They had whistled for him a quarter of an hour; Hivert had even gone back a mile and a half expecting every moment to catch sight of her; but it had been necessary to go on.
Emma had wept, grown angry; she had accused Charles of this misfortune.
Monsieur Lheureux, a draper, who happened to be in the coach with her, had tried to console her by a number of examples of lost dogs recognizing their masters at the end of long years.
One, he said had been told of, who had come back to Paris from Constantinople.
Another had gone one hundred and fifty miles in a straight line, and swum four rivers; and his own father had possessed a poodle, which, after twelve years of absence, had all of a sudden jumped on his back in the street as he was going to dine in town.
Emma got out first, then Felicite, Monsieur Lheureux, and a nurse, and they had to wake up Charles in his corner, where he had slept soundly since night set in.
Homais introduced himself; he offered his homages to madame and his respects to monsieur; said he was charmed to have been able to render them some slight service, and added with a cordial air that he had ventured to invite himself, his wife being away.
When Madame Bovary was in the kitchen she went up to the chimney.
With the tips of her fingers she caught her dress at the knee, and having thus pulled it up to her ankle, held out her foot in its black boot to the fire above the revolving leg of mutton.
The flame lit up the whole of her, penetrating with a crude light the woof of her gowns, the fine pores of her fair skin, and even her eyelids, which she blinked now and again.
A great red glow passed over her with the blowing of the wind through the half-open door.
As he was a good deal bored at Yonville, where he was a clerk at the notary's, Monsieur Guillaumin, Monsieur Leon Dupuis (it was he who was the second habitue of the "Lion d'Or") frequently put back his dinner-hour in hope that some traveler might come to the inn, with whom he could chat in the evening.
On the days when his work was done early, he had, for want of something else to do, to come punctually, and endure from soup to cheese a tete-a-tete with Binet.
It was therefore with delight that he accepted the landlady's suggestion that he should dine in company with the newcomers, and they passed into the large parlour where Madame Lefrancois, for the purpose of showing off, had had the table laid for four.
Homais asked to be allowed to keep on his skull-cap, for fear of coryza; then, turning to his neighbour
"But," Leon went on, addressing himself to Madame Bovary, "nothing, it seems to me, is more pleasantwhen one can," he added.
"At any rate, you have some walks in the neighbourhood?" continued Madame Bovary, speaking to the young man.
"Oh, very few," he answered. "There is a place they call La Pature, on the top of the hill, on the edge of the forest.
"I think there is nothing so admirable as sunsets," she resumed; "but especially by the side of the sea."
Such spectacles must stir to enthusiasm, incline to prayer, to ecstasy; and I no longer marvel at that celebrated musician who, the better to inspire his imagination, was in the habit of playing the piano before some imposing site."
"You play?" she asked.
"No, but I am very fond of music," he replied.
"Ah! don't you listen to him, Madame Bovary," interrupted Homais, bending over his plate.
Leon, in fact, lodged at the chemist's where he had a small room on the second floor, overlooking the Place.
He blushed at the compliment of his landlord, who had already turned to the doctor, and was enumerating to him, one after the other, all the principal inhabitants of Yonville.
"As I had the honour of putting it to your husband," said the chemist, "with regard to this poor Yanoda who has run away, you will find yourself, thanks to his extravagance, in the possession of one of the most comfortable houses of Yonville.
Moreover, it contains everything that is agreeable in a householda laundry, kitchen with offices, sitting-room, fruit-room, and so on. He was a gay dog, who didn't care what he spent.
At the end of the garden, by the side of the water, he had an arbour built just for the purpose of drinking beer in summer; and if madame is fond of gardening she will be able"
"My wife doesn't care about it," said Charles; "although she has been advised to take exercise, she prefers always sitting in her room reading."
"What, indeed?" she said, fixing her large black eyes wide open upon him.
"One thinks of nothing," he continued; "the hours slip by.
That is true?" she said.
"I have experienced it," she replied.
"That is why," he said, "I especially love the poets.
"If madame will do me the honour of making use of it", said the chemist, who had just caught the last words, "I have at her disposal a library composed of the best authors, Voltaire, Rousseau, Delille, Walter Scott, the 'Echo des Feuilletons'; and in addition I receive various periodicals, among them the 'Fanal de Rouen' daily, having the advantage to be its correspondent for the districts of Buchy, Forges, Neufchatel, Yonville, and vicinity."
For two hours and a half they had been at table; for the servant Artemis, carelessly dragging her old list slippers over the flags, brought one plate after the other, forgot everything, and constantly left the door of the billiard-room half open, so that it beat against the wall with its hooks.
Unconsciously, Leon, while talking, had placed his foot on one of the bars of the chair on which Madame Bovary was sitting.
She wore a small blue silk necktie, that kept up like a ruff a gauffered cambric collar, and with the movements of her head the lower part of her face gently sunk into the linen or came out from it.
The Paris theatres, titles of novels, new quadrilles, and the world they did not know; Tostes, where she had lived, and Yonville, where they were; they examined all, talked of everything till to the end of dinner.
Bits of straw stuck in his red hair, and he limped with his left leg.
When he had taken in his other hand the cure's umbrella, they started.
As soon as she entered the passage, Emma felt the cold of the plaster fall about her shoulders like damp linen.
This was the fourth time that she had slept in a strange place.
The first was the day of her going to the convent; the second, of her arrival at Tostes; the third, at Vaubyessard; and this was the fourth.
And each one had marked, as it were, the inauguration of a new phase in her life.
She did not believe that things could present themselves in the same way in different places, and since the portion of her life lived had been bad, no doubt that which remained to be lived would be better.
The next day, as she was getting up, she saw the clerk on the Place.
Leon waited all day for six o'clock in the evening to come, but on going to the inn, he found no one but Monsieur Binet, already at table. The dinner of the evening before had been a considerable event for him; he had never till then talked for two hours consecutively to a "lady."
How then had he been able to explain, and in such language, the number of things that he could not have said so well before? He was usually shy, and maintained that reserve which partakes at once of modesty and dissimulation.
At Yonville he was considered "well-bred."
He listened to the arguments of the older people, and did not seem hot about politicsa remarkable thing for a young man.
Then he had some accomplishments; he painted in water-colours, could read the key of G, and readily talked literature after dinner when he did not play cards.
Monsieur Homais respected him for his education; Madame Homais liked him for his good-nature, for he often took the little Homais into the gardenlittle brats who were always dirty, very much spoilt, and somewhat lymphatic, like their mother.
He gave Madame Bovary information as to the trades-people, sent expressly for his own cider merchant, tasted the drink himself, and saw that the casks were properly placed in the cellar; he explained how to set about getting in a supply of butter cheap, and made an arrangement with Lestiboudois, the sacristan, who, besides his sacerdotal and funeral functions, looked after the principal gardens at Yonville by the hour or the year, according to the taste of the customers.
Little by little the memory of this reprimand grew fainter, and he continued, as heretofore, to give anodyne consultations in his back-parlour.
But the mayor resented it, his colleagues were jealous, everything was to be feared; gaining over Monsieur Bovary by his attentions was to earn his gratitude, and prevent his speaking out later on, should he notice anything.
So every morning Homais brought him "the paper," and often in the afternoon left his shop for a few moments to have a chat with the Doctor.
He remained seated for hours without speaking, went into his consulting room to sleep, or watched his wife sewing.
Then for diversion he employed himself at home as a workman; he even tried to do up the attic with some paint which had been left behind by the painters.
A pleasanter trouble came to distract him, namely, the pregnancy of his wife.
As the time of her confinement approached he cherished her the more.
When from afar he saw her languid walk, and her figure without stays turning softly on her hips; when opposite one another he looked at her at his ease, while she took tired poses in her armchair, then his happiness knew no bounds; he got up, embraced her, passed his hands over her face, called her little mamma, wanted to make her dance, and half-laughing, half-crying, uttered all kinds of caressing pleasantries that came into his head.
Now he wanted nothing.
He knew human life from end to end, and he sat down to it with serenity.
Emma at first felt a great astonishment; then was anxious to be delivered that she might know what it was to be a mother.
But not being able to spend as much as she would have liked, to have a swing-bassinette with rose silk curtains, and embroidered caps, in a fit of bitterness she gave up looking after the trousseau, and ordered the whole of it from a village needlewoman, without choosing or discussing anything.
Thus she did not amuse herself with those preparations that stimulate the tenderness of mothers, and so her affection was from the very outset, perhaps, to some extent attenuated.
She hoped for a son; he would be strong and dark; she would call him George; and this idea of having a male child was like an expected revenge for all her impotence in the past.
A man, at least, is free; he may travel over passions and over countries, overcome obstacles, taste of the most far-away pleasures.
But a woman is always hampered.
At once inert and flexible, she has against her the weakness of the flesh and legal dependence.
Her will, like the veil of her bonnet, held by a string, flutters in every wind; there is always some desire that draws her, some conventionality that restrains.
She turned her head away and fainted.
Madame Homais, as well as Madame Lefrancois of the Lion d'Or, almost immediately came running in to embrace her.
The chemist, as man of discretion, only offered a few provincial felicitations through the half-opened door.
Whilst she was getting well she occupied herself much in seeking a name for her daughter.
First she went over all those that have Italian endings, such as Clara, Louisa, Amanda, Atala; she liked Galsuinde pretty well, and Yseult or Leocadie still better.
Charles wanted the child to be called after her mother; Emma opposed this.
At last Emma remembered that at the chateau of Vaubyessard she had heard the Marchioness call a young lady Berthe; from that moment this name was chosen; and as old Rouault could not come, Monsieur Homais was requested to stand godfather.
His gifts were all products from his establishment, to wit: six boxes of jujubes, a whole jar of racahout, three cakes of marshmallow paste, and six sticks of sugar-candy into the bargain that he had come across in a cupboard.
Monsieur Bovary, senior, stayed at Yonville a month, dazzling the natives by a superb policeman's cap with silver tassels that he wore in the morning when he smoked his pipe in the square.
Being also in the habit of drinking a good deal of brandy, he often sent the servant to the Lion d'Or to buy him a bottle, which was put down to his son's account, and to perfume his handkerchiefs he used up his daughter-in-law's whole supply of eau-de-cologne.
The latter did not at all dislike his company.
He had knocked about the world, he talked about Berlin, Vienna, and Strasbourg, of his soldier times, of the mistresses he had had, the grand luncheons of which he had partaken; then he was amiable, and sometimes even, either on the stairs, or in the garden, would seize hold of her waist, crying, "Charles, look out for yourself."
Then Madame Bovary, senior, became alarmed for her son's happiness, and fearing that her husband might in the long-run have an immoral influence upon the ideas of the young woman, took care to hurry their departure.
Perhaps she had more serious reasons for uneasiness.
Monsieur Bovary was not the man to respect anything.
One day Emma was suddenly seized with the desire to see her little girl, who had been put to nurse with the carpenter's wife, and, without looking at the calendar to see whether the six weeks of the Virgin were yet passed, she set out for the Rollets' house, situated at the extreme end of the village, between the highroad and the fields.
It was mid-day, the shutters of the houses were closed and the slate roofs that glittered beneath the fierce light of the blue sky seemed to strike sparks from the crest of the gables. A heavy wind was blowing; Emma felt weak as she walked; the stones of the pavement hurt her; she was doubtful whether she would not go home again, or go in somewhere to rest.
At this moment Monsieur Leon came out from a neighbouring door with a bundle of papers under his arm.
He came to greet her, and stood in the shade in front of the Lheureux's shop under the projecting grey awning.
Madame Bovary said she was going to see her baby, but that she was beginning to grow tired.
"Have you any business to attend to?" she asked.
And on the clerk's answer, she begged him to accompany her.
That same evening this was known in Yonville, and Madame Tuvache, the mayor's wife, declared in the presence of her servant that "Madame Bovary was compromising herself."
The two, side by side walked slowly, she leaning upon him, and he restraining his pace, which he regulated by hers; in front of them a swarm of midges fluttered, buzzing in the warm air.
At the noise of the gate the nurse appeared with a baby she was suckling on one arm. With her other hand she was pulling along a poor puny little fellow, his face covered with scrofula, the son of a Rouen hosier, whom his parents, too taken up with their business, left in the country.
"Go in," she said; "your little one is there asleep."
Finally, the last luxury in the apartment was a "Fame" blowing her trumpets, a picture cut out, no doubt, from some perfumer's prospectus and nailed to the wall with six wooden shoe-pegs.
She took it up in the wrapping that enveloped it and began singing softly as she rocked herself to and fro.
Leon walked up and down the room; it seemed strange to him to see this beautiful woman in her nankeen dress in the midst of all this poverty. Madam Bovary reddened; he turned away, thinking perhaps there had been an impertinent look in his eyes. Then she put back the little girl, who had just been sick over her collar.
The nurse at once came to dry her, protesting that it wouldn't show.
"She gives me other doses," she said: "I am always a-washing of her.
"Very well! very well!" said Emma. "Good morning, Madame Rollet," and she went out, wiping her shoes at the door.
The good woman accompanied her to the end of the garden, talking all the time of the trouble she had getting up of nights.
After having submitted to her thanks, Madam Bovary left.
She had gone a little way down the path when, at the sound of wooden shoes, she turned round.
Then the peasant woman, taking her aside behind an elm tree, began talking to her of her husband, who with his trade and six francs a year that the captain
"Well," the nurse went on, heaving sighs between each word, "I'm afraid he'll be put out seeing me have coffee alone, you know men"
"Oh, dear! my poor, dear lady! you see in consequence of his wounds he has terrible cramps in the chest.
"Well," the latter continued, making a curtsey, "if it weren't asking too much," and she curtsied once more, "if you would"and her eyes begged"a jar of brandy," she said at last, "and I'd rub your little one's feet with it; they're as tender as one's tongue."
She walked fast for some time, then more slowly, and looking straight in front of her, her eyes rested on the shoulder of the young man, whose frock-coat had a black-velvety collar.
She noticed his nails which were longer than one wore them at Yonville.
It was one of the clerk's chief occupations to trim them, and for this purpose he kept a special knife in his writing desk.
It was the dinner-hour at the farms, and the young woman and her companion heard nothing as they walked but the fall of their steps on the earth of the path, the words they spoke, and the sound of Emma's dress rustling round her.
Wallflowers had sprung up between the bricks, and with the tip of her open sunshade Madame Bovary, as she passed, made some of their faded flowers crumble into a yellow dust, or a spray of overhanging honeysuckle and clematis caught in its fringe and dangled for a moment over the silk.
"Are you going?" she asked.
"If I can," he answered.
She often stopped a moment to look where to place her foot, and tottering on a stone that shook, her arms outspread, her form bent forward with a look of indecision, she would laugh, afraid of falling into the puddles of water.
When they arrived in front of her garden, Madame Bovary opened the little gate, ran up the steps and disappeared.
"How bored I am!" he said to himself, "how bored I am!"
He thought he was to be pitied for living in this village, with Homais for a friend and Monsieru Guillaumin for master. The latter, entirely absorbed by his business, wearing gold-rimmed spectacles and red whiskers over a white cravat, understood nothing of mental refinements, although he affected a stiff English manner, which in the beginning had impressed the clerk.
Binet, a few shopkeepers, two or three publicans, the cure, and finally, Monsieur Tuvache, the mayor, with his two sons, rich, crabbed, obtuse persons, who farmed their own lands and had feasts among themselves, bigoted to boot, and quite unbearable companions.
But from the general background of all these human faces Emma's stood out isolated and yet farthest off; for between her and him he seemed to see a vague abyss.
In the beginning he had called on her several times along with the druggist. Charles had not appeared particularly anxious to see him again, and Leon did not know what to do between his fear of being indiscreet and the desire for an intimacy that seemed almost impossible.
When the first cold days set in Emma left her bedroom for the sitting-room, a long apartment with a low ceiling, in which there was on the mantelpiece a large bunch of coral spread out against the looking-glass.
Seated in her arm chair near the window, she could see the villagers pass along the pavement.
Twice a day Leon went from his office to the Lion d'Or.
Emma could hear him coming from afar; she leant forward listening, and the young man glided past the curtain, always dressed in the same way, and without turning his head.
But in the twilight, when, her chin resting on her left hand, she let the embroidery she had begun fall on her knees, she often shuddered at the apparition of this shadow suddenly gliding past.
Skull-cap in hand, he came in on tiptoe, in order to disturb no one, always repeating the same phrase, "Good evening, everybody." Then, when he had taken his seat at the table between the pair, he asked the doctor about his patients, and the latter consulted his as to the probability of their payment.
Homais by this hour knew it almost by heart, and he repeated it from end to end, with the reflections of the penny-a-liners, and all the stories of individual catastrophes that had occurred in France or abroad.
But the subject becoming exhausted, he was not slow in throwing out some remarks on the dishes before him. Sometimes even, half-rising, he delicately pointed out to madame the tenderest morsel, or turning to the servant, gave her some advice on the manipulation of stews and the hygiene of seasoning.
Moreover, Homais, with his head fuller of recipes than his shop of jars, excelled in making all kinds of preserves, vinegars, and sweet liqueurs; he knew also all the latest inventions in economic stoves, together with the art of preserving cheese and of curing sick wines.
Then Monsieur Homais gave him a sly look, especially if Felicite was there, for he half noticed that his apprentice was fond of the doctor's house.
"The young dog," he said, "is beginning to have ideas, and the devil take me if I don't believe he's in love with your servant!"
But a more serious fault with which he reproached Justin was his constantly listening to conversation.
Not many people came to these soirees at the chemist's, his scandal-mongering and political opinions having successfully alienated various respectable persons from him.
As soon as he heard the bell he ran to meet Madame Bovary, took her shawl, and put away under the shop-counter the thick list shoes that she wore over her boots when there was snow.
First they played some hands at trente-et-un; next Monsieur Homais played ecarte with Emma; Leon behind her gave her advice.
Standing up with his hands on the back of her chair he saw the teeth of her comb that bit into her chignon.
With every movement that she made to throw her cards the right side of her dress was drawn up.
From her turned-up hair a dark colour fell over her back, and growing gradually paler, lost itself little by little in the shade.
Then her dress fell on both sides of her chair, puffing out full of folds, and reached the ground.
When Leon occasionally felt the sole of his boot resting on it, he drew back as if he had trodden upon some one.
When the game of cards was over, the druggist and the Doctor played dominoes, and Emma, changing her place, leant her elbow on the table, turning over the leaves of "L'Illustration".
She had brought her ladies' journal with her.
Leon sat down near her; they looked at the engravings together, and waited for one another at the bottom of the pages.
She often begged him to read her the verses; Leon declaimed them in a languid voice, to which he carefully gave a dying fall in the love passages.
Monsieur Homais was strong at the game; he could beat Charles and give him a double-six.
Leon stopped, pointing with a gesture to his sleeping audience; then they talked in low tones, and their conversation seemed the more sweet to them because it was unheard.
On his birthday he received a beautiful phrenological head, all marked with figures to the thorax and painted blue.
He showed him many others, even to doing errands for him at Rouen; and the book of a novelist having made the mania for cactuses fashionable, Leon bought some for Madame Bovary, bringing them back on his knees in the "Hirondelle," pricking his fingers on their hard hairs.
She had a board with a balustrade fixed against her window to hold the pots. The clerk, too, had his small hanging garden; they saw each other tending their flowers at their windows.
One evening on coming home Leon found in his room a rug in velvet and wool with leaves on a pale ground.
He called Madame Homais, Monsieur Homais, Justin, the children, the cook; he spoke of it to his chief; every one wanted to see this rug.
They decided that she must be his lover.
He made this seem likely, so ceaselessly did he talk of her charms and of her wit; so much so, that Binet once roughly answered him
"What does it matter to me since I'm not in her set?"
He tortured himself to find out how he could make his declaration to her, and always halting between the fear of displeasing her and the shame of being such a coward, he wept with discouragement and desire.
Then he took energetic resolutions, wrote letters that he tore up, put it off to times that he again deferred.
Often he set out with the determination to dare all; but this resolution soon deserted him in Emma's presence, and when Charles, dropping in, invited him to jump into his chaise to go with him to see some patient in the neighbourhood, he at once accepted, bowed to madame, and went out.
Her husband, was he not something belonging to her?
As to Emma, she did not ask herself whether she loved.
Love, she thought, must come suddenly, with great outbursts and lightningsa hurricane of the skies, which falls upon life, revolutionises it, roots up the will like a leaf, and sweeps the whole heart into the abyss.
She did not know that on the terrace of houses it makes lakes when the pipes are choked, and she would thus have remained in her security when she suddenly discovered a rent in the wall of it.
The druggist had taken Napoleon and Athalie to give them some exercise, and Justin accompanied them, carrying the umbrellas on his shoulder.
He explained to the company the future importance of this establishment, computed the strength of the floorings, the thickness of the walls, and regretted extremely not having a yard-stick such as Monsieur Binet possessed for his own special use.
Emma, who had taken his arm, bent lightly against his shoulder, and she looked at the sun's disc shedding afar through the mist his pale splendour.
His cap was drawn down over his eyebrows, and his two thick lips were trembling, which added a look of stupidity to his face; his very back, his calm back, was irritating to behold, and she saw written upon his coat all the platitude of the bearer.
While she was considering him thus, tasting in her irritation a sort of depraved pleasure, Leon made a step forward.
The cold that made him pale seemed to add a more gentle languor to his face; between his cravat and his neck the somewhat loose collar of his shirt showed the skin; the lobe of his ear looked out from beneath a lock of hair, and his large blue eyes, raised to the clouds, seemed to Emma more limpid and more beautiful than those mountain-lakes where the heavens are mirrored.
"Wretched boy!" suddenly cried the chemist. And he ran to his son, who had just precipitated himself into a heap of lime in order to whiten his boots.
At the reproaches with which he was being overwhelmed Napoleon began to roar, while Justin dried his shoes with a wisp of straw.
But a knife was wanted; Charles offered his.
"Ah!" she said to herself, "he carried a knife in his pocket like a peasant."
In the evening Madame Bovary did not go to her neighbour's, and when Charles had left and she felt herself alone, the comparison re-began with the clearness of a sensation almost actual, and with that lengthening of perspective which memory gives to things. Looking from her bed at the clean fire that was burning, she still saw, as she had down there, Leon standing up with one hand behind his cane, and with the other holding Athalie, who was quietly sucking a piece of ice. She thought him charming; she could not tear herself away from him; she recalled his other attitudes on other days, the words he had spoken, the sound of his voice, his whole person; and she repeated, pouting out her lips as if for a kiss
"Yes, charming! charming! Is he not in love?" she asked herself; "but with whom?
All the proofs arose before her at once; her heart leapt.
The flame of the fire threw a joyous light upon the ceiling; she turned on her back, stretching out her arms.
When Charles came home at midnight, she seemed to have just awakened, and as he made a noise undressing, she complained of a headache, then asked carelessly what had happened that evening.
"Monsieur Leon," he said, "went to his room early."
She could not help smiling, and she fell asleep, her soul filled with a new delight.
The next day, at dusk, she received a visit from Monsieur Lherueux, the draper.
He was a man of ability, was this shopkeeper.
Born a Gascon but bred a Norman, he grafted upon his southern volubility the cunning of the Cauchois.
His fat, flabby, beardless face seemed dyed by a decoction of liquorice, and his white hair made even more vivid the keen brilliance of his small black eyes.
No one knew what he had been formerly; a pedlar said some, a banker at Routot according to others.
What was certain was that he made complex calculations in his head that would have frightened Binet himself.
Polite to obsequiousness, he always held himself with his back bent in the position of one who bows or who invites.
After leaving at the door his hat surrounded with crape, he put down a green bandbox on the table, and began by complaining to madame, with many civilities, that he should have remained till that day without gaining her confidence.
A poor shop like his was not made to attract a "fashionable lady"; he emphasized the words; yet she had only to command, and he would undertake to provide her with anything she might wish, either in haberdashery or linen, millinery or fancy goods, for he went to town regularly four times a month.
To-day, then he had come to show madame, in passing, various articles he happened to have, thanks to the most rare opportunity.
And he pulled out half-a-dozen embroidered collars from the box.
Madame Bovary examined them. "I do not require anything," she said.
Then, with both hands on the table, his neck stretched out, his figure bent forward, open-mouthed, he watched Emma's look, who was walking up and down undecided amid these goods.
From time to time, as if to remove some dust, he filliped with his nail the silk of the scarves spread out at full length, and they rustled with a little noise, making in the green twilight the gold spangles of their tissue scintillate like little stars.
"A mere nothing," he replied, "a mere nothing.
"I wanted to tell you," he went on good-naturedly, after his joke, "that it isn't the money I should trouble about.
"Ah!" said he quickly and in a low voice, "I shouldn't have to go far to find you some, rely on that."
And he began asking after Pere Tellier, the proprietor of the "Cafe Francais," whom Monsieur Bovary was then attending.
He coughs so that he shakes his whole house, and I'm afraid he'll soon want a deal covering rather than a flannel vest.
He was such a rake as a young man!
Those sort of people, madame, have not the least regularity; he's burnt up with brandy.
And while he fastened up his box he discoursed about the doctor's patients.
"It's the weather, no doubt," he said, looking frowningly at the floor, "that causes these illnesses.
And he closed the door gently.
Emma had her dinner served in her bedroom on a tray by the fireside; she was a long time over it; everything was well with her.
"How good I was!" she said to herself, thinking of the scarves.
When he came in she seemed very busy.
The conversation languished; Madame Bovary gave it up every few minutes, whilst he himself seemed quite embarrassed.
Seated on a low chair near the fire, he turned round in his fingers the ivory thimble-case.
She stitched on, or from time to time turned down the hem of the cloth with her nail.
She did not speak; he was silent, captivated by her silence, as he would have been by her speech.
"Poor fellow!" she thought.
"How have I displeased her?" he asked himself.
At last, however, Leon said that he should have, one of these days, to go to Rouen on some office business.
"No," she replied.
And pursing her lips she slowly drew a long stitch of grey thread.
This work irritated Leon. It seemed to roughen the ends of her fingers.
A gallant phrase came into his head, but he did not risk it.
"Then you are giving it up?" he went on.
"What?" she asked hurriedly.
Then, she affected anxiety.
Two or three times she even repeated, "He is so good!"
But this tenderness on his behalf astonished him unpleasantly; nevertheless he took up on his praises, which he said everyone was singing, especially the chemist.
"Ah! he is a good fellow," continued Emma.
And he began talking of Madame Homais, whose very untidy appearance generally made them laugh.
"What does it matter?" interrupted Emma. "A good housewife does not trouble about her appearance."
Then she relapsed into silence.
It was the same on the following days; her talks, her manners, everything changed.
She took interest in the housework, went to church regularly, and looked after her servant with more severity.
When visitors called, Felicite brought her in, and Madame Bovary undressed her to show off her limbs.
She declared she adored children; this was her consolation, her joy, her passion, and she accompanied her caresses with lyrical outburst which would have reminded anyone but the Yonville people of Sachette in "Notre Dame de Paris."
When Charles came home he found his slippers put to warm near the fire.
His waistcoat now never wanted lining, nor his shirt buttons, and it was quite a pleasure to see in the cupboard the night-caps arranged in piles of the same height.
She no longer grumbled as formerly at taking a turn in the garden; what he proposed was always done, although she did not understand the wishes to which she submitted without a murmur; and when Leon saw him by his fireside after dinner, his two hands on his stomach, his two feet on the fender, his two cheeks red with feeding, his eyes moist with happiness, the child crawling along the carpet, and this woman with the slender waist who came behind his arm-chair to kiss his forehead: "What madness!" he said to himself. "And how to reach her!"
And thus she seemed so virtuous and inaccessible to him that he lost all hope, even the faintest.
But by this renunciation he placed her on an extraordinary pinnacle.
To him she stood outside those fleshly attributes from which he had nothing to obtain, and in his heart she rose ever, and became farther removed from him after the magnificent manner of an apotheosis that is taking wing.
Emma grew thinner, her cheeks paler, her face longer.
With her black hair, her large eyes, her aquiline nose, her birdlike walk, and always silent now, did she not seem to be passing through life scarcely touching it, and to bear on her brow the vague impress of some divine destiny?
She was so sad and so calm, at once so gentle and so reserved, that near her one felt oneself seized by an icy charm, as we shudder in churches at the perfume of the flowers mingling with the cold of the marble.
"She is a woman of great parts, who wouldn't be misplaced in a sub-prefecture."
The housewives admired her economy, the patients her politeness, the poor her charity.
But she was eaten up with desires, with rage, with hate.
She was in love with Leon, and sought solitude that she might with the more ease delight in his image.
The sight of his form troubled the voluptuousness of this mediation.
Emma thrilled at the sound of his step; then in his presence the emotion subsided, and afterwards there remained to her only an immense astonishment that ended in sorrow.
Leon did not know that when he left her in despair she rose after he had gone to see him in the street.
She concerned herself about his comings and goings; she watched his face; she invented quite a history to find an excuse for going to his room.
The chemist's wife seemed happy to her to sleep under the same roof, and her thoughts constantly centered upon this house, like the "Lion d'Or" pigeons, who came there to dip their red feet and white wings in its gutters.
But the more Emma recognised her love, the more she crushed it down, that it might not be evident, that she might make it less.
She would have liked Leon to guess it, and she imagined chances, catastrophes that should facilitate this.
What restrained her was, no doubt, idleness and fear, and a sense of shame also.
She thought she had repulsed him too much, that the time was past, that all was lost.
Then, pride, and joy of being able to say to herself, "I am virtuous," and to look at herself in the glass taking resigned poses, consoled her a little for the sacrifice she believed she was making.
Then the lusts of the flesh, the longing for money, and the melancholy of passion all blended themselves into one suffering, and instead of turning her thoughts from it, she clave to it the more, urging herself to pain, and seeking everywhere occasion for it. She was irritated by an ill-served dish or by a half-open door; bewailed the velvets she had not, the happiness she had missed, her too exalted dreams, her narrow home.
What exasperated her was that Charles did not seem to notice her anguish.
His conviction that he was making her happy seemed to her an imbecile insult, and his sureness on this point ingratitude.
For whose sake, then was she virtuous?
Was it not for him, the obstacle to all felicity, the cause of all misery, and, as it were, the sharp clasp of that complex strap that bucked her in on all sides.
On him alone, then, she concentrated all the various hatreds that resulted from her boredom, and every effort to diminish only augmented it; for this useless trouble was added to the other reasons for despair, and contributed still more to the separation between them.
Her own gentleness to herself made her rebel against him.
Domestic mediocrity drove her to lewd fancies, marriage tenderness to adulterous desires.
She would have liked Charles to beat her, that she might have a better right to hate him, to revenge herself upon him.
She was surprised sometimes at the atrocious conjectures that came into her thoughts, and she had to go on smiling, to hear repeated to her at all hours that she was happy, to pretend to be happy, to let it be believed.
Yet she had loathing of this hypocrisy.
She was seized with the temptation to flee somewhere with Leon to try a new life; but at once a vague chasm full of darkness opened within her soul.
"Besides, he no longer loves me," she thought. "What is to become of me?
"Why don't you tell master?" the servant asked her when she came in during these crises.
"Ah! yes," Felicite went on, "you are just like La Guerine, Pere Guerin's daughter, the fisherman at Pollet, that I used to know at Dieppe before I came to you.
She was so sad, so sad, to see her standing upright on the threshold of her house, she seemed to you like a winding-sheet spread out before the door.
Her illness, it appears, was a kind of fog that she had in her head, and the doctors could not do anything, nor the priest either.
When she was taken too bad she went off quite alone to the sea-shore, so that the customs officer, going his rounds, often found her lying flat on her face, crying on the shingle.
Then, after her marriage, it went off, they say."
One evening when the window was open, and she, sitting by it, had been watching Lestiboudois, the beadle, trimming the box, she suddenly heard the Angelus ringing.
With this repeated tinkling the thoughts of the young woman lost themselves in old memories of her youth and school-days.
At mass on Sundays, when she looked up, she saw the gentle face of the Virgin amid the blue smoke of the rising incense. Then she was moved; she felt herself weak and quite deserted, like the down of a bird whirled by the tempest, and it was unconsciously that she went towards the church, included to no matter what devotions, so that her soul was absorbed and all existence lost in it.
On the Place she met Lestivoudois on his way back, for, in order not to shorten his day's labour, he preferred interrupting his work, then beginning it again, so that he rang the Angelus to suit his own convenience. Besides, the ringing over a little earlier warned the lads of catechism hour.
"He is just coming," he answered.
Then, picking up a catechism all in rags that he had struck with is foot, "They respect nothing!" But as soon as he caught sight of Madame Bovary, "Excuse me," he said; "I did not recognise you."
He thrust the catechism into his pocket, and stopped short, balancing the heavy vestry key between his two fingers.
The light of the setting sun that fell full upon his face paled the lasting of his cassock, shiny at the elbows, unravelled at the hem.
Grease and tobacco stains followed along his broad chest the lines of the buttons, and grew more numerous the farther they were from his neckcloth, in which the massive folds of his red chin rested; this was dotted with yellow spots, that disappeared beneath the coarse hair of his greyish beard.
"How are you?" he added.
"He!" she said with a gesture of contempt.
"What!" replied the good fellow, quite astonished, "doesn't he prescribe something for you?"
"I should like to know" she went on.
"You look out, Riboudet," cried the priest in an angry voice; "I'll warm your ears, you imp!" Then turning to Emma, "He's Boudet the carpenter's son; his parents are well off, and let him do just as he pleases.
Yet he could learn quickly if he would, for he is very sharp. And so sometimes for a joke I call him Riboudet (like the road one takes to go to Maromme) and I even say 'Mon Riboudet.'
'Mont Riboudet.' The other day I repeated that just to Monsignor, and he laughed at it; he condescended to laugh at it.
And he went on
"Always very busy, no doubt; for he and I are certainly the busiest people in the parish.
But he is doctor of the body," he added with a thick laugh, "and I of the soul."
She fixed her pleading eyes upon the priest.
"Yes," she said, "you solace all sorrows."
But the priest suddenly distributed a shower of cuffs among them. Seizing them by the collars of their coats, he lifted them from the ground, and deposited them on their knees on the stones of the choir, firmly, as if he meant planting them there.
"Yes," said he, when he returned to Emma, unfolding his large cotton handkerchief, one corner of which he put between his teeth, "farmers are much to be pitied."
"Others, too," she replied.
"But those," replied Emma, and the corners of her mouth twitched as she spoke, "those, Monsieur le Cure, who have bread and have no"
"My God! my God!" she sighed.
"Why?" And she looked like one awaking from a dream.
And the glance she cast round her slowly fell upon the old man in the cassock.
"Then, Madame Bovary," he said at last, "excuse me, but duty first, you know; I must look after my good-for-nothings.
One cannot lead them too soon into the path of the Lord, as, moreover, he has himself recommended us to do by the mouth of his Divine Son.
And he went into the church making a genuflexion as soon as he reached the door.
Emma saw him disappear between the double row of forms, walking with a heavy tread, his head a little bent over his shoulder, and with his two hands half-open behind him.
Then she turned on her heel all of one piece, like a statue on a pivot, and went homewards.
But the loud voice of the priest, the clear voices of the boys still reached her ears, and went on behind her.
She went up the steps of the staircase holding on to the banisters, and when she was in her room threw herself into an arm-chair.
But little Berthe was there, between the window and the work-table, tottering on her knitted shoes, and trying to come to her mother to catch hold of the ends of her apron-strings.
"Leave me alone," said the latter, putting her from her with her hand.
The little girl soon came up closer against her knees, and leaning on them with her arms, she looked up with her large blue eyes, while a small thread of pure saliva dribbled from her lips on to the silk apron.
"Leave me alone," repeated the young woman quite irritably.
"Will you leave me alone?" she said, pushing her with her elbow.
Berthe fell at the foot of the drawers against the brass handle, cutting her cheek, which began to bleed, against it.
Madame Bovary sprang to lift her up, broke the bell-rope, called for the servant with all her might, and she was just going to curse herself when Charles appeared.
It was the dinner-hour; he had come home.
"Look, dear!" said Emma, in a calm voice, "the little one fell down while she was playing, and has hurt herself."
Charles reassured her; the case was not a serious one, and he went for some sticking plaster.
Madame Bovary did not go downstairs to the dining-room; she wished to remain alone to look after the child.
Then watching her sleep, the little anxiety she felt gradually wore off, and she seemed very stupid to herself, and very good to have been so worried just now at so little.
Big tears lay in the corner of the half-closed eyelids, through whose lashes one could see two pale sunken pupils; the plaster stuck on her cheek drew the skin obliquely.
When at eleven o'clock Charles came back from the chemist's shop, whither he had gone after dinner to return the remainder of the sticking-plaster, he found his wife standing by the cradle.
"I assure you it's nothing." he said, kissing her on the forehead. "Don't worry, my poor darling; you will make yourself ill."
Although he had not seemed much moved, Homais, nevertheless, had exerted himself to buoy him up, to "keep up his spirits."
Madame Homais knew something of it, having still upon her chest the marks left by a basin full of soup that a cook had formerly dropped on her pinafore, and her good parents took no end of trouble for her.
The knives were not sharpened, nor the floors waxed; there were iron gratings to the windows and strong bars across the fireplace; the little Homais, in spite of their spirit, could not stir without someone watching them; at the slightest cold their father stuffed them with pectorals; and until they were turned four they all, without pity, had to wear wadded head-protectors.
This, it is true, was a fancy of Madame Homais'; her husband was inwardly afflicted at it. Fearing the possible consequences of such compression to the intellectual organs.
He even went so far as to say to her, "Do you want to make Caribs or Botocudos of them?"
"I should like to speak to you," he had whispered in the clerk's ear, who went upstairs in front of him.
"Can he suspect anything?" Leon asked himself.
His heart beat, and he racked his brain with surmises.
It was a sentimental surprise he intended for his wife, a delicate attentionhis portrait in a frock-coat.
But he wanted first to know "how much it would be."
The inquiries would not put Monsieur Leon out, since he went to town almost every week.
Why? Monsieur Homais suspected some "young man's affair" at the bottom of it, an intrigue.
But he was mistaken.
He was sadder than ever, as Madame Lefrancois saw from the amount of food he left on his plate.
To find out more about it she questioned the tax-collector. Binet answered roughly that he "wasn't paid by the police."
All the same, his companion seemed very strange to him, for Leon often threw himself back in his chair, and stretching out his arms. Complained vaguely of life.
"Ah! that's true," said the other, rubbing his chin with an air of mingled contempt and satisfaction.
Leon was weary of loving without any result; moreover he was beginning to feel that depression caused by the repetition of the same kind of life, when no interest inspires and no hope sustains it. He was so bored with Yonville and its inhabitants, that the sight of certain persons, of certain houses, irritated him beyond endurance; and the chemist, good fellow though he was, was becoming absolutely unbearable to him. Yet the prospect of a new condition of life frightened as much as it seduced him.
As he was to finish reading there, why not set out at once?
What prevented him? And he began making home-preparations; he arranged his occupations beforehand.
He furnished in his head an apartment. He would lead an artist's life there!
He even already was admiring two crossed foils over his chimney-piece, with a death's head on the guitar above them.
The difficulty was the consent of his mother; nothing, however, seemed more reasonable.
Even his employer advised him to go to some other chambers where he could advance more rapidly.
Taking a middle course, then, Leon looked for some place as second clerk at Rouen; found none, and at last wrote his mother a long letter full of details, in which he set forth the reasons for going to live at Paris immediately.
He did not hurry. Every day for a month Hivert carried boxes, valises, parcels for him from Yonville to Rouen and from Rouen to Yonville; and when Leon had packed up his wardrobe, had his three arm-chairs restuffed, bought a stock of neckties, in a word, had made more preparations than for a voyage around the world, he put it off from week to week, until he received a second letter from his mother urging him to leave, since he wanted to pass his examination before the vacation.
When the moment for the farewells had come, Madame Homais wept, Justin sobbed; Homais, as a man of nerve, concealed his emotion; he wished to carry his friend's overcoat himself as far as the gate of the notary, who was taking Leon to Rouen in his carriage.
When he reached the head of the stairs, he stopped, he was so out of breath.
As he came in, Madame Bovary arose hurriedly.
She bit her lips, and a rush of blood flowing under her skin made her red from the roots of her hair to the top of her collar.
She remained standing, leaning with her shoulder against the wainscot.
"The doctor is not here?" he went on.
He threw one long look around him that took in the walls, the decorations, the fireplace, as if to penetrate everything, carry away everything. But she returned, and the servant brought Berthe, who was swinging a windmill roof downwards at the end of a string. Leon kissed her several times on the neck.
"Good-bye, poor child! good-bye, dear little one! good-bye!" And he gave her back to her mother.
"Take her away," she said.
They remained aloneMadame Bovary, her back turned, her face pressed against a window-pane; Leon held his cap in his hand, knocking it softly against his thigh.
"I have a cloak," he answered.
She turned around, her chin lowered, her forehead bent forward.
The light fell on it as on a piece of marble, to the curve of the eyebrows, without one's being able to guess what Emma was seeing on the horizon or what she was thinking within herself.
"Well, good-bye," he sighed.
She raised her head with a quick movement.
They advanced towards each other; he held out his hand; she hesitated.
"In the English fashion, then," she said, giving her own hand wholly to him, and forcing a laugh.
Leon felt it between his fingers, and the very essence of all his being seemed to pass down into that moist palm.
Then he opened his hand; their eyes met again, and he disappeared.
When he reached the market-place, he stopped and hid behind a pillar to look for the last time at this white house with the four green blinds.
He thought he saw a shadow behind the window in the room; but the curtain, sliding along the pole as though no one were touching it, slowly opened its long oblique folds that spread out with a single movement, and thus hung straight and motionless as a plaster wall.
From afar he saw his employer's gig in the road, and by it a man in a coarse apron holding the horse.
"Embrace me," said the druggist with tears in his eyes.
"Good-night," said Monsieur Guillaumin. "Give him his head."
Madame Bovary had opened her window overlooking the garden and watched the clouds.
"Ah! how far off he must be already!" she thought.
"Well," said he, "so we've sent off our young friend!"
Then turning on his chair; "Any news at home?"
"Poor Leon!" said Charles. "How will he live at Paris?
Will he get used to it?"
"Get along!" said the chemist, smacking his lips.
"I don't think he'll go wrong," objected Bovary.
"Nor do I," said Monsieur Homais quickly; "although he'll have to do like the rest for fear of passing for a Jesuit.
He approaches you, he insinuates himself; offers you a pinch of snuff, or picks up your hat.
Then you become more intimate; he takes you to a cafe, invites you to his country-house, introduces you, between two drinks, to all sorts of people; and three-fourths of the time it's only to plunder your watch or lead you into some pernicious step.
And thus he went on, expounding his opinions generally and his personal likings, until Justin came to fetch him for a mulled egg that was wanted.
"Not a moment's peace!" he cried; "always at it!
What drudgery!" Then, when he was at the door, "By the way, do you know the news?"
"That it is very likely," Homais went on, raising his eyebrows and assuming one of his most serious expression, "that the agricultural meeting of the Seine-Inferieure will be held this year at Yonville-l'Abbaye.
Everything seemed to her enveloped in a black atmosphere floating confusedly over the exterior of things, and sorrow was engulfed within her soul with soft shrieks such as the winter wind makes in ruined castles.
As on the return from Vaubyessard, when the quadrilles were running in her head, she was full of a gloomy melancholy, of a numb despair.
Though separated from her, he had not left her; he was there, and the walls of the house seemed to hold his shadow.
She could not detach her eyes from the carpet where he had walked, from those empty chairs where he had sat.
Ah! he was gone, the only charm of her life, the only possible hope of joy. Why had she not seized this happiness when it came to her?
Why not have kept hold of it with both hands, with both knees, when it was about to flee from her?
And she cursed herself for not having loved Leon.
She thirsted for his lips.
The wish took possession of her to run after and rejoin him, throw herself into his arms and say to him, "It is I; I am yours."
But Emma recoiled beforehand at the difficulties of the enterprise, and her desires, increased by regret, became only the more acute.
Henceforth the memory of Leon was the centre of her boredom; it burnt there more brightly than the fire travellers have left on the snow of a Russian steppe. She sprang towards him, she pressed against him, she stirred carefully the dying embers, sought all around her anything that could revive it; and the most distant reminiscences, like the most immediate occasions, what she experienced as well as what she imagined, her voluptuous desires that were unsatisfied, her projects of happiness that crackled in the wind like dead boughs, her sterile virtue, her lost hopes, the domestic tete-a-teteshe gathered it all up, took everything, and made it all serve as fuel for her melancholy.
Love, little by little, was quelled by absence; regret stifled beneath habit; and this incendiary light that had empurpled her pale sky was overspread and faded by degrees.
In the supineness of her conscience she even took her repugnance towards her husband for aspirations towards her lover, the burning of hate for the warmth of tenderness; but as the tempest still raged, and as passion burnt itself down to the very cinders, and no help came, no sun rose, there was night on all sides, and she was lost in the terrible cold that pierced her.
She thought herself now far more unhappy; for she had the experience of grief, with the certainty that it would not end.
A woman who had laid on herself such sacrifices could well allow herself certain whims. She bought a Gothic prie-dieu, and in a month spent fourteen francs on lemons for polishing her nails; she wrote to Rouen for a blue cashmere gown; she chose one of Lheureux's finest scarves, and wore it knotted around her waist over her dressing-gown; and, with closed blinds and a book in her hand, she lay stretched out on a couch in this garb.
She often changed her coiffure; she did her hair a la Chinoise, in flowing curls, in plaited coils; she parted in on one side and rolled it under like a man's.
She wanted to learn Italian; she bought dictionaries, a grammar, and a supply of white paper. She tried serious reading, history, and philosophy.
Sometimes in the night Charles woke up with a start, thinking he was being called to a patient. "I'm coming," he stammered; and it was the noise of a match Emma had struck to relight the lamp.
But her reading fared like her piece of embroidery, all of which, only just begun, filled her cupboard; she took it up, left it, passed on to other books.
She had attacks in which she could easily have been driven to commit any folly.
She maintained one day, in opposition to her husband, that she could drink off a large glass of brandy, and, as Charles was stupid enough to dare her to, she swallowed the brandy to the last drop.
In spite of her vapourish airs (as the housewives of Yonville called them), Emma, all the same, never seemed gay, and usually she had at the corners of her mouth that immobile contraction that puckers the faces of old maids, and those of men whose ambition has failed.
She was pale all over, white as a sheet; the skin of her nose was drawn at the nostrils, her eyes looked at you vaguely.
After discovering three grey hairs on her temples, she talked much of her old age.
One day she even spat blood, and, as Charles fussed around her showing his anxiety
"Bah!" she answered, "what does it matter?"
Charles fled to his study and wept there, both his elbows on the table, sitting in an arm-chair at his bureau under the phrenological head.
Then he wrote to his mother begging her to come, and they had many long consultations together on the subject of Emma.
If she were obliged, like so many others, to earn her living, she wouldn't have these vapours, that come to her from a lot of ideas she stuffs into her head, and from the idleness in which she lives."
"Yet she is always busy," said Charles.
She was, when she passed through Rouen, to go herself to the lending-library and represent that Emma had discontinued her subscription.
Would they not have a right to apply to the police if the librarian persisted all the same in his poisonous trade?
The farewells of mother and daughter-in-law were cold.
On Wednesdays his shop was never empty, and the people pushed in less to buy drugs than for consultations.
Emma was leaning out at the window; she was often there.
The window in the provinces replaces the theatre and the promenade, she was amusing herself with watching the crowd of boors when she saw a gentleman in a green velvet coat.
He had on yellow gloves, although he wore heavy gaiters; he was coming towards the doctor's house, followed by a peasant walking with a bent head and quite a thoughtful air.
"Can I see the doctor?" he asked Justin, who was talking on the doorsteps with Felicite, and, taking him for a servant of the house"Tell him that Monsieur Rodolphe Boulanger of La Huchette is here."
It was not from territorial vanity that the new arrival added "of La Huchette" to his name, but to make himself the better known.
La Huchette, in fact, was an estate near Yonville, where he had just bought the chateau and two farms that he cultivated himself, without, however, troubling very much about them.
Monsieur Boulanger introduced his man, who wanted to be bled because he felt "a tingling all over."
"That'll purge me," he urged as an objection to all reasoning.
And with an air of bravado he held out his great arm.
"Sometimes," answered the doctor, "one feels nothing at first, and then syncope sets in, and more especially with people of strong constitution like this man."
At these words the rustic let go the lancet-case he was twisting between his fingers. A shudder of his shoulders made the chair-back creak.
The basin was beginning to tremble in Justin's hands; his knees shook, he turned pale.
With one bound she came down the staircase.
"Some vinegar," he cried.
And in his emotion he could hardly put on the compress.
"It is nothing," said Monsieur Boulanger quietly, taking Justin in his arms.
He seated him on the table with his back resting against the wall.
Madame Bovary began taking off his cravat.
The strings of his shirt had got into a knot, and she was for some minutes moving her light fingers about the young fellow's neck.
Then she poured some vinegar on her cambric handkerchief; she moistened his temples with little dabs, and then blew upon them softly.
The ploughman revived, but Justin's syncope still lasted, and his eyeballs disappeared in the pale sclerotics like blue flowers in milk.
With the movement she made in bending down, her dress (it was a summer dress with four flounces, yellow, long in the waist and wide in the skirt) spread out around her on the flags of the room; and as Emma stooping, staggered a little as she stretched out her arms.
The stuff here and there gave with the inflections of her bust.
Then she went to fetch a bottle of water, and she was melting some pieces of sugar when the chemist arrived.
Seeing his pupil's eyes staring he drew a long breath; then going around him he looked at him from head to foot.
"Fool!" he said, "really a little fool!
And a fellow who isn't afraid of anything; a kind of squirrel, just as he is who climbs to vertiginous heights to shake down nuts.
Here's a fine fitness for practising pharmacy later on; for under serious circumstances you may be called before the tribunals in order to enlighten the minds of the magistrates, and you would have to keep your head then, to reason, show yourself a man, or else pass for an imbecile."
When Justin, who was rearranging his dress, had gone, they talked for a little while about fainting-fits.
Monsieur Boulanger, however, dismissed his servant, advising him to calm himself, since his fancy was over.
"It procured me the advantage of making your acquaintance," he added, and he looked at Emma as he said this.
Then he put three francs on the corner of the table, bowed negligently, and went out.
He was soon on the other side of the river (this was his way back to La Huchette), and Emma saw him in the meadow, walking under the poplars, slackening his pace now and then as one who reflects.
"She is very pretty," he said to himself; "she is very pretty, this doctor's wife.
Where the devil does she come from?
Wherever did that fat fellow pick her up?"
Monsieur Rodolphe Boulanger was thirty-four; he was of brutal temperament and intelligent perspicacity, having, moreover, had much to do with women, and knowing them well.
This one had seemed pretty to him; so he was thinking about her and her husband.
"I think he is very stupid.
While he is trotting after his patients, she sits there botching socks.
And she gets bored!
Poor little woman!
With three words of gallantry she'd adore one, I'm sure of it.
Yes; but how to get rid of her afterwards?"
Then the difficulties of love-making seen in the distance made him by contrast think of his mistress. She was an actress at Rouen, whom he kept; and when he had pondered over this image, with which, even in remembrance, he was satiated
"Ah! Madame Bovary," he thought, "is much prettier, especially fresher.
She is so finiky about her pleasures; and, besides, she has a mania for prawns."
The fields were empty, and around him Rodolphe only heard the regular beating of the grass striking against his boots, with a cry of the grasshopper hidden at a distance among the oats.
He again saw Emma in her room, dressed as he had seen her, and he undressed her.
"Oh, I will have her," he cried, striking a blow with his stick at a clod in front of him.
And he at once began to consider the political part of the enterprise.
Then he resumed, "She really has eyes that pierce one's heart like a gimlet.
When he reached the top of the Arguiel hills he had made up his mind.
By Jove!" added he, "there's the agricultural show coming on.
I shall see her.
On that day he wore a collar even higher than usual; and, tightly buttoned in his tunic, his figure was so stiff and motionless that the whole vital portion of his person seemed to have descended into his legs, which rose in a cadence of set steps with a single movement.
Standing on her kitchen-steps she muttered to herself,
Excuse me, I am in a hurry." And as the fat widow asked where he was going
"It seems odd to you, doesn't it, I who am always more cooped up in my laboratory than the man's rat in his cheese."
"Oh, you're going down there!" she said contemptuously.
The landlady never took her eyes off the "Cafe Francois" and the chemist went on
"Just look at them!" she said. "It's past comprehension!
Such a cookshop as that!" And with a shrug of the shoulders that stretched out over her breast the stitches of her knitted bodice, she pointed with both hands at her rival's inn, whence songs were heard issuing.
"Well, it won't last long," she added. "It'll be over before a week."
She came down three steps and whispered in his ear
It's Lheureux who is selling him out; he has killed him with bills."
Then the landlady began telling him the story that she had heard from Theodore, Monsieur Guillaumin's servant, and although she detested Tellier, she blamed Lheureux.
"There!" she said.
"Look at him! he is in the market; he is bowing to Madame Bovary, who's got on a green bonnet.
Why, she's taking Monsieur Boulanger's arm."
"Madame Bovary!" exclaimed Homais. "I must go at once and pay her my respects.
Perhaps she'll be very glad to have a seat in the enclosure under the peristyle." And, without heeding Madame Lefrancois, who was calling him back to tell him more about it, the druggist walked off rapidly with a smile on his lips, with straight knees, bowing copiously to right and left, and taking up much room with the large tails of his frock-coat that fluttered behind him in the wind.
Rodolphe, having caught sight of him from afar, hurried on, but Madame Bovary lost her breath; so he walked more slowly, and, smiling at her, said in a rough tone
"It's only to get away from that fat fellow, you know, the druggist." She pressed his elbow.
"What's the meaning of that?" he asked himself.
And he looked at her out of the corner of his eyes.
It stood out in the light from the oval of her bonnet, with pale ribbons on it like the leaves of weeds.
Her eyes with their long curved lashes looked straight before her, and though wide open, they seemed slightly puckered by the cheek-bones, because of the blood pulsing gently under the delicate skin.
A pink line ran along the partition between her nostrils. Her head was bent upon her shoulder, and the pearl tips of her white teeth were seen between her lips.
"Is she making fun of me?" thought Rodolphe.
And neither Madame Bovary nor Rodolphe answered him, whilst at the slightest movement made by them he drew near, saying, "I beg your pardon!" and raised his hat.
"How you got rid of him!" she said, laughing.
"Why," he went on, "allow oneself to be intruded upon by others? And as to-day I have the happiness of being with you"
He did not finish his sentence. Then he talked of the fine weather and of the pleasure of walking on the grass.
"Here are some pretty Easter daisies," he said, "and enough of them to furnish oracles to all the amorous maids in the place."
"Are you in love?" she asked, coughing a little.
Apart, outside the enclosure, a hundred paces off, was a large black bull, muzzled, with an iron ring in its nostrils, and who moved no more than if he had been in bronze.
One who seemed of more importance now and then took notes in a book as he walked along.
As soon as he recognised Rodolphe he came forward quickly, and smiling amiably, said
Rodolphe protested that he was just coming.
"Ma foi!*" said he, "I shall not go.
Your company is better than his."
And while poking fun at the show, Rodolphe, to move about more easily, showed the gendarme his blue card, and even stopped now and then in front of some fine beast, which Madame Bovary did not at all admire.
He noticed this, and began jeering at the Yonville ladies and their dresses; then he apologised for the negligence of his own.
Thus his cambric shirt with plaited cuffs was blown out by the wind in the opening of his waistcoat of grey ticking, and his broad-striped trousers disclosed at the ankle nankeen boots with patent leather gaiters.
He trampled on horses's dung with them, one hand in the pocket of his jacket and his straw hat on one side.
"Besides," added he, "when one lives in the country"
"You!" she said in astonishment; "I thought you very light-hearted."
"Oh! and your friends?" she said.
And he accompanied the last words with a kind of whistling of the lips.
But they were obliged to separate from each other because of a great pile of chairs that a man was carrying behind them.
He was so overladen with them that one could only see the tips of his wooden shoes and the ends of his two outstretched arms.
Alive to all that concerned his interests, he had hit upon this means of turning the show to account; and his idea was succeeding, for he no longer knew which way to turn.
Madame Bovary again took Rodolphe's arm; he went on as if speaking to himself
"For, after all," she went on, "you are free" she hesitated, "rich"
"Do not mock me," he replied.
And she protested that she was not mocking him, when the report of a cannon resounded. Immediately all began hustling one another pell-mell towards the village.
Then was seen stepping down from the carriage a gentleman in a short coat with silver braiding, with bald brow, and wearing a tuft of hair at the back of his head, of a sallow complexion and the most benign appearance.
His eyes, very large and covered by heavy lids, were half-closed to look at the crowd, while at the same time he raised his sharp nose, and forced a smile upon his sunken mouth.
He recognised the mayor by his scarf, and explained to him that the prefect was not able to come.
He himself was a councillor at the prefecture; then he added a few apologies.
The councillor pressing his little cocked hat to his breast repeated his bows, while Tuvache, bent like a bow, also smiled, stammered, tried to say something, protested his devotion to the monarchy and the honour that was being done to Yonville.
Hippolyte, the groom from the inn, took the head of the horses from the coachman, and, limping along with his club-foot, led them to the door of the "Lion d'Or", where a number of peasants collected to look at the carriage.
All the waist-coats were of velvet, double-breasted; all the watches had, at the end of a long ribbon, an oval cornelian seal; everyone rested his two hands on his thighs, carefully stretching the stride of their trousers, whose unsponged glossy cloth shone more brilliantly than the leather of their heavy boots.
As a matter of fact, Lestiboudois had brought thither all those that he had moved from the field, and he even kept running back every minute to fetch others from the church.
"I think," said Monsieur Lheureux to the chemist, who was passing to his place, "that they ought to have put up two Venetian masts with something rather severe and rich for ornaments; it would have been a very pretty effect."
The mayor took everything on his own shoulders. He hasn't much taste.
Poor Tuvache! and he is even completely destitute of what is called the genius of art."
Rodolphe, meanwhile, with Madame Bovary, had gone up to the first floor of the town hall, to the "council-room," and, as it was empty, he declared that they could enjoy the sight there more comfortably.
They knew now that his name was Lieuvain, and in the crowd the name was passed from one to the other.
After he had collated a few pages, and bent over them to see better, he began
"This is no longer the time, gentlemen, when civil discord ensanguined our public places, when the landlord, the business-man, the working-man himself, falling asleep at night, lying down to peaceful sleep, trembled lest he should be awakened suddenly by the noise of incendiary tocsins, when the most subversive doctrines audaciously sapped foundations."
"How so?" she asked.
"What!" said he. "Do you not know that there are souls constantly tormented?
Then she looked at him as one looks at a traveller who has voyaged over strange lands, and went on
"But is it ever found?" she asked.
"Yes; one day it comes," he answered.
(And he looked at her.)
And as he ended Rodolphe suited the action to the word.
He passed his hand over his face, like a man seized with giddiness.
Then he let it fall on Emma's.
"Ah! but there are two," he replied. "The small, the conventional, that of men, that which constantly changes, that brays out so loudly, that makes such a commotion here below, of the earth earthly, like the mass of imbeciles you see down there.
Monsieur Lieuvain had just wiped his mouth with a pocket-handkerchief. He continued
Again, is it not the agriculturist who fattens, for our clothes, his abundant flocks in the pastures?
But I should never end if I were to enumerate one after the other all the different products which the earth, well cultivated, like a generous mother, lavishes upon her children.
He had no need to call it, for all the mouths of the multitude were wide open, as if to drink in his words.
Tuvache by his side listened to him with staring eyes.
Monsieur Derozerays from time to time softly closed his eyelids, and farther on the chemist, with his son Napoleon between his knees, put his hand behind his ear in order not to lose a syllable.
The firemen at the foot of the platform rested on their bayonets; and Binet, motionless, stood with out-turned elbows, the point of his sabre in the air.
Perhaps he could hear, but certainly he could see nothing, because of the visor of his helmet, that fell down on his nose.
His lieutenant, the youngest son of Monsieur Tuvache, had a bigger one, for his was enormous, and shook on his head, and from it an end of his cotton scarf peeped out.
He smiled beneath it with a perfectly infantine sweetness, and his pale little face, whence drops were running, wore an expression of enjoyment and sleepiness.
One saw folk leaning on their elbows at all the windows, others standing at doors, and Justin, in front of the chemist's shop, seemed quite transfixed by the sight of what he was looking at.
Rodolphe had drawn nearer to Emma, and said to her in a low voice, speaking rapidly
His arms were folded across his knees, and thus lifting his face towards Emma, close by her, he looked fixedly at her.
She noticed in his eyes small golden lines radiating from black pupils; she even smelt the perfume of the pomade that made his hair glossy.
Then a faintness came over her; she recalled the Viscount who had waltzed with her at Vaubyessard, and his beard exhaled like this air an odour of vanilla and citron, and mechanically she half-closed her eyes the better to breathe it in.
But in making this movement, as she leant back in her chair, she saw in the distance, right on the line of the horizon, the old diligence, the "Hirondelle," that was slowly descending the hill of Leux, dragging after it a long trail of dust. It was in this yellow carriage that Leon had so often come back to her, and by this route down there that he had gone for ever.
She fancied she saw him opposite at his windows; then all grew confused; clouds gathered; it seemed to her that she was again turning in the waltz under the light of the lustres on the arm of the Viscount, and that Leon was not far away, that he was coming; and yet all the time she was conscious of the scent of Rodolphe's head by her side.
This sweetness of sensation pierced through her old desires, and these, like grains of sand under a gust of wind, eddied to and fro in the subtle breath of the perfume which suffused her soul.
She opened wide her nostrils several times to drink in the freshness of the ivy round the capitals.
She took off her gloves, she wiped her hands, then fanned her face with her handkerchief, while athwart the throbbing of her temples she heard the murmur of the crowd and the voice of the councillor intoning his phrases.
From magnetism little by little Rodolphe had come to affinities, and while the president was citing Cincinnatus and his plough, Diocletian, planting his cabbages, and the Emperors of China inaugurating the year by the sowing of seed, the young man was explaining to the young woman that these irresistible attractions find their cause in some previous state of existence.
"Thus we," he said, "why did we come to know one another?
And he seized her hand; she did not withdraw it.
Rodolphe was pressing her hand, and he felt it all warm and quivering like a captive dove that wants to fly away; but, whether she was trying to take it away or whether she was answering his pressure; she made a movement with her fingers.
He was hurrying on: "Flemish manure-flax-growing-drainage-long leases-domestic service."
"Oh, how stupid she is!"
"Yes; here she is."
"Then let her come up!"
Then there came forward on the platform a little old woman with timid bearing, who seemed to shrink within her poor clothes.
On her feet she wore heavy wooden clogs, and from her hips hung a large blue apron.
And from the sleeves of her red jacket looked out two large hands with knotty joints, the dust of barns, the potash of washing the grease of wools had so encrusted, roughened, hardened these that they seemed dirty, although they had been rinsed in clear water; and by dint of long service they remained half open, as if to bear humble witness for themselves of so much suffering endured.
Something of monastic rigidity dignified her face.
In her constant living with animals she had caught their dumbness and their calm.
It was the first time that she found herself in the midst of so large a company, and inwardly scared by the flags, the drums, the gentlemen in frock-coats, and the order of the councillor, she stood motionless, not knowing whether to advance or run away, nor why the crowd was pushing her and the jury were smiling at her.
"Approach, venerable Catherine Nicaise Elizabeth Leroux!" said the councillor, who had taken the list of prize-winners from the president; and, looking at the piece of paper and the old woman by turns, he repeated in a fatherly tone"Approach! approach!"
"Are you deaf?" said Tuvache, fidgeting in his armchair; and he began shouting in her ear, "Fifty-four years of service. A silver medal!
Then, when she had her medal, she looked at it, and a smile of beatitude spread over her face; and as she walked away they could hear her muttering "I'll give it to our cure up home, to say some masses for me!"
The meeting was over, the crowd dispersed, and now that the speeches had been read, each one fell back into his place again, and everything into the old grooves; the masters bullied the servants, and these struck the animals, indolent victors, going back to the stalls, a green-crown on their horns.
The National Guards, however, had gone up to the first floor of the town hall with buns spitted on their bayonets, and the drummer of the battalion carried a basket with bottles. Madame Bovary took Rodolphe's arm; he saw her home; they separated at her door; then he walked about alone in the meadow while he waited for the time of the banquet.
Each one stuffed himself on his own account.
Rodolphe, leaning against the calico of the tent was thinking so earnestly of Emma that he heard nothing.
Behind him on the grass the servants were piling up the dirty plates, his neighbours were talking; he did not answer them; they filled his glass, and there was silence in his thoughts in spite of the growing noise.
He was dreaming of what she had said, of the line of her lips; her face, as in a magic mirror, shone on the plates of the shakos, the folds of her gown fell along the walls, and days of love unrolled to all infinity before him in the vistas of the future.
He saw her again in the evening during the fireworks, but she was with her husband, Madame Homais, and the druggist, who was worrying about the danger of stray rockets, and every moment he left the company to go and give some advice to Binet.
The pyrotechnic pieces sent to Monsieur Tuvache had, through an excess of caution, been shut up in his cellar, and so the damp powder would not light, and the principal set piece, that was to represent a dragon biting his tail, failed completely. Now and then a meagre Roman-candle went off; then the gaping crowd sent up a shout that mingled with the cry of the women, whose waists were being squeezed in the darkness. Emma silently nestled against Charles's shoulder; then, raising her chin, she watched the luminous rays of the rockets against the dark sky. Rodolphe gazed at her in the light of the burning lanterns.
She knotted her fichu round her bare head.
His coachman, who was drunk, suddenly dozed off, and one could see from the distance, above the hood, between the two lanterns, the mass of his body, that swayed from right to left with the giving of the traces.
And he once more ran off to the captain.
"Do not be uneasy," said the druggist, when he returned to his friends. "Monsieur Binet has assured me that all precautions have been taken.
Then he spoke of the condition of the peasants. Certainly the Government was doing much, but not enough.
"Courage!" he cried to it; "a thousand reforms are indispensable; let us accomplish them!"
Then touching on the entry of the councillor, he did not forget "the martial air of our militia;" nor "our most merry village maidens;" nor the "bald-headed old men like patriarchs who were there, and of whom some, the remnants of our phalanxes, still felt their hearts beat at the manly sound of the drums." He cited himself among the first of the members of the jury, and he even called attention in a note to the fact that Monsieur Homais, chemist, had sent a memoir on cider to the agricultural society.
When he came to the distribution of the prizes, he painted the joy of the prize-winners in dithyrambic strophes. "The father embraced the son, the brother the brother, the husband his consort.
More than one showed his humble medal with pride; and no doubt when he got home to his good housewife, he hung it up weeping on the modest walls of his cot.
And he added "Only the absence of the clergy was remarked.
At last one evening he appeared.
The day after the show he had said to himself"We mustn't go back too soon; that would be a mistake."
And at the end of a week he had gone off hunting.
After the hunting he had thought it was too late, and then he reasoned thus
"If from the first day she loved me, she must from impatience to see me again love me more.
And he knew that his calculation had been right when, on entering the room, he saw Emma turn pale.
Rodolphe remained standing, and Emma hardly answered his first conventional phrases.
"I," he said, "have been busy.
"Seriously?" she cried.
"Well," said Rodolphe, sitting down at her side on a footstool, "no; it was because I did not want to come back."
He looked at her again, but so hard that she lowered her head, blushing.
"Sir," she said, drawing back a little.
He repeated, "of another!" And he hid his face in his hands.
It was the first time that Emma had heard such words spoken to herself, and her pride, like one who reposes bathed in warmth, expanded softly and fully at this glowing language.
"But if I did not come," he continued, "if I could not see you, at least I have gazed long on all that surrounds you.
"Oh, you are good!" she said.
And Rodolphe imperceptibly glided from the footstool to the ground; but a sound of wooden shoes was heard in the kitchen, and he noticed the door of the room was not closed.
"How kind it would be of you," he went on, rising, "if you would humour a whim of mine."
It was to go over her house; he wanted to know it; and Madame Bovary seeing no objection to this, they both rose, when Charles came in.
"Madame was speaking to me," he then said, "about her health."
Charles interrupted him; he had indeed a thousand anxieties; his wife's palpitations of the heart were beginning again.
And as she objected that she had no horse, Monsieur Rodolphe offered one.
She refused his offer; he did not insist.
Then to explain his visit he said that his ploughman, the man of the blood-letting, still suffered from giddiness.
"You must order one," he answered.
The riding-habit decided her.
When the habit was ready, Charles wrote to Monsieur Boulanger that his wife was at his command, and that they counted on his good-nature.
One had pink rosettes at his ears and a deerskin side-saddle.
Rodolphe had put on high soft boots, saying to himself that no doubt she had never seen anything like them. In fact, Emma was charmed with his appearance as he stood on the landing in his great velvet coat and white corduroy breeches.
She was ready; she was waiting for him.
Justin escaped from the chemist's to see her start, and the chemist also came out.
She heard a noise above her; it was Felicite drumming on the windowpanes to amuse little Berthe.
The child blew her a kiss; her mother answered with a wave of her whip.
And he flourished his newspaper as he saw them disappear.
As soon as he felt the ground, Emma's horse set off at a gallop.
Rodolphe galloped by her side.
Her figure slightly bent, her hand well up, and her right arm stretched out, she gave herself up to the cadence of the movement that rocked her in her saddle.
At the bottom of the hill Rodolphe gave his horse its head; they started together at a bound, then at the top suddenly the horses stopped, and her large blue veil fell about her.
Emma half closed her eyes to pick out her house, and never had this poor village where she lived appeared so small.
She turned away from time to time to avoid his look, and then she saw only the pine trunks in lines, whose monotonous succession made her a little giddy. The horses were panting; the leather of the saddles creaked.
"Forward! forward!" he continued.
He "tchk'd" with his tongue.
At other times, to turn aside the branches, he passed close to her, and Emma felt his knee brushing against her leg.
She walked on in front on the moss between the paths.
She stopped. "I am tired," she said.
"Come, try again," he went on.
Then some hundred paces farther on she again stopped, and through her veil, that fell sideways from her man's hat over her hips, her face appeared in a bluish transparency as if she were floating under azure waves.
Rodolphe looked round him biting his moustache. They came to a larger space where the coppice had been cut.
They sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree, and Rodolphe began speaking to her of his love. He did not begin by frightening her with compliments.
Emma listened to him with bowed head, and stirred the bits of wood on the ground with the tip of her foot.
"Oh, no!" she replied.
He seized her by the wrist. She stopped.
Then, having gazed at him for a few moments with an amorous and humid look, she said hurriedly
Then smiling a strange smile, his pupil fixed, his teeth set, he advanced with outstretched arms.
"If it must be," he went on, his face changing; and he again became respectful, caressing, timid.
She gave him her arm.
And he put out his arm round her waist.
He supported her thus as they walked along.
"I am wrong! I am wrong!" she said.
"Oh, Rodolphe!" said the young woman slowly, leaning on his shoulder.
The cloth of her habit caught against the velvet of his coat.
She threw back her white neck, swelling with a sigh, and faltering, in tears, with a long shudder and hiding her face, she gave herself up to him
Here and there around her, in the leaves or on the ground, trembled luminous patches, as it hummingbirds flying about had scattered their feathers.
Silence was everywhere; something sweet seemed to come forth from the trees; she felt her heart, whose beating had begun again, and the blood coursing through her flesh like a stream of milk.
Then far away, beyond the wood, on the other hills, she heard a vague prolonged cry, a voice which lingered, and in silence she heard it mingling like music with the last pulsations of her throbbing nerves.
Rodolphe, a cigar between his lips, was mending with his penknife one of the two broken bridles.
They returned to Yonville by the same road. On the mud they saw again the traces of their horses side by side, the same thickets, the same stones to the grass; nothing around them seemed changed; and yet for her something had happened more stupendous than if the mountains had moved in their places.
Rodolphe now and again bent forward and took her hand to kiss it.
She was charming on horsebackupright, with her slender waist, her knee bent on the mane of her horse, her face somewhat flushed by the fresh air in the red of the evening.
On entering Yonville she made her horse prance in the road.
People looked at her from the windows.
At dinner her husband thought she looked well, but she pretended not to hear him when he inquired about her ride, and she remained sitting there with her elbow at the side of her plate between the two lighted candles.
"Emma!" he said.
She nodded her head in assent; then a quarter of an hour later
"Are you going out to-night?" she asked.
And as soon as she had got rid of Charles she went and shut herself up in her room.
At first she felt stunned; she saw the trees, the paths, the ditches, Rodolphe, and she again felt the pressure of his arm, while the leaves rustled and the reeds whistled.
But when she saw herself in the glass she wondered at her face.
Never had her eyes been so large, so black, of so profound a depth.
Something subtle about her being transfigured her.
She repeated, "I have a lover! a lover!" delighting at the idea as if a second puberty had come to her. So at last she was to know those joys of love, that fever of happiness of which she had despaired!
An azure infinity encompassed her, the heights of sentiment sparkled under her thought, and ordinary existence appeared only afar off, down below in the shade, through the interspaces of these heights.
Then she recalled the heroines of the books that she had read, and the lyric legion of these adulterous women began to sing in her memory with the voice of sisters that charmed her.
She became herself, as it were, an actual part of these imaginings, and realised the love-dream of her youth as she saw herself in this type of amorous women whom she had so envied.
Had she not suffered enough?
But now she triumphed, and the love so long pent up burst forth in full joyous bubblings.
They made vows to one another She told him of her sorrows.
Rodolphe interrupted her with kisses; and she looking at him through half-closed eyes, asked him to call her again by her nameto say that he loved her They were in the forest, as yesterday, in the shed of some woodenshoe maker.
Emma placed her letter at the end of the garden, by the river, in a fissure of the wall.
Rodolphe came to fetch it, and put another there, that she always found fault with as too short.
One morning, when Charles had gone out before day break, she was seized with the fancy to see Rodolphe at once.
This idea made her pant with desire, and she soon found herself in the middle of the field, walking with rapid steps, without looking behind her.
Emma from afar recognised her lover's house.
Beyond the farmyard there was a detached building that she thought must be the chateau She enteredit was if the doors at her approach had opened wide of their own accord.
Emma raised the latch of a door, and suddenly at the end of the room she saw a man sleeping.
You here?" he repeated. "How did you manage to come?
"I love you," she answered, throwing her arms about his neck.
Emma felt about, opening and closing her eyes, while the drops of dew hanging from her hair formed, as it were, a topaz aureole around her face.
Rodolphe, laughing, drew her to him, and pressed her to his breast.
Then she examined the apartment, opened the drawers of the tables, combed her hair with his comb, and looked at herself in his shaving-glass.
Often she even put between her teeth the big pipe that lay on the table by the bed, amongst lemons and pieces of sugar near a bottle of water.
Something stronger than herself forced her to him; so much so, that one day, seeing her come unexpectedly, he frowned as one put out.
"What is the matter with you?" she said. "Are you ill?
At last he declared with a serious air that her visits were becoming imprudentthat she was compromising herself.
Gradually Rodolphe's fears took possession of her.
At first, love had intoxicated her; and she had thought of nothing beyond.
But now that he was indispensable to her life, she feared to lose anything of this, or even that it should be disturbed.
When she came back from his house she looked all about her, anxiously watching every form that passed in the horizon, and every village window from which she could be seen.
She listened for steps, cries, the noise of the ploughs, and she stopped short, white, and trembling more than the aspen leaves swaying overhead.
One morning as she was thus returning, she suddenly thought she saw the long barrel of a carbine that seemed to be aimed at her.
Emma, half-fainting with terror, nevertheless walked on, and a man stepped out of the tub like a Jack-in-the-box.
He had gaiters buckled up to the knees, his cap pulled down over his eyes, trembling lips, and a red nose.
"You ought to have called out long ago!" he exclaimed; "When one sees a gun, one should always give warning."
The tax-collector was thus trying to hide the fright he had had, for a prefectorial order having prohibited duckhunting except in boats, Monsieur Binet, despite his respect for the laws, was infringing them, and so he every moment expected to see the rural guard turn up. But this anxiety whetted his pleasure, and, all alone in his tub, he congratulated himself on his luck and on his cuteness. At sight of Emma he seemed relieved from a great weight, and at once entered upon a conversation.
"Yes," she said stammering; "I am just coming from the nurse where my child is."
"Good evening, Monsieur Binet," she interrupted him, turning on her heel.
"Your servant, madame," he replied drily; and he went back into his tub.
No doubt he would form unfavourable conjectures.
The story about the nurse was the worst possible excuse, everyone at Yonville knowing that the little Bovary had been at home with her parents for a year.
Binet, then, would guess whence she came, and he would not keep silence; he would talk, that was certain.
She remained until evening racking her brain with every conceivable lying project, and had constantly before her eyes that imbecile with the game-bag.
Charles after dinner, seeing her gloomy, proposed, by way of distraction, to take her to the chemist's, and the first person she caught sight of in the shop was the taxcollector again.
"Justin," cried the druggist, "bring us the sulphuric acid." Then to Emma, who was going up to Madame Homais' room, "No, stay here; it isn't worth while going up; she is just coming down.
Good-day, doctor," (for the chemist much enjoyed pronouncing the word "doctor," as if addressing another by it reflected on himself some of the grandeur that he found in it).
And to put his arm-chair back in its place he was darting away from the counter, when Binet asked him for half an ounce of sugar acid.
Binet explained that he wanted a corrosive to make himself some copperwater with which to remove rust from his hunting things.
"Will he never go?" thought she. "Half an ounce of resin and turpentine, four ounces of yellow wax, and three half ounces of animal charcoal, if you please, to clean the varnished leather of my togs."
The druggist was beginning to cut the wax when Madame Homais appeared, Irma in her arms, Napoleon by her side, and Athalie following.
She sat down on the velvet seat by the window, and the lad squatted down on a footstool, while his eldest sister hovered round the jujube box near her papa. The latter was filling funnels and corking phials, sticking on labels, making up parcels.
Around him all were silent; only from time to time, were heard the weights jingling in the balance, and a few low words from the chemist giving directions to his pupil.
"And how's the little woman?" suddenly asked Madame Homais.
"Silence!" exclaimed her husband, who was writing down some figures in his waste-book.
"Why didn't you bring her?" she went on in a low voice.
"Hush! hush!" said Emma, pointing with her finger to the druggist.
But Binet, quite absorbed in looking over his bill, had probably heard nothing.
At last he went out.
"Well, you see, it's rather warm," she replied.
Emma wanted to bribe her servant with a present, but it would be better to find some safe house at Yonville.
All through the winter, three or four times a week, in the dead of night he came to the garden.
To call her, Rodolphe threw a sprinkle of sand at the shutters.
She jumped up with a start; but sometimes he had to wait, for Charles had a mania for chatting by the fireside, and he would not stop.
She was wild with impatience; if her eyes could have done it, she would have hurled him out at the window.
At last she would begin to undress, then take up a book, and go on reading very quietly as if the book amused her.
But Charles, who was in bed, called to her to come too.
"Come, now, Emma," he said, "it is time."
"Yes, I am coming," she answered.
Then, as the candles dazzled him; he turned to the wall and fell asleep.
Rodolphe had a large cloak; he wrapped her in it, and putting his arm round her waist, he drew her without a word to the end of the garden.
It was in the arbour, on the same seat of old sticks where formerly Leon had looked at her so amorously on the summer evenings.
She lighted one of the kitchen candles that she had hidden behind the books.
The sight of the library, of the bureau, of the whole apartment, in fine, excited his merriment, and he could not refrain from making jokes about Charles, which rather embarrassed Emma.
She would have liked to see him more serious, and even on occasions more dramatic; as, for example, when she thought she heard a noise of approaching steps in the alley.
"Someone is coming!" she said.
Oh, poor devil!" And Rodolphe finished his sentence with a gesture that said, "I could crush him with a flip of my finger."
She was wonder-stricken at his bravery, although she felt in it a sort of indecency and a naive coarseness that scandalised her.
If she had spoken seriously, it was very ridiculous, he thought, even odious; for he had no reason to hate the good Charles, not being what is called devoured by jealousy; and on this subject Emma had taken a great vow that he did not think in the best of taste.
Besides, she was growing very sentimental.
She had insisted on exchanging miniatures; they had cut off handfuls of hair, and now she was asking for a ringa real wedding-ring, in sign of an eternal union.
Then she talked to him of her motherhers! and of his motherhis!
Rodolphe had lost his twenty years ago.
Emma none the less consoled him with caressing words as one would have done a lost child, and she sometimes even said to him, gazing at the moon
But she was so pretty.
This love without debauchery was a new experience for him, and, drawing him out of his lazy habits, caressed at once his pride and his sensuality.
Emma's enthusiasm, which his bourgeois good sense disdained, seemed to him in his heart of hearts charming, since it was lavished on him.
Then, sure of being loved, he no longer kept up appearances, and insensibly his ways changed.
He had no longer, as formerly, words so gentle that they made her cry, nor passionate caresses that made her mad, so that their great love, which engrossed her life, seemed to lessen beneath her like the water of a stream absorbed into its channel, and she could see the bed of it.
She would not believe it; she redoubled in tenderness, and Rodolphe concealed his indifference less and less.
She did not know if she regretted having yielded to him, or whether she did not wish, on the contrary, to enjoy him the more.
He subjugated her; she almost feared him.
Appearances, nevertheless, were calmer than ever, Rodolphe having succeeded in carrying out the adultery after his own fancy; and at the end of six months, when the spring-time came, they were to one another like a married couple, tranquilly keeping up a domestic flame.
It was the time of year when old Rouault sent his turkey in remembrance of the setting of his leg.
Here there was a break in the lines, as if the old fellow had dropped his pen to dream a little while.
"For myself, I am very well, except for a cold I caught the other day at the fair at Yvetot, where I had gone to hire a shepherd, having turned away mine because he was too dainty.
Besides, he was also rude. I heard from a pedlar, who, travelling through your part of the country this winter, had a tooth drawn, that Bovary was as usual working hard.
That doesn't surprise me; and he showed me his tooth; we had some coffee together.
I asked him if he had seen you, and he said not, but that he had seen two horses in the stables, from which I conclude that business is looking up.
I have planted an Orleans plum-tree for her in the garden under your room, and I won't have it touched unless it is to have jam made for her by and bye, that I will keep in the cupboard for her when she comes.
She held the coarse paper in her fingers for some minutes.
The writing had been dried with ashes from the hearth, for a little grey powder slipped from the letter on to her dress, and she almost thought she saw her father bending over the hearth to take up the tongs.
How long since she had been with him, sitting on the footstool in the chimney-corner, where she used to burn the end of a bit of wood in the great flame of the sea-sedges!
She remembered the summer evenings all full of sunshine. The colts neighed when anyone passed by, and galloped, galloped.
Under her window there was a beehive, and sometimes the bees wheeling round in the light struck against her window like rebounding balls of gold.
She had got rid of them all in her soul's life, in all her successive conditions of life, maidenhood, her marriage, and her lovethus constantly losing them all her life through, like a traveller who leaves something of his wealth at every inn along his road.
But what then, made her so unhappy?
What was the extraordinary catastrophe that had transformed her?
And she raised her head, looking round as if to seek the cause of that which made her suffer.
An April ray was dancing on the china of the whatnot; the fire burned; beneath her slippers she felt the softness of the carpet; the day was bright, the air warm, and she heard her child shouting with laughter.
In fact, the little girl was just then rolling on the lawn in the midst of the grass that was being turned.
She was lying flat on her stomach at the top of a rick.
The servant was holding her by her skirt.
Lestiboudois was raking by her side, and every time he came near she lent forward, beating the air with both her arms.
"Bring her to me," said her mother, rushing to embrace her. "How I love you, my poor child!
Then noticing that the tips of her ears were rather dirty, she rang at once for warm water, and washed her, changed her linen, her stockings, her shoes, asked a thousand questions about her health, as if on the return from a long journey, and finally, kissing her again and crying a little, she gave her back to the servant, who stood quite thunderstricken at this excess of tenderness.
That evening Rodolphe found her more serious than usual.
"That will pass over," he concluded; "it's a whim:"
And he missed three rendezvous running.
When he did come, she showed herself cold and almost contemptuous.
And he pretended not to notice her melancholy sighs, nor the handkerchief she took out.
She even asked herself why she detested Charles; if it had not been better to have been able to love him?
But he gave her no opportunities for such a revival of sentiment, so that she was much embarrassed by her desire for sacrifice, when the druggist came just in time to provide her with an opportunity.
He had recently read a eulogy on a new method for curing club-foot, and as he was a partisan of progress, he conceived the patriotic idea that Yonville, in order to keep to the fore, ought to have some operations for strephopody or club-foot.
"For," said he to Emma, "what risk is there? See" (and he enumerated on his fingers the advantages of the attempt), "success, almost certain relief and beautifying of the patient, celebrity acquired by the operator. Why, for example, should not your husband relieve poor Hippolyte of the 'Lion d'Or'? Note that he would not fail to tell about his cure to all the travellers, and then" (Homais lowered his voice and looked round him) "who is to prevent me from sending a short paragraph on the subject to the paper? Eh! goodness me! an article gets about; it is talked of; it ends by making a snowball! And who knows? who knows?"
Nothing proved to Emma that he was not clever; and what a satisfaction for her to have urged him to a step by which his reputation and fortune would be increased!
Charles, urged by the druggist and by her, allowed himself to be persuaded.
He sent to Rouen for Dr. Duval's volume, and every evening, holding his head between both hands, plunged into the reading of it.
While he was studying equinus, varus, and valgus, that is to say, katastrephopody, endostrephopody, and exostrephopody (or better, the various turnings of the foot downwards, inwards, and outwards, with the hypostrephopody and anastrephopody), otherwise torsion downwards and upwards, Monsier Homais, with all sorts of arguments, was exhorting the lad at the inn to submit to the operation.
Hippolyte, reflecting, rolled his stupid eyes.
Then Homais represented to him how much jollier and brisker he would feel afterwards, and even gave him to understand that he would be more likely to please the women; and the stable-boy began to smile heavily. Then he attacked him through his vanity:
"Aren't you a man?
And Homais retired, declaring that he could not understand this obstinacy, this blindness in refusing the benefactions of science.
This generosity was an idea of Emma's, and Charles consented to it, thinking in his heart of hearts that his wife was an angel.
So by the advice of the chemist, and after three fresh starts, he had a kind of box made by the carpenter, with the aid of the locksmith, that weighed about eight pounds, and in which iron, wood, sheer-iron, leather, screws, and nuts had not been spared.
But to know which of Hippolyte's tendons to cut, it was necessary first of all to find out what kind of club-foot he had.
But with this equinus, wide in foot like a horse's hoof, with rugose skin, dry tendons, and large toes, on which the black nails looked as if made of iron, the clubfoot ran about like a deer from morn till night. He was constantly to be seen on the Place, jumping round the carts, thrusting his limping foot forwards.
By dint of hard service it had acquired, as it were, moral qualities of patience and energy; and when he was given some heavy work, he stood on it in preference to its fellow.
Now, as it was an equinus, it was necessary to cut the tendon of Achilles, and, if need were, the anterior tibial muscle could be seen to afterwards for getting rid of the varus; for the doctor did not dare to risk both operations at once; he was even trembling already for fear of injuring some important region that he did not know.
Neither Ambrose Pare, applying for the first time since Celsus, after an interval of fifteen centuries, a ligature to an artery, nor Dupuytren, about to open an abscess in the brain, nor Gensoul when he first took away the superior maxilla, had hearts that trembled, hands that shook, minds so strained as Monsieur Bovary when he approached Hippolyte, his tenotome between his fingers.
It was Monsieur Homais who since morning had been organising all these preparations, as much to dazzle the multitude as to keep up his illusions.
Hippolyte could not get over his surprise, but bent over Bovary's hands to cover them with kisses.
And he went down to tell the result to five or six inquirers who were waiting in the yard, and who fancied that Hippolyte would reappear walking properly.
Then Charles, having buckled his patient into the machine, went home, where Emma, all anxiety, awaited him at the door.
She threw herself on his neck; they sat down to table; he ate much, and at dessert he even wanted to take a cup of coffee, a luxury he only permitted himself on Sundays when there was company.
They talked about their future fortune, of the improvements to be made in their house; he saw people's estimation of him growing, his comforts increasing, his wife always loving him; and she was happy to refresh herself with a new sentiment, healthier, better, to feel at last some tenderness for this poor fellow who adored her.
The thought of Rodolphe for one moment passed through her mind, but her eyes turned again to Charles; she even noticed with surprise that he had not bad teeth.
They were in bed when Monsieur Homais, in spite of the servant, suddenly entered the room, holding in his hand a sheet of paper just written.
It was the paragraph he intended for the "Fanal de Rouen."
What next!" "'Performed an operation on a club-footed man.' I have not used the scientific term, because you know in a newspaper everyone would not perhaps understand.
"I proceed," said the chemist. "'Monsieur Bovary, one of our most distinguished practitioners, performed an operation on a club-footed man called Hippolyte Tautain, stableman for the last twenty-five years at the hotel of the "Lion d'Or," kept by Widow Lefrancois, at the Place d'Armes.
Everything tends to show that his convelescence will be brief; and who knows even if at our next village festivity we shall not see our good Hippolyte figuring in the bacchic dance in the midst of a chorus of joyous boon-companions, and thus proving to all eyes by his verve and his capers his complete cure?
"Help! he is dying!
Charles rushed to the "Lion d'Or," and the chemist, who caught sight of him passing along the Place hatless, abandoned his shop.
The strephopode was writhing in hideous convulsions, so that the machine in which his leg was enclosed was knocked against the wall enough to break it.
Hippolyte had already complained of suffering from it. No attention had been paid to him; they had to acknowledge that he had not been altogether wrong, and he was freed for a few hours.
Hippolyte began to worry himself, and Mere Lefrancois, had him installed in the little room near the kitchen, so that he might at least have some distraction.
He lay there moaning under his heavy coverings, pale with long beard, sunken eyes, and from time to time turning his perspiring head on the dirty pillow, where the flies alighted.
She brought him linen for his poultices; she comforted, and encouraged him.
Besides, he did not want for company, especially on market-days, when the peasants were knocking about the billiard-balls round him, fenced with the cues, smoked, drank, sang, and brawled.
And then they told him stories of people who had all been cured by other remedies than his.
And she gave him some good beef-tea, a slice of mutton, a piece of bacon, and sometimes small glasses of brandy, that he had not the strength to put to his lips.
Abbe Bournisien, hearing that he was growing worse, asked to see him.
He began by pitying his sufferings, declaring at the same time that he ought to rejoice at them since it was the will of the Lord, and take advantage of the occasion to reconcile himself to Heaven.
He chatted with the landlady; and even told anecdotes interspersed with jokes and puns that Hippolyte did not understand.
Then, as soon as he could, he fell back upon matters of religion, putting on an appropriate expression of face.
His zeal seemed successful, for the club-foot soon manifested a desire to go on a pilgrimage to Bon-Secours if he were cured; to which Monsieur Bournisien replied that he saw no objection; two precautions were better than one; it was no risk anyhow.
The druggist was indignant at what he called the manoeuvres of the priest; they were prejudicial, he said, to Hippolyte's convalescence, and he kept repeating to Madame Lefrancois, "Leave him alone! leave him alone! You perturb his morals with your mysticism."
But the good woman would no longer listen to him; he was the cause of it all.
From a spirit of contradiction she hung up near the bedside of the patient a basin filled with holy-water and a branch of box.
It was all very well to vary the potions and change the poultices; the muscles each day rotted more and more; and at last Charles replied by an affirmative nod of the head when Mere Lefrancois, asked him if she could not, as a forlorn hope, send for Monsieur Canivet of Neufchatel, who was a celebrity.
A doctor of medicine, fifty years of age, enjoying a good position and self-possessed, Charles's colleague did not refrain from laughing disdainfully when he had uncovered the leg, mortified to the knee.
Then having flatly declared that it must be amputated, he went off to the chemist's to rail at the asses who could have reduced a poor man to such a state.
Shaking Monsieur Homais by the button of his coat, he shouted out in the shop
Homais suffered as he listened to this discourse, and he concealed his discomfort beneath a courtier's smile; for he needed to humour Monsier Canivet, whose prescriptions sometimes came as far as Yonville.
So he did not take up the defence of Bovary; he did not even make a single remark, and, renouncing his principles, he sacrificed his dignity to the more serious interests of his business.
At the grocer's they discussed Hippolyte's illness; the shops did no business, and Madame Tuvache, the mayor's wife, did not stir from her window, such was her impatience to see the operator arrive.
He came in his gig, which he drove himself.
But the springs of the right side having at length given way beneath the weight of his corpulence, it happened that the carriage as it rolled along leaned over a little, and on the other cushion near him could be seen a large box covered in red sheep-leather, whose three brass clasps shone grandly.
After he had entered like a whirlwind the porch of the "Lion d'Or," the doctor, shouting very loud, ordered them to unharness his horse.
Then he went into the stable to see that he was eating his oats all right; for on arriving at a patient's he first of all looked after his mare and his gig.
And he was the more esteemed for this imperturbable coolness. The universe to the last man might have died, and he would not have missed the smallest of his habits.
But the druggist, turning red, confessed that he was too sensitive to assist at such an operation.
"When one is a simple spectator," he said, "the imagination, you know, is impressed.
Then, without any consideration for Hippolyte, who was sweating with agony between his sheets, these gentlemen entered into a conversation, in which the druggist compared the coolness of a surgeon to that of a general; and this comparison was pleasing to Canivet, who launched out on the exigencies of his art. He looked upon, it as a sacred office, although the ordinary practitioners dishonoured it. At last, coming back to the patient, he examined the bandages brought by Homais, the same that had appeared for the club-foot, and asked for someone to hold the limb for him. Lestiboudois was sent for, and Monsieur Canivet having turned up his sleeves, passed into the billiard-room, while the druggist stayed with Artemise and the landlady, both whiter than their aprons, and with ears strained towards the door.
Bovary during this time did not dare to stir from his house.
He kept downstairs in the sitting-room by the side of the fireless chimney, his chin on his breast, his hands clasped, his eyes staring.
"What a mishap!" he thought, "what a mishap!"
Perhaps, after all, he had made some slip.
Who could say if his colleagues would not write against him.
Polemics would ensue; he would have to answer in the papers.
He saw himself dishonoured, ruined, lost; and his imagination, assailed by a world of hypotheses, tossed amongst them like an empty cask borne by the sea and floating upon the waves.
Emma, opposite, watched him; she did not share his humiliation; she felt anotherthat of having supposed such a man was worth anything.
As if twenty times already she had not sufficiently perceived his mediocrity.
Charles was walking up and down the room; his boots creaked on the floor.
"Sit down," she said; "you fidget me."
How was it that sheshe, who was so intelligentcould have allowed herself to be deceived again? and through what deplorable madness had she thus ruined her life by continual sacrifices? She recalled all her instincts of luxury, all the privations of her soul, the sordidness of marriage, of the household, her dream sinking into the mire like wounded swallows; all that she had longed for, all that she had denied herself, all that she might have had! And for what? for what?
She knit her brows with a nervous gesture, then went on.
And it was for him, for this creature, for this man, who understood nothing, who felt nothing!
For he was there quite quiet, not even suspecting that the ridicule of his name would henceforth sully hers as well as his.
She had made efforts to love him, and she had repented with tears for having yielded to another!
At the unexpected shock of this phrase falling on her thought like a leaden bullet on a silver plate, Emma, shuddering, raised her head in order to find out what he meant to say; and they looked at the other in silence, almost amazed to see each other, so far sundered were they by their inner thoughts. Charles gazed at her with the dull look of a drunken man, while he listened motionless to the last cries of the sufferer, that followed each other in long-drawn modulations, broken by sharp spasms like the far-off howling of some beast being slaughtered. Emma bit her wan lips, and rolling between her fingers a piece of coral that she had broken, fixed on Charles the burning glance of her eyes like two arrows of fire about to dart forth. Everything in him irritated her now; his face, his dress, what he did not say, his whole person, his existence, in fine. She repented of her past virtue as of a crime, and what still remained of it rumbled away beneath the furious blows of her pride. She revelled in all the evil ironies of triumphant adultery. The memory of her lover came back to her with dazzling attractions; she threw her whole soul into it, borne away towards this image with a fresh enthusiasm; and Charles seemed to her as much removed from her life, as absent forever, as impossible and annihilated, as if he had been about to die and were passing under her eyes.
Charles looked up, and through the lowered blinds he saw at the corner of the market in the broad sunshine Dr. Canivet, who was wiping his brow with his handkerchief.
Homais, behind him, was carrying a large red box in his hand, and both were going towards the chemist's.
Then with a feeling of sudden tenderness and discouragement Charles turned to his wife saying to her
"Leave me!" she said, red with anger.
"What is the matter?" he asked, stupefied.
"Enough!" she cried with a terrible look.
Charles sank back into his arm-chair overwhelmed, trying to discover what could be wrong with her, fancying some nervous illness, weeping, and vaguely feeling something fatal and incomprehensible whirling round him.
When Rodolphe came to the garden that evening, he found his mistress waiting for him at the foot of the steps on the lowest stair.
Often, even in the middle of the day, Emma suddenly wrote to him, then from the window made a sign to Justin, who, taking his apron off, quickly ran to La Huchette.
Rodolphe would come; she had sent for him to tell him that she was bored, that her husband was odious, her life frightful.
"But what can I do?" he cried one day impatiently.
She was sitting on the floor between his knees, her hair loose, her look lost.
"You are really mad!" he said laughing. "How could that be possible?"
She returned to the subject; he pretended not to understand, and turned the conversation.
What he did not understand was all this worry about so simple an affair as love.
She had a motive, a reason, and, as it were, a pendant to her affection.
Her tenderness, in fact, grew each day with her repulsion to her husband.
The more she gave up herself to the one, the more she loathed the other.
Never had Charles seemed to her so disagreeable, to have such stodgy fingers, such vulgar ways, to be so dull as when they found themselves together after her meeting with Rodolphe.
Then, while playing the spouse and virtue, she was burning at the thought of that head whose black hair fell in a curl over the sunburnt brow, of that form at once so strong and elegant, of that man, in a word, who had such experience in his reasoning, such passion in his desires.
It was for him that she filed her nails with the care of a chaser, and that there was never enough cold-cream for her skin, nor of patchouli for her handkerchiefs.
When he was coming she filled the two large blue glass vases with roses, and prepared her room and her person like a courtesan expecting a prince.
The servant had to be constantly washing linen, and all day Felicite did not stir from the kitchen, where little Justin, who often kept her company, watched her at work.
With his elbows on the long board on which she was ironing, he greedily watched all these women's clothes spread about him, the dimity petticoats, the fichus, the collars, and the drawers with running strings, wide at the hips and growing narrower below.
"What is that for?" asked the young fellow, passing his hand over the crinoline or the hooks and eyes.
Madame Homais!" And he added with a meditative air, "As if she were a lady like madame!"
But Felicite grew impatient of seeing him hanging round her.
She was six years older than he, and Theodore, Monsieur Guillaumin's servant, was beginning to pay court to her.
"Let me alone," she said, moving her pot of starch.
Before you meddle with such things, bad boy, wait till you've got a beard to your chin."
I'll go and clean her boots."
And he at once took down from the shelf Emma's boots, all coated with mud, the mud of the rendezvous, that crumbled into powder beneath his fingers, and that he watched as it gently rose in a ray of sunlight.
"How afraid you are of spoiling them!" said the servant, who wasn't so particular when she cleaned them herself, because as soon as the stuff of the boots was no longer fresh madame handed them over to her.
Emma had a number in her cupboard that she squandered one after the other, without Charles allowing himself the slightest observation.
So also he disbursed three hundred francs for a wooden leg that she thought proper to make a present of to Hippolyte.
He chatted with her about the new goods from Paris, about a thousand feminine trifles, made himself very obliging, and never asked for his money.
Emma yielded to this lazy mode of satisfying all her caprices.
Thus she wanted to have a very handsome ridding-whip that was at an umbrella-maker's at Rouen to give to Rodolphe.
The week after Monsieur Lheureux placed it on her table.
But the next day he called on her with a bill for two hundred and seventy francs, not counting the centimes.
At last he lost patience; he was being sued; his capital was out, and unless he got some in he should be forced to take back all the goods she had received.
"I was only joking," he replied; "the only thing I regret is the whip. My word!
"No, no!" she said.
And, certain of his discovery, he went out repeating to himself in an undertone, and with his usual low whistle
She heard Charles on the stairs; threw the gold to the back of her drawer, and took out the key.
"I have an arrangement to suggest to you," he said. "If, instead of the sum agreed on, you would take"
"Here it is," she said placing fourteen napoleons in his hand.
Then, to conceal his disappointment, he was profuse in apologies and proffers of service, all of which Emma declined; then she remained a few moments fingering in the pocket of her apron the two five-franc pieces that he had given her in change. She promised herself she would economise in order to pay back later on.
"Pshaw!" she thought, "he won't think about it again."
Besides the riding-whip with its silver-gilt handle, Rodolphe had received a seal with the motto Amor nel cor* furthermore, a scarf for a muffler, and, finally, a cigar-case exactly like the Viscount's, that Charles had formerly picked up in the road, and that Emma had kept. These presents, however, humiliated him; he refused several; she insisted, and he ended by obeying, thinking her tyrannical and overexacting.
Then she had strange ideas.
"When midnight strikes," she said, "you must think of me."
And if he confessed that he had not thought of her, there were floods of reproaches that always ended with the eternal question
"Why, of course I love you," he answered.
"Did you think you'd got a virgin?" he exclaimed laughing.
Emma cried, and he tried to console her, adorning his protestations with puns.
"Oh," she went on, "I love you! I love you so that I could not live without you, do you see?
I ask myself, Where is he?
Perhaps he is talking to other women.
They smile upon him; he approaches.
Emma was like all his mistresses; and the charm of novelty, gradually falling away like a garment, laid bare the eternal monotony of passion, that has always the same forms and the same language.
He did not distinguish, this man of so much experience, the difference of sentiment beneath the sameness of expression.
Because lips libertine and venal had murmured such words to him, he believed but little in the candour of hers; exaggerated speeches hiding mediocre affections must be discounted; as if the fullness of the soul did not sometimes overflow in the emptiest metaphors, since no one can ever give the exact measure of his needs, nor of his conceptions, nor of his sorrows; and since human speech is like a cracked tin kettle, on which we hammer out tunes to make bears dance when we long to move the stars.
He treated her quite sans facon.* He made of her something supple and corrupt.
Hers was an idiotic sort of attachment, full of admiration for him, of voluptuousness for her, a beatitude that benumbed her; her soul sank into this drunkenness, shrivelled up, drowned in it, like Clarence in his butt of Malmsey.
By the mere effect of her love Madame Bovary's manners changed.
Her looks grew bolder, her speech more free; she even committed the impropriety of walking out with Monsieur Rodolphe, a cigarette in her mouth, "as if to defy the people."
At last, those who still doubted doubted no longer when one day they saw her getting out of the "Hirondelle," her waist squeezed into a waistcoat like a man; and Madame Bovary senior, who, after a fearful scene with her husband, had taken refuge at her son's, was not the least scandalised of the women-folk.
Many other things displeased her.
First, Charles had not attended to her advice about the forbidding of novels; then the "ways of the house" annoyed her; she allowed herself to make some remarks, and there were quarrels, especially one on account of Felicite.
Madame Bovary senior, the evening before, passing along the passage, had surprised her in company of a mana man with a brown collar, about forty years old, who, at the sound of her step, had quickly escaped through the kitchen.
"Where were you brought up?" asked the daughter-in-law, with so impertinent a look that Madame Bovary asked her if she were not perhaps defending her own case.
"Leave the room!" said the young woman, springing up with a bound.
Emma was stamping her feet as she repeated
He ran to his mother; she was beside herself. She stammered
And she was for leaving at once if the other did not apologise.
So Charles went back again to his wife and implored her to give way; he knelt to her; she ended by saying
"Very well! I'll go to her."
And in fact she held out her hand to her mother-in-law with the dignity of a marchioness as she said
Then, having gone up again to her room, she threw herself flat on her bed and cried there like a child, her face buried in the pillow.
She and Rodolphe had agreed that in the event of anything extraordinary occurring, she should fasten a small piece of white paper to the blind, so that if by chance he happened to be in Yonville, he could hurry to the lane behind the house.
Emma made the signal; she had been waiting three-quarters of an hour when she suddenly caught sight of Rodolphe at the corner of the market.
She felt tempted to open the window and call him, but he had already disappeared.
Soon, however, it seemed to her that someone was walking on the pavement.
It was he, no doubt.
She threw herself into his arms.
"Do take care!" he said.
And she began telling him everything, hurriedly, disjointedly, exaggerating the facts, inventing many, and so prodigal of parentheses that he understood nothing of it.
She clung to Rodolphe. Her eyes, full of tears, flashed like flames beneath a wave; her breast heaved; he had never loved her so much, so that he lost his head and said "What is, it? What do you wish?"
"Take me away," she cried, "carry me off!
And she threw herself upon his mouth, as if to seize there the unexpected consent if breathed forth in a kiss.
"Your little girl!"
"We will take her!
"What a woman!" he said to himself, watching her as she went.
For she had run into the garden.
Someone was calling her.
On the following days Madame Bovary senior was much surprised at the change in her daughter-in-law.
Emma, in fact, was showing herself more docile, and even carried her deference so far as to ask for a recipe for pickling gherkins.
Or did she wish by a sort of voluptuous stoicism to feel the more profoundly the bitterness of the things she was about to leave?
But she paid no heed to them; on the contrary, she lived as lost in the anticipated delight of her coming happiness.
She leant on his shoulder murmuring
Never had Madame Bovary been so beautiful as at this period; she had that indefinable beauty that results from joy, from enthusiasm, from success, and that is only the harmony of temperament with circumstances.
Her desires, her sorrows, the experience of pleasure, and her ever-young illusions, that had, as soil and rain and winds and the sun make flowers grow, gradually developed her, and she at length blossomed forth in all the plenitude of her nature.
Her eyelids seemed chiselled expressly for her long amorous looks in which the pupil disappeared, while a strong inspiration expanded her delicate nostrils and raised the fleshy corner of her lips, shaded in the light by a little black down.
One would have thought that an artist apt in conception had arranged the curls of hair upon her neck; they fell in a thick mass, negligently, and with the changing chances of their adultery, that unbound them every day.
Her voice now took more mellow infections, her figure also; something subtle and penetrating escaped even from the folds of her gown and from the line of her foot.
Charles, as when they were first married, thought her delicious and quite irresistible.
When he came home in the middle of the night, he did not dare to wake her.
He seemed to hear the light breathing of his child.
He already saw her coming from school as the day drew in, laughing, with ink-stains on her jacket, and carrying her basket on her arm.
Then she would have to be sent to the boarding-school; that would cost much; how was it to be done?
Then he reflected.
He thought of hiring a small farm in the neighbourhood, that he would superintend every morning on his way to his patients.
He would save up what he brought in; he would put it in the savings-bank.
Then he would buy shares somewhere, no matter where; besides, his practice would increase; he counted upon that, for he wanted Berthe to be well-educated, to be accomplished, to learn to play the piano.
Ah! how pretty she would be later on when she was fifteen, when, resembling her mother, she would, like her, wear large straw hats in the summer-time; from a distance they would be taken for two sisters.
He pictured her to himself working in the evening by their side beneath the light of the lamp; she would embroider him slippers; she would look after the house; she would fill all the home with her charm and her gaiety.
At last, they would think of her marriage; they would find her some good young fellow with a steady business; he would make her happy; this would last for ever.
Emma was not asleep; she pretended to be; and while he dozed off by her side she awakened to other dreams.
To the gallop of four horses she was carried away for a week towards a new land, whence they would return no more.
However, in the immensity of this future that she conjured up, nothing special stood forth; the days, all magnificent, resembled each other like waves; and it swayed in the horizon, infinite, harmonised, azure, and bathed in sunshine.
But the child began to cough in her cot or Bovary snored more loudly, and Emma did not fall asleep till morning, when the dawn whitened the windows, and when little Justin was already in the square taking down the shutters of the chemist's shop.
"You are going on a journey?" he asked.
"Besides, I shall want," she went on, "a trunknot too heavyhandy."
"And," said Madame Bovary, taking her watch from her belt, "take this; you can pay yourself out of it."
But the tradesman cried out that she was wrong; they knew one another; did he doubt her? What childishness! She insisted, however, on his taking at least the chain, and Lheureux had already put it in his pocket and was going, when she called him back.
She was to leave Yonville as if she was going on some business to Rouen.
She would take care to send her luggage to Lheureux whence it would be taken direct to the "Hirondelle," so that no one would have any suspicion.
Rodolphe avoided speaking of her; perhaps he no longer thought about it.
He wished to have two more weeks before him to arrange some affairs; then at the end of a week he wanted two more; then he said he was ill; next he went on a journey.
"Everything is ready?" she asked him.
And yet he looked at her strangely in a tender fashion.
"It is because you are going away?" she went on; "because you are leaving what is dear to youyour life? Ah!
"How sweet you are!" he said, seizing her in his arms.
"Really!" she said with a voluptuous laugh. "Do you love me?
She rose quickly between the branches of the poplars, that hid her here and there like a black curtain pierced with holes.
Then she appeared dazzling with whiteness in the empty heavens that she lit up, and now sailing more slowly along, let fall upon the river a great stain that broke up into an infinity of stars; and the silver sheen seemed to writhe through the very depths like a heedless serpent covered with luminous scales; it also resembled some monster candelabra all along which sparkled drops of diamonds running together.
Emma, her eyes half closed, breathed in with deep sighs the fresh wind that was blowing.
"There is still time!" he cried.
"Never!" she cried impetuously.
At regular intervals he answered, "YesYes" She had passed her hands through his hair, and she repeated in a childlike voice, despite the big tears which were falling, "Rodolphe! Rodolphe!
"Midnight!" said she. "Come, it is to-morrow.
He rose to go; and as if the movement he made had been the signal for their flight, Emma said, suddenly assuming a gay air
"Till to-morrow then!" said Emma in a last caress; and she watched him go.
"To-morrow!" she cried.
After a few moments Rodolphe stopped; and when he saw her with her white gown gradually fade away in the shade like a ghost, he was seized with such a beating of the heart that he leant against a tree lest he should fall.
"What an imbecile I am!" he said with a fearful oath. "No matter!
For a moment he softened; then he rebelled against her.
"For, after all," he exclaimed, gesticulating, "I can't exile myselfhave a child on my hands."
No sooner was Rodolphe at home than he sat down quickly at his bureau under the stag's head that hung as a trophy on the wall.
But when he had the pen between his fingers, he could think of nothing, so that, resting on his elbows, he began to reflect.
Emma seemed to him to have receded into a far-off past, as if the resolution he had taken had suddenly placed a distance between them.
To get back something of her, he fetched from the cupboard at the bedside an old Rheims biscuit-box, in which he usually kept his letters from women, and from it came an odour of dry dust and withered roses.
First he saw a handkerchief with pale little spots. It was a handkerchief of hers.
Once when they were walking her nose had bled; he had forgotten it.
Near it, chipped at all the corners, was a miniature given him by Emma: her toilette seemed to him pretentious, and her languishing look in the worst possible taste.
Then, from looking at this image and recalling the memory of its original, Emma's features little by little grew confused in his remembrance, as if the living and the painted face, rubbing one against the other, had effaced each other.
Finally, he read some of her letters; they were full of explanations relating to their journey, short, technical, and urgent, like business notes.
Thus dallying with his souvenirs, he examined the writing and the style of the letters, as varied as their orthography. They were tender or jovial, facetious, melancholy; there were some that asked for love, others that asked for money. A word recalled faces to him, certain gestures, the sound of a voice; sometimes, however, he remembered nothing at all.
In fact, these women, rushing at once into his thoughts, cramped each other and lessened, as reduced to a uniform level of love that equalised them all. So taking handfuls of the mixed-up letters, he amused himself for some moments with letting them fall in cascades from his right into his left hand. At last, bored and weary, Rodolphe took back the box to the cupboard, saying to himself, "What a lot of rubbish!" Which summed up his opinion; for pleasures, like schoolboys in a school courtyard, had so trampled upon his heart that no green thing grew there, and that which passed through it, more heedless than children, did not even, like them, leave a name carved upon the wall.
"Come," said he, "let's begin."
"I am acting in her interest; I am honest."
"If I told her all my fortune is lost?
"That's a word that always tells," he said to himself.
But that delicious exaltation, at once your charm and your torment, has prevented you from understanding, adorable woman that you are, the falseness of our future position.
"Perhaps she'll think I'm giving it up from avarice.
Teach my name to your child; let her repeat it in her prayers."
Rodolphe got up to, shut the window, and when he had sat down again
"I think it's all right. Ah! and this for fear she should come and hunt me up."
"A Dieu!" which he thought in very excellent taste.
"Now how am I to sign?" he said to himself. "'Yours devotedly?'
He re-read his letter.
"Poor little woman!" he thought with emotion. "She'll think me harder than a rock.
Then, having emptied some water into a glass, Rodolphe dipped his finger into it, and let a big drop fall on the paper, that made a pale stain on the ink.
Then looking for a seal, he came upon the one "Amor nel cor."
After which he smoked three pipes and went to bed.
The next day when he was up (at about two o'clockhe had slept late), Rodolphe had a basket of apricots picked.
He put his letter at the bottom under some vine leaves, and at once ordered Girard, his ploughman, to take it with care to Madame Bovary.
He made use of this means for corresponding with her, sending according to the season fruits or game.
"If she asks after me," he said, "you will tell her that I have gone on a journey.
You must give the basket to her herself, into her own hands.
Girard put on his new blouse, knotted his handkerchief round the apricots, and walking with great heavy steps in his thick iron-bound galoshes, made his way to Yonville.
Madame Bovary, when he got to her house, was arranging a bundle of linen on the kitchen-table with Felicite.
She was seized with apprehension, and as she sought in her pocket for some coppers, she looked at the peasant with haggard eyes, while he himself looked at her with amazement, not understanding how such a present could so move anyone.
At last he went out.
She could bear it no longer; she ran into the sitting room as if to take the apricots there, overturned the basket, tore away the leaves, found the letter, opened it, and, as if some fearful fire were behind her, Emma flew to her room terrified.
Charles was there; she saw him; he spoke to her; she heard nothing, and she went on quickly up the stairs, breathless, distraught, dumb, and ever holding this horrible piece of paper, that crackled between her fingers like a plate of sheet-iron. On the second floor she stopped before the attic door, which was closed.
Then she tried to calm herself; she recalled the letter; she must finish it; she did not dare to. And where?
"Ah, no! here," she thought, "I shall be all right."
The slates threw straight down a heavy heat that gripped her temples, stifled her; she dragged herself to the closed garret-window.
Down below, underneath her, the village square was empty; the stones of the pavement glittered, the weathercocks on the houses were motionless.
But the more she fixed her attention upon it, the more confused were her ideas.
She saw him again, heard him, encircled him with her arms, and throbs of her heart, that beat against her breast like blows of a sledge-hammer, grew faster and faster, with uneven intervals.
She looked about her with the wish that the earth might crumble into pieces.
What restrained her?
The luminous ray that came straight up from below drew the weight of her body towards the abyss.
It seemed to her that the ground of the oscillating square went up the walls and that the floor dipped on end like a tossing boat.
The blue of the heavens suffused her, the air was whirling in her hollow head; she had but to yield, to let herself be taken; and the humming of the lathe never ceased, like an angry voice calling her.
The thought that she had just escaped from death almost made her faint with terror.
She closed her eyes; then she shivered at the touch of a hand on her sleeve; it was Felicite.
And she had to go down to sit at table.
She tried to eat. The food choked her.
Then she unfolded her napkin as if to examine the darns, and she really thought of applying herself to this work, counting the threads in the linen.
Suddenly the remembrance of the letter returned to her.
How had she lost it?
Where could she find it?
But she felt such weariness of spirit that she could not even invent a pretext for leaving the table.
Then she became a coward; she was afraid of Charles; he knew all, that was certain!
Indeed he pronounced these words in a strange manner:
"Who told you?" she said, shuddering.
"Who told me!" he replied, rather astonished at her abrupt tone. "Why, Girard, whom I met just now at the door of the Cafe Francais.
He absents himself like that from time to time for a change, and, ma foi, I think he's right, when one has a fortune and is a bachelor.
Besides, he has jolly times, has our friend.
Charles, without noticing his wife's colour, had them brought to him, took one, and bit into it.
"Ah! perfect!" said he; "just taste!"
And he handed her the basket, which she put away from her gently.
What an odour!" he remarked, passing it under her nose several times.
"I am choking," she cried, leaping up. But by an effort of will the spasm passed; then
"It is nothing," she said, "it is nothing!
For she dreaded lest he should begin questioning her, attending to her, that she should not be left alone.
Charles, to obey her, sat down again, and he spat the stones of the apricots into his hands, afterwards putting them on his plate.
Now, as from La Huchette to Buchy there is no other way than by Yonville, he had to go through the village, and Emma had recognised him by the rays of the lanterns, which like lightning flashed through the twilight.
Then as she opened her eyes on smelling the bottle
"I was sure of it," he remarked; "that would wake any dead person for you!"
See! here is your little girl!
Oh, kiss her!"
The child stretched out her arms to her mother to cling to her neck.
But turning away her head, Emma said in a broken voice "No, no! no one!"
They carried her to her bed.
She lay there stretched at full length, her lips apart, her eyelids closed, her hands open, motionless, and white as a waxen image.
Two streams of tears flowed from her eyes and fell slowly upon the pillow.
"Do not be uneasy," he said, touching his elbow; "I think the paroxysm is past."
"Yes, she is resting a little now," answered Charles, watching her sleep. "Poor girl! poor girl!
Charles answered that she had been taken ill suddenly while she was eating some apricots.
"Take care; you'll wake her!" said Bovary in a low voice.
He often even makes the experiment before his friends at his summer-house at Guillaume Wood.
With regard to madame, she has always seemed to me, I confess, very susceptible.
Then, don't you think that perhaps her imagination should be worked upon?"
They thought she was delirious; and she was by midnight.
For forty-three days Charles did not leave her. He gave up all his patients; he no longer went to bed; he was constantly feeling her pulse, putting on sinapisms and cold-water compresses. He sent Justin as far as Neufchatel for ice; the ice melted on the way; he sent him back again. He called Monsieur Canivet into consultation; he sent for Dr. Lariviere, his old master, from Rouen; he was in despair. What alarmed him most was Emma's prostration, for she did not speak, did not listen, did not even seem to suffer, as if her body and soul were both resting together after all their troubles.
About the middle of October she could sit up in bed supported by pillows.
Charles wept when he saw her eat her first bread-and-jelly.
Her strength returned to her; she got up for a few hours of an afternoon, and one day, when she felt better, he tried to take her, leaning on his arm, for a walk round the garden.
The sand of the paths was disappearing beneath the dead leaves; she walked slowly, dragging along her slippers, and leaning against Charles's shoulder.
She drew herself up slowly, shading her eyes with her hand to look.
She looked far off, as far as she could, but on the horizon were only great bonfires of grass smoking on the hills.
"You will tire yourself, my darling!" said Bovary. And, pushing her gently to make her go into the arbour, "Sit down on this seat; you'll be comfortable."
"Oh! no; not there!" she said in a faltering voice.
She was seized with giddiness, and from that evening her illness recommenced, with a more uncertain character, it is true, and more complex symptoms.
Now she suffered in her heart, then in the chest, the head, the limbs; she had vomitings, in which Charles thought he saw the first signs of cancer.
To begin with, he did not know how he could pay Monsieur Homais for all the physic supplied by him, and though, as a medical man, he was not obliged to pay for it, he nevertheless blushed a little at such an obligation.
In fact, at the height of Emma's illness, the latter, taking advantage of the circumstances to make his bill larger, had hurriedly brought the cloak, the travelling-bag, two trunks instead of one, and a number of other things. It was very well for Charles to say he did not want them.
The tradesman answered arrogantly that these articles had been ordered, and that he would not take them back; besides, it would vex madame in her convalescence; the doctor had better think it over; in short, he was resolved to sue him rather than give up his rights and take back his goods.
Felicite forgot; he had other things to attend to; then thought no more about them.
But hardly had he signed this bill than a bold idea occurred to him: it was to borrow a thousand francs from Lheureux.
So, with an embarrassed air, he asked if it were possible to get them, adding that it would be for a year, at any interest he wished.
Lheureux ran off to his shop, brought back the money, and dictated another bill, by which Bovary undertook to pay to his order on the 1st of September next the sum of one thousand and seventy francs, which, with the hundred and eighty already agreed to, made just twelve hundred and fifty, thus lending at six per cent in addition to one-fourth for commission: and the things bringing him in a good third at the least, this ought in twelve months to give him a profit of a hundred and thirty francs.
He hoped that the business would not stop there; that the bills would not be paid; that they would be renewed; and that his poor little money, having thriven at the doctor's as at a hospital, would come back to him one day considerably more plump, and fat enough to burst his bag.
Everything, moreover, succeeded with him. He was adjudicator for a supply of cider to the hospital at Neufchatel; Monsieur Guillaumin promised him some shares in the turf-pits of Gaumesnil, and he dreamt of establishing a new diligence service between Arcueil and Rouen, which no doubt would not be long in ruining the ramshackle van of the "Lion d'Or," and that, travelling faster, at a cheaper rate, and carrying more luggage, would thus put into his hands the whole commerce of Yonville.
Charles several times asked himself by what means he should next year be able to pay back so much money.
He reflected, imagined expedients, such as applying to his father or selling something.
But his father would be deaf, and hehe had nothing to sell.
Then he foresaw such worries that he quickly dismissed so disagreeable a subject of meditation from his mind.
He reproached himself with forgetting Emma, as if, all his thoughts belonging to this woman, it was robbing her of something not to be constantly thinking of her.
When it was fine they wheeled her arm-chair to the window that overlooked the square, for she now had an antipathy to the garden, and the blinds on that side were always down.
She wished the horse to be sold; what she formerly liked now displeased her.
All her ideas seemed to be limited to the care of herself.
She stayed in bed taking little meals, rang for the servant to inquire about her gruel or to chat with her.
The snow on the market-roof threw a white, still light into the room; then the rain began to fall; and Emma waited daily with a mind full of eagerness for the inevitable return of some trifling events which nevertheless had no relation to her.
The most important was the arrival of the "Hirondelle" in the evening. Then the landlady shouted out, and other voices answered, while Hippolyte's lantern, as he fetched the boxes from the boot, was like a star in the darkness.
At mid-day Charles came in; then he went out again; next she took some beef-tea, and towards five o'clock, as the day drew in, the children coming back from school, dragging their wooden shoes along the pavement, knocked the clapper of the shutters with their rulers one after the other.
It was at this hour that Monsieur Bournisien came to see her.
He inquired after her health, gave her news, exhorted her to religion, in a coaxing little prattle that was not without its charm.
The mere thought of his cassock comforted her.
One day, when at the height of her illness, she had thought herself dying, and had asked for the communion; and, while they were making the preparations in her room for the sacrament, while they were turning the night table covered with syrups into an altar, and while Felicite was strewing dahlia flowers on the floor, Emma felt some power passing over her that freed her from her pains, from all perception, from all feeling.
Her body, relieved, no longer thought; another life was beginning; it seemed to her that her being, mounting toward God, would be annihilated in that love like a burning incense that melts into vapour.
The bed-clothes were sprinkled with holy water, the priest drew from the holy pyx the white wafer; and it was fainting with a celestial joy that she put out her lips to accept the body of the Saviour presented to her.
The curtains of the alcove floated gently round her like clouds, and the rays of the two tapers burning on the night-table seemed to shine like dazzling halos.
Then she let her head fall back, fancying she heard in space the music of seraphic harps, and perceived in an azure sky, on a golden throne in the midst of saints holding green palms, God the Father, resplendent with majesty, who with a sign sent to earth angels with wings of fire to carry her away in their arms.
This splendid vision dwelt in her memory as the most beautiful thing that it was possible to dream, so that now she strove to recall her sensation.
Her soul, tortured by pride, at length found rest in Christian humility, and, tasting the joy of weakness, she saw within herself the destruction of her will, that must have left a wide entrance for the inroads of heavenly grace.
She saw amid the illusions of her hope a state of purity floating above the earth mingling with heaven, to which she aspired.
She bought chaplets and wore amulets; she wished to have in her room, by the side of her bed, a reliquary set in emeralds that she might kiss it every evening.
The cure marvelled at this humour, although Emma's religion, he thought, might, from its fervour, end by touching on heresy, extravagance.
But not being much versed in these matters, as soon as they went beyond a certain limit he wrote to Monsieur Boulard, bookseller to Monsignor, to send him "something good for a lady who was very clever."
The bookseller, with as much indifference as if he had been sending off hardware to niggers, packed up, pellmell, everything that was then the fashion in the pious book trade. There were little manuals in questions and answers, pamphlets of aggressive tone after the manner of Monsieur de Maistre, and certain novels in rose-coloured bindings and with a honied style, manufactured by troubadour seminarists or penitent blue-stockings.
Madame Bovary's mind was not yet sufficiently clear to apply herself seriously to anything; moreover, she began this reading in too much hurry.
She grew provoked at the doctrines of religion; the arrogance of the polemic writings displeased her by their inveteracy in attacking people she did not know; and the secular stories, relieved with religion, seemed to her written in such ignorance of the world, that they insensibly estranged her from the truths for whose proof she was looking.
Nevertheless, she persevered; and when the volume slipped from her hands, she fancied herself seized with the finest Catholic melancholy that an ethereal soul could conceive.
As for the memory of Rodolphe, she had thrust it back to the bottom of her heart, and it remained there more solemn and more motionless than a king's mummy in a catacomb.
An exhalation escaped from this embalmed love, that, penetrating through everything, perfumed with tenderness the immaculate atmosphere in which she longed to live.
When she knelt on her Gothic prie-Dieu, she addressed to the Lord the same suave words that she had murmured formerly to her lover in the outpourings of adultery.
It was to make faith come; but no delights descended from the heavens, and she arose with tired limbs and with a vague feeling of a gigantic dupery.
This searching after faith, she thought, was only one merit the more, and in the pride of her devoutness Emma compared herself to those grand ladies of long ago whose glory she, had dreamed of over a portrait of La Valliere, and who, trailing with so much majesty the lace-trimmed trains of their long gowns, retired into solitudes to shed at the feet of Christ all the tears of hearts that life had wounded.
Then she gave herself up to excessive charity.
She sewed clothes for the poor, she sent wood to women in childbed; and Charles one day, on coming home, found three good-for-nothings in the kitchen seated at the table eating soup.
She had her little girl, whom during her illness her husband had sent back to the nurse, brought home.
She wanted to teach her to read; even when Berthe cried, she was not vexed.
She had made up her mind to resignation, to universal indulgence.
She said to her child, "Is your stomach-ache better, my angel?"
Madame Bovary senior found nothing to censure except perhaps this mania of knitting jackets for orphans instead of mending her own house-linen; but, harassed with domestic quarrels, the good woman took pleasure in this quiet house, and she even stayed there till after Easter, to escape the sarcasms of old Bovary, who never failed on Good Friday to order chitterlings.
Besides the companionship of her mother-in-law, who strengthened her a little by the rectitude of her judgment and her grave ways, Emma almost every day had other visitors.
These were Madame Langlois, Madame Caron, Madame Dubreuil, Madame Tuvache, and regularly from two to five o'clock the excellent Madame Homais, who, for her part, had never believed any of the tittle-tattle about her neighbour.
The little Homais also came to see her; Justin accompanied them.
He went up with them to her bedroom, and remained standing near the door, motionless and mute.
Often even Madame Bovary; taking no heed of him, began her toilette.
She began by taking out her comb, shaking her head with a quick movement, and when he for the first time saw all this mass of hair that fell to her knees unrolling in black ringlets, it was to him, poor child! like a sudden entrance into something new and strange, whose splendour terrified him.
Emma, no doubt, did not notice his silent attentions or his timidity.
She had no suspicion that the love vanished from her life was there, palpitating by her side, beneath that coarse holland shirt, in that youthful heart open to the emanations of her beauty.
Besides, she now enveloped all things with such indifference, she had words so affectionate with looks so haughty, such contradictory ways, that one could no longer distinguish egotism from charity, or corruption from virtue.
One evening, for example, she was angry with the servant, who had asked to go out, and stammered as she tried to find some pretext. Then suddenly
"So you love him?" she said.
And without waiting for any answer from Felicite, who was blushing, she added, "There! run along; enjoy yourself!"
In the beginning of spring she had the garden turned up from end to end, despite Bovary's remonstrances. However, he was glad to see her at last manifest a wish of any kind.
As she grew stronger she displayed more wilfulness.
First, she found occasion to expel Mere Rollet, the nurse, who during her convalescence had contracted the habit of coming too often to the kitchen with her two nurslings and her boarder, better off for teeth than a cannibal.
Then she got rid of the Homais family, successively dismissed all the other visitors, and even frequented church less assiduously, to the great approval of the druggist, who said to her in a friendly way
As formerly, Monsieur Bournisien dropped in every day when he came out after catechism class.
He preferred staying out of doors to taking the air "in the grove," as he called the arbour.
Bovary invited him to have a drink, and he thoroughly understood the uncorking of the stone bottles.
"You must," he said, throwing a satisfied glance all round him, even to the very extremity of the landscape, "hold the bottle perpendicularly on the table, and after the strings are cut, press up the cork with little thrusts, gently, gently, as indeed they do seltzer-water at restaurants."
But during his demonstration the cider often spurted right into their faces, and then the ecclesiastic, with a thick laugh, never missed this joke
He was, in fact, a good fellow and one day he was not even scandalised at the chemist, who advised Charles to give madame some distraction by taking her to the theatre at Rouen to hear the illustrious tenor, Lagardy. Homais, surprised at this silence, wanted to know his opinion, and the priest declared that he considered music less dangerous for morals than literature.
"I," said Binet, "once saw a piece called the 'Gamin de Paris,' in which there was the character of an old general that is really hit off to a T. He sets down a young swell who had seduced a working girl, who at the ending"
Finally," he added, suddenly assuming a mystic tone of voice while he rolled a pinch of snuff between his fingers, "if the Church has condemned the theatre, she must be right; we must submit to her decrees."
"Why," asked the druggist, "should she excommunicate actors? For formerly they openly took part in religious ceremonies.
"Ah! you'll admit that it is not a book to place in the hands of a young girl, and I should be sorry if Athalie"
"No doubt," replied the doctor carelessly, either because, sharing the same ideas, he wished to offend no one, or else because he had not any ideas.
I've known some!" And separating the words of his sentence, Homais repeated, "Ihaveknownsome!"
"I only mean to say," he replied in less brutal a tone, "that toleration is the surest way to draw people to religion."
"That is true! that is true!" agreed the good fellow, sitting down again on his chair.
But he stayed only a few moments.
Then, as soon as he had gone, Monsieur Homais said to the doctor
Lagardy is only going to give one performance; he's engaged to go to England at a high salary.
From what I hear, he's a regular dog; he's rolling in money; he's taking three mistresses and a cook along with him.
The idea of the theatre quickly germinated in Bovary's head, for he at once communicated it to his wife, who at first refused, alleging the fatigue, the worry, the expense; but, for a wonder, Charles did not give in, so sure was he that this recreation would be good for her. He saw nothing to prevent it: his mother had sent them three hundred francs which he had no longer expected; the current debts were not very large, and the falling in of Lheureux's bills was still so far off that there was no need to think about them. Besides, imagining that she was refusing from delicacy, he insisted the more; so that by dint of worrying her she at last made up her mind, and the next day at eight o'clock they set out in the "Hirondelle."
The druggist, whom nothing whatever kept at Yonville, but who thought himself bound not to budge from it, sighed as he saw them go.
"Well, a pleasant journey!" he said to them; "happy mortals that you are!"
For fear of seeming ridiculous, Emma before going in wished to have a little stroll in the harbour, and Bovary prudently kept his tickets in his hand, in the pocket of his trousers, which he pressed against his stomach.
Her heart began to beat as soon as she reached the vestibule.
She involuntarily smiled with vanity on seeing the crowd rushing to the right by the other corridor while she went up the staircase to the reserved seats.
She was as pleased as a child to push with her finger the large tapestried door.
She breathed in with all her might the dusty smell of the lobbies, and when she was seated in her box she bent forward with the air of a duchess.
Peasants and lords with plaids on their shoulders were singing a hunting-song together; then a captain suddenly came on, who evoked the spirit of evil by lifting both his arms to heaven.
Another appeared; they went away, and the hunters started afresh. She felt herself transported to the reading of her youth, into the midst of Walter Scott.
She seemed to hear through the mist the sound of the Scotch bagpipes re-echoing over the heather.
Then her remembrance of the novel helping her to understand the libretto, she followed the story phrase by phrase, while vague thoughts that came back to her dispersed at once again with the bursts of music.
She gave herself up to the lullaby of the melodies, and felt all her being vibrate as if the violin bows were drawn over her nerves. She had not eyes enough to look at the costumes, the scenery, the actors, the painted trees that shook when anyone walked, and the velvet caps, cloaks, swordsall those imaginary things that floated amid the harmony as in the atmosphere of another world.
But a young woman stepped forward, throwing a purse to a squire in green.
Lucie attacked her cavatina in G major bravely.
She plained of love; she longed for wings.
His vigorous form was tightly clad in a brown-coloured doublet; a small chiselled poniard hung against his left thigh, and he cast round laughing looks showing his white teeth.
They said that a Polish princess having heard him sing one night on the beach at Biarritz, where he mended boats, had fallen in love with him.
He had deserted her for other women, and this sentimental celebrity did not fail to enhance his artistic reputation.
The diplomatic mummer took care always to slip into his advertisements some poetic phrase on the fascination of his person and the susceptibility of his soul.
From the first scene he evoked enthusiasm.
He pressed Lucy in his arms, he left her, he came back, he seemed desperate; he had outbursts of rage, then elegiac gurglings of infinite sweetness, and the notes escaped from his bare neck full of sobs and kisses.
Emma leant forward to see him, clutching the velvet of the box with her nails.
She was filling her heart with these melodious lamentations that were drawn out to the accompaniment of the double-basses, like the cries of the drowning in the tumult of a tempest.
She recognised all the intoxication and the anguish that had almost killed her.
The voice of a prima donna seemed to her to be but echoes of her conscience, and this illusion that charmed her as some very thing of her own life.
But no one on earth had loved her with such love.
"But why," asked Bovary, "does that gentleman persecute her?"
"No, no!" she answered; "he is her lover!"
"Yet he vows vengeance on her family, while the other one who came on before said, 'I love Lucie and she loves me!'
Besides, he went off with her father arm in arm. For he certainly is her father, isn't hethe ugly little man with a cock's feather in his hat?"
Despite Emma's explanations, as soon as the recitative duet began in which Gilbert lays bare his abominable machinations to his master Ashton, Charles, seeing the false troth-ring that is to deceive Lucie, thought it was a love-gift sent by Edgar.
He confessed, moreover, that he did not understand the story because of the music, which interfered very much with the words.
"Yes, but you know," he went on, leaning against her shoulder, "I like to understand things."
"Be quiet! be quiet!" she cried impatiently.
Lucie advanced, half supported by her women, a wreath of orange blossoms in her hair, and paler than the white satin of her gown.
Emma dreamed of her marriage day; she saw herself at home again amid the corn in the little path as they walked to the church.
Oh, why had not she, like this woman, resisted, implored?
She, on the contrary, had been joyous, without seeing the abyss into which she was throwing herself.
Ah! if in the freshness of her beauty, before the soiling of marriage and the disillusions of adultery, she could have anchored her life upon some great, strong heart, then virtue, tenderness, voluptuousness, and duty blending, she would never have fallen from so high a happiness. But that happiness, no doubt, was a lie invented for the despair of all desire.
So, striving to divert her thoughts, Emma determined now to see in this reproduction of her sorrows only a plastic fantasy, well enough to please the eye, and she even smiled internally with disdainful pity when at the back of the stage under the velvet hangings a man appeared in a black cloak.
His large Spanish hat fell at a gesture he made, and immediately the instruments and the singers began the sextet.
Edgar, flashing with fury, dominated all the others with his clearer voice; Ashton hurled homicidal provocations at him in deep notes; Lucie uttered her shrill plaint, Arthur at one side, his modulated tones in the middle register, and the bass of the minister pealed forth like an organ, while the voices of the women repeating his words took them up in chorus delightfully.
The outraged lover brandished his naked sword; his guipure ruffle rose with jerks to the movements of his chest, and he walked from right to left with long strides, clanking against the boards the silver-gilt spurs of his soft boots, widening out at the ankles. He, she thought must have an inexhaustible love to lavish it upon the crowd with such effusion.
All her small fault-findings faded before the poetry of the part that absorbed her; and, drawn towards this man by the illusion of the character, she tried to imagine to herself his lifethat life resonant, extraordinary, splendid, and that might have been hers if fate had willed it.
With him, through all the kingdoms of Europe she would have travelled from capital to capital, sharing his fatigues and his pride, picking up the flowers thrown to him, herself embroidering his costumes.
Then each evening, at the back of a box, behind the golden trellis-work she would have drunk in eagerly the expansions of this soul that would have sung for her alone; from the stage, even as he acted, he would have looked at her.
But the mad idea seized her that he was looking at her; it was certain.
She longed to run to his arms, to take refuge in his strength, as in the incarnation of love itself, and to say to him, to cry out, "Take me away! carry me with you! let us go!
Emma wanted to go out; the crowd filled the corridors, and she fell back in her arm-chair with palpitations that choked her.
Charles, fearing that she would faint, ran to the refreshment-room to get a glass of barley-water.
He had great difficulty in getting back to his seat, for his elbows were jerked at every step because of the glass he held in his hands, and he even spilt three-fourths on the shoulders of a Rouen lady in short sleeves, who feeling the cold liquid running down to her loins, uttered cries like a peacock, as if she were being assassinated. Her husband, who was a millowner, railed at the clumsy fellow, and while she was with her handkerchief wiping up the stains from her handsome cherry-coloured taffeta gown, he angrily muttered about indemnity, costs, reimbursement. At last Charles reached his wife, saying to her, quite out of breath
He's coming along to pay his respects." And as he finished these words the ex-clerk of Yonville entered the box.
He held out his hand with the ease of a gentleman; and Madame Bovary extended hers, without doubt obeying the attraction of a stronger will.
But soon recalling herself to the necessities of the situation, with an effort she shook off the torpor of her memories, and began stammering a few hurried words.
But from that moment she listened no more; and the chorus of the guests, the scene between Ashton and his servant, the grand duet in D major, all were for her as far off as if the instruments had grown less sonorous and the characters more remote.
And why had he come back?
What combination of circumstances had brought him back into her life?
He was standing behind her, leaning with his shoulder against the wall of the box; now and again she felt herself shuddering beneath the hot breath from his nostrils falling upon her hair.
"Does this amuse you?" said he, bending over her so closely that the end of his moustache brushed her cheek. She replied carelessly
Then he proposed that they should leave the theatre and go and take an ice somewhere.
But the mad scene did not at all interest Emma, and the acting of the singer seemed to her exaggerated.
"She screams too loud," said she, turning to Charles, who was listening.
"Yesa little," he replied, undecided between the frankness of his pleasure and his respect for his wife's opinion.
Monsieur Leon put her long lace shawl carefully about her shoulders, and all three went off to sit down in the harbour, in the open air, outside the windows of a cafe.
First they spoke of her illness, although Emma interrupted Charles from time to time, for fear, she said, of boring Monsieur Leon; and the latter told them that he had come to spend two years at Rouen in a large office, in order to get practice in his profession, which was different in Normandy and Paris. Then he inquired after Berthe, the Homais, Mere Lefrancois, and as they had, in the husband's presence, nothing more to say to one another, the conversation soon came to an end.
"Yet," interrupted Charles, who was slowly sipping his rum-sherbet, "they say that he is quite admirable in the last act.
But Charles replied that they were going back next day. "Unless," he added, turning to his wife, "you would like to stay alone, kitten?"
And changing his tactics at this unexpected opportunity that presented itself to his hopes, the young man sang the praises of Lagardy in the last number.
Charles, who understood, took out his purse; the clerk held back his arm, and did not forget to leave two more pieces of silver that he made chink on the marble.
The other made a careless gesture full of cordiality, and taking his hat said
Charles explained once more that he could not absent himself longer, but that nothing prevented Emma
"But," she stammered, with a strange smile, "I am not sure"
The clerk declared he would not fail to do so, being obliged, moreover, to go to Yonville on some business for his office.
Monsieur Leon, while studying law, had gone pretty often to the dancing-rooms, where he was even a great success amongst the grisettes, who thought he had a distinguished air.
He was the best-mannered of the students; he wore his hair neither too long nor too short, didn't spend all his quarter's money on the first day of the month, and kept on good terms with his professors.
As for excesses, he had always abstained from them, as much from cowardice as from refinement.
Often when he stayed in his room to read, or else when sitting of an evening under the lime-trees of the Luxembourg, he let his Code fall to the ground, and the memory of Emma came back to him.
Then, seeing her again after three years of absence his passion reawakened.
He must, he thought, at last make up his mind to possess her.
Moreover, his timidity had worn off by contact with his gay companions, and he returned to the provinces despising everyone who had not with varnished shoes trodden the asphalt of the boulevards.
By the side of a Parisienne in her laces, in the drawing-room of some illustrious physician, a person driving his carriage and wearing many orders, the poor clerk would no doubt have trembled like a child; but here, at Rouen, on the harbour, with the wife of this small doctor he felt at his ease, sure beforehand he would shine.
We don't speak on the first floor as on the fourth; and the wealthy woman seems to have, about her, to guard her virtue, all her banknotes, like a cuirass in the lining of her corset.
On leaving the Bovarys the night before, Leon had followed them through the streets at a distance; then having seen them stop at the "Croix-Rouge," he turned on his heel, and spent the night meditating a plan.
So the next day about five o'clock he walked into the kitchen of the inn, with a choking sensation in his throat, pale cheeks, and that resolution of cowards that stops at nothing.
She was not disturbed at his approach; on the contrary, she apologised for having neglected to tell him where they were staying.
He pretended he had been guided towards her by chance, by, instinct.
She began to smile; and at once, to repair his folly, Leon told her that he had spent his morning in looking for her in all the hotels in the town one after the other.
"So you have made up your mind to stay?" he added.
"Yes," she said, "and I am wrong.
"Ah! no; for you, you are a man!"
To show off, or from a naive imitation of this melancholy which called forth his, the young man declared that he had been awfully bored during the whole course of his studies.
The law irritated him, other vocations attracted him, and his mother never ceased worrying him in every one of her letters.
She did not confess her passion for another; he did not say that he had forgotten her.
"If you knew," she went on, raising to the ceiling her beautiful eyes, in which a tear was trembling, "all that I had dreamed!"
She is draped in a tunic, and she is looking at the moon, with forget-me-nots in her flowing hair.
Madame Bovary turned away her head that he might not see the irrepressible smile she felt rising to her lips.
"Often," he went on, "I wrote you letters that I tore up."
Crossing her arms and bending down her face, she looked at the rosettes on her slippers, and at intervals made little movements inside the satin of them with her toes.
At last she sighed.
He started off in praise of virtue, duty, and silent immolation, having himself an incredible longing for self-sacrifice that he could not satisfy.
"I should much like," she said, "to be a nurse at a hospital."
With a slight shrug of her shoulders, Emma interrupted him to speak of her illness, which had almost killed her.
Leon at once envied the calm of the tomb, and one evening he had even made his will, asking to be buried in that beautiful rug with velvet stripes he had received from her.
But at this invention of the rug she asked, "But why?"
"Because I loved you so!" And congratulating himself at having surmounted the difficulty, Leon watched her face out of the corner of his eyes.
The mass of sad thoughts that darkened them seemed to be lifted from her blue eyes; her whole face shone.
At last she replied
They recalled the arbour with clematis, the dresses she had worn, the furniture of her room, the whole of her house.
"Poor friend!" she said, holding out her hand to him.
Leon swiftly pressed his lips to it.
Then, when he had taken a deep breath
"I do," she said; "go on."
Madame Bovary, as she listened to him, wondered that she was so old. All these things reappearing before her seemed to widen out her life; it was like some sentimental immensity to which she returned; and from time to time she said in a low voice, her eyes half closed
She rose to light two wax-candles on the drawers, then she sat down again.
"Well!" she replied.
He was thinking how to resume the interrupted conversation, when she said to him
He from the first moment had loved her, and he despaired when he thought of the happiness that would have been theirs, if thanks to fortune, meeting her earlier, they had been indissolubly bound to one another.
"I have sometimes thought of it," she went on.
And fingering gently the blue binding of her long white sash, he added, "And who prevents us from beginning now?"
"No, my friend," she replied; "I am too old; you are too young.
"Not as you!" he cried.
Was she speaking thus seriously?
No doubt Emma did not herself know, quite absorbed as she was by the charm of the seduction, and the necessity of defending herself from it; and contemplating the young man with a moved look, she gently repulsed the timid caresses that his trembling hands attempted.
"Ah! forgive me!" he cried, drawing back.
Emma was seized with a vague fear at this shyness, more dangerous to her than the boldness of Rodolphe when he advanced to her open-armed.
No man had ever seemed to her so beautiful.
An exquisite candour emanated from his being.
He lowered his long fine eyelashes, that curled upwards.
His cheek, with the soft skin reddened, she thought, with desire of her person, and Emma felt an invincible longing to press her lips to it.
"Ah! how late it is!" she said; "how we do chatter!"
He understood the hint and took up his hat.
Monsieur Lormeaux, of the Rue Grand-Pont, was to take me and his wife."
And the opportunity was lost, as she was to leave the next day.
"But I must see you again," he went on.
"I shall be there," he cried, seizing her hands, which she disengaged.
And as they were both standing up, he behind her, and Emma with her head bent, he stooped over her and pressed long kisses on her neck.
"You are mad! Ah! you are mad!" she said, with sounding little laughs, while the kisses multiplied.
Then bending his head over her shoulder, he seemed to beg the consent of her eyes.
He stopped on the threshold; then he whispered with a trembling voice, "Tomorrow!"
In the evening Emma wrote the clerk an interminable letter, in which she cancelled the rendezvous; all was over; they must not, for the sake of their happiness, meet again.
But when the letter was finished, as she did not know Leon's address, she was puzzled.
"I'll give it to him myself," she said; "he will come."
The next morning, at the open window, and humming on his balcony, Leon himself varnished his pumps with several coatings.
He put on white trousers, fine socks, a green coat, emptied all the scent he had into his handkerchief, then having had his hair curled, he uncurled it again, in order to give it a more natural elegance.
"It is still too early," he thought, looking at the hairdresser's cuckoo-clock, that pointed to the hour of nine.
The young man took one.
It was the first time that he had bought flowers for a woman, and his breast, as he smelt them, swelled with pride, as if this homage that he meant for another had recoiled upon himself.
But he was afraid of being seen; he resolutely entered the church. The beadle, who was just then standing on the threshold in the middle of the left doorway, under the "Dancing Marianne," with feather cap, and rapier dangling against his calves, came in, more majestic than a cardinal, and as shining as a saint on a holy pyx.
And he first went round the lower aisles. Then he went out to look at the Place.
She would come directly, charming, agitated, looking back at the glances that followed her, and with her flounced dress, her gold eyeglass, her thin shoes, with all sorts of elegant trifles that he had never enjoyed, and with the ineffable seduction of yielding virtue.
The church like a huge boudoir spread around her; the arches bent down to gather in the shade the confession of her love; the windows shone resplendent to illumine her face, and the censers would burn that she might appear like an angel amid the fumes of the sweet-smelling odours.
But she did not come.
He sat down on a chair, and his eyes fell upon a blue stained window representing boatmen carrying baskets.
He looked at it long, attentively, and he counted the scales of the fishes and the button-holes of the doublets, while his thoughts wandered off towards Emma.
But a rustle of silk on the flags, the tip of a bonnet, a lined cloakit was she!
Leon rose and ran to meet her.
"Read!" she said, holding out a paper to him. "Oh, no!"
And she abruptly withdrew her hand to enter the chapel of the Virgin, where, kneeling on a chair, she began to pray.
The young man was irritated at this bigot fancy; then he nevertheless experienced a certain charm in seeing her, in the middle of a rendezvous, thus lost in her devotions, like an Andalusian marchioness; then he grew bored, for she seemed never coming to an end.
Emma prayed, or rather strove to pray, hoping that some sudden resolution might descend to her from heaven; and to draw down divine aid she filled full her eyes with the splendours of the tabernacle. She breathed in the perfumes of the full-blown flowers in the large vases, and listened to the stillness of the church, that only heightened the tumult of her heart.
"Why not?" said she.
For she clung with her expiring virtue to the Virgin, the sculptures, the tombsanything.
Then, in order to proceed "by rule," the beadle conducted them right to the entrance near the square, where, pointing out with his cane a large circle of block-stones without inscription or carving
"This," he said majestically, "is the circumference of the beautiful bell of Ambroise.
The old fellow started off again; then, having got back to the chapel of the Virgin, he stretched forth his arm with an all-embracing gesture of demonstration, and, prouder than a country squire showing you his espaliers, went on
Leon bit his lips, fuming.
"And on the right, this gentleman all encased in iron, on the prancing horse, is his grandson, Louis de Breze, lord of Breval and of Montchauvet, Count de Maulevrier, Baron de Mauny, chamberlain to the king, Knight of the Order, and also governor of Normandy; died on the 23rd of July, 1531a Sunday, as the inscription specifies; and below, this figure, about to descend into the tomb, portrays the same person.
Madame Bovary put up her eyeglasses.
Leon, motionless, looked at her, no longer even attempting to speak a single word, to make a gesture, so discouraged was he at this two-fold obstinacy of gossip and indifference.
"Near him, this kneeling woman who weeps is his spouse, Diane de Poitiers, Countess de Breze, Duchess de Valentinois, born in 1499, died in 1566, and to the left, the one with the child is the Holy Virgin.
In his will he left thirty thousand gold crowns for the poor."
And without stopping, still talking, he pushed them into a chapel full of balustrades, some put away, and disclosed a kind of block that certainly might once have been an ill-made statue.
"Truly," he said with a groan, "it adorned the tomb of Richard Coeur de Lion, King of England and Duke of Normandy.
See! this is the door by which Monsignor passes to his house.
But Leon hastily took some silver from his pocket and seized Emma's arm.
So calling him back, he cried
Leon was fleeing, for it seemed to him that his love, that for nearly two hours now had become petrified in the church like the stones, would vanish like a vapour through that sort of truncated funnel, of oblong cage, of open chimney that rises so grotesquely from the cathedral like the extravagant attempt of some fantastic brazier.
"But where are we going?" she said.
Making no answer, he walked on with a rapid step; and Madame Bovary was already, dipping her finger in the holy water when behind them they heard a panting breath interrupted by the regular sound of a cane.
And he recognised the beadle, holding under his arms and balancing against his stomach some twenty large sewn volumes.
Leon! ReallyI don't knowif I ought," she whispered.
And that, as an irresistible argument, decided her.
Leon was afraid she might go back into the church.
The coachman wiped his brow, put his leather hat between his knees, and drove his carriage beyond the side alley by the meadow to the margin of the waters.
From time to time the coachman, on his box cast despairing eyes at the public-houses.
Then he lashed his perspiring jades afresh, but indifferent to their jolting, running up against things here and there, not caring if he did, demoralised, and almost weeping with thirst, fatigue, and depression.
At about six o'clock the carriage stopped in a back street of the Beauvoisine Quarter, and a woman got out, who walked with her veil down, and without turning her head.
Hivert, who had waited for her fifty-three minutes, had at last started.
Yet nothing forced her to go; but she had given her word that she would return that same evening.
Moreover, Charles expected her, and in her heart she felt already that cowardly docility that is for some women at once the chastisement and atonement of adultery.
She packed her box quickly, paid her bill, took a cab in the yard, hurrying on the driver, urging him on, every moment inquiring about the time and the miles traversed. He succeeded in catching up the "Hirondelle" as it neared the first houses of Quincampoix.
Hardly was she seated in her corner than she closed her eyes, and opened them at the foot of the hill, when from afar she recognised Felicite, who was on the lookout in front of the farrier's shop.
Hivert pulled in his horses and, the servant, climbing up to the window, said mysteriously
At the corner of the streets were small pink heaps that smoked in the air, for this was the time for jam-making, and everyone at Yonville prepared his supply on the same day.
She pushed open the lobby door, and in the middle of the kitchen, amid brown jars full of picked currants, of powdered sugar and lump sugar, of the scales on the table, and of the pans on the fire, she saw all the Homais, small and large, with aprons reaching to their chins, and with forks in their hands.
Then he, from indolence, from laziness, went and took, hanging on its nail in my laboratory, the key of the Capharnaum."
It was thus the druggist called a small room under the leads, full of the utensils and the goods of his trade. He often spent long hours there alone, labelling, decanting, and doing up again; and he looked upon it not as a simple store, but as a veritable sanctuary, whence there afterwards issued, elaborated by his hands, all sorts of pills, boluses, infusions, lotions, and potions, that would bear far and wide his celebrity. No one in the world set foot there, and he respected it so, that he swept it himself. Finally, if the pharmacy, open to all comers, was the spot where he displayed his pride, the Capharnaum was the refuge where, egoistically concentrating himself, Homais delighted in the exercise of his predilections, so that Justin's thoughtlessness seemed to him a monstrous piece of irreverence, and, redder than the currants, he repeated
And Athalie, pulling at his coat, cried "Papa! papa!"
"Next to it!" cried Madame Homais, clasping her hands. "Arsenic!
Emma no longer dreamed of asking what they wanted her for, and the druggist went on in breathless phrases
He was so exasperated he quoted Latin.
He would have quoted Chinese or Greenlandish had he known those two languages, for he was in one of those crises in which the whole soul shows indistinctly what it contains, like the ocean, which, in the storm, opens itself from the seaweeds on its shores down to the sands of its abysses.
And he went on
"Oh, dear me!" interrupted the good woman, with a sad air, "how am I to tell you?
And seizing Justin by the collar of his blouse, he shook a book out of his pocket.
"CONJUGALLOVE!" he said, slowly separating the two words.
"Leave the room," he said imperiously; and they went out.
First he walked up and down with the open volume in his hand, rolling his eyes, choking, tumid, apoplectic.
Then he came straight to his pupil, and, planting himself in front of him with crossed arms
He is already formed like a man.
"Ah, yes! madame. Your father-in-law is dead."
In fact, Monsieur Bovary senior had expired the evening before suddenly from an attack of apoplexy as he got up from table, and by way of greater precaution, on account of Emma's sensibility, Charles had begged Homais to break the horrible news to her gradually.
Homais had thought over his speech; he had rounded, polished it, made it rhythmical; it was a masterpiece of prudence and transitions, of subtle turns and delicacy; but anger had got the better of rhetoric.
Emma, giving up all chance of hearing any details, left the pharmacy; for Monsieur Homais had taken up the thread of his vituperations.
However, he was growing calmer, and was now grumbling in a paternal tone whilst he fanned himself with his skull-cap.
Its author was a doctor! There are certain scientific points in it that it is not ill a man should know, and I would even venture to say that a man must know.
At any rate, not till you are man yourself and your temperament is formed."
When Emma knocked at the door. Charles, who was waiting for her, came forward with open arms and said to her with tears in his voice
And he bent over her gently to kiss her.
But at the contact of his lips the memory of the other seized her, and she passed her hand over her face shuddering.
But she made answer, "Yes, I know, I know!"
He showed her the letter in which his mother told the event without any sentimental hypocrisy.
She only regretted her husband had not received the consolations of religion, as he had died at Daudeville, in the street, at the door of a cafe after a patriotic dinner with some ex-officers.
Emma gave him back the letter; then at dinner, for appearance's sake, she affected a certain repugnance.
But as he urged her to try, she resolutely began eating, while Charles opposite her sat motionless in a dejected attitude.
Now and then he raised his head and gave her a long look full of distress.
Once he sighed, "I should have liked to see him again!"
At last, understanding that she must say something, "How old was your father?" she asked.
A quarter of an hour after he added, "My poor mother! what will become of her now?"
She made a gesture that signified she did not know.
Seeing her so taciturn, Charles imagined her much affected, and forced himself to say nothing, not to reawaken this sorrow which moved him.
And, shaking off his own
"Did you enjoy yourself yesterday?" he asked.
When the cloth was removed, Bovary did not rise, nor did Emma; and as she looked at him, the monotony of the spectacle drove little by little all pity from her heart.
He seemed to her paltry, weak, a cipherin a word, a poor thing in every way.
Something stupefying like the fumes of opium seized her.
In order to put it down he described painfully a quarter of a circle with his stump.
"He doesn't even remember any more about it," she thought, looking at the poor devil, whose coarse red hair was wet with perspiration.
Bovary was searching at the bottom of his purse for a centime, and without appearing to understand all there was of humiliation for him in the mere presence of this man, who stood there like a personified reproach to his incurable incapacity.
"Hallo! you've a pretty bouquet," he said, noticing Leon's violets on the chimney.
"Yes," she replied indifferently; "it's a bouquet I bought just now from a beggar."
Charles picked up the flowers, and freshening his eyes, red with tears, against them, smelt them delicately.
She took them quickly from his hand and put them in a glass of water.
She and her son wept much. Emma, on the pretext of giving orders, disappeared.
Charles was thinking of his father, and was surprised to feel so much affection for this man, whom till then he had thought he cared little about.
Madame Bovary senior was thinking of her husband.
The worst days of the past seemed enviable to her.
All was forgotten beneath the instinctive regret of such a long habit, and from time to time whilst she sewed, a big tear rolled along her nose and hung suspended there a moment.
But the presence of her husband and mother-in-law worried her.
She would have liked to hear nothing, to see nothing, so as not to disturb the meditation on her love, that, do what she would, became lost in external sensations.
She was unpicking the lining of a dress, and the strips were scattered around her.
Madame Bovary senior was plying her scissor without looking up, and Charles, in his list slippers and his old brown surtout that he used as a dressing-gown, sat with both hands in his pockets, and did not speak either; near them Berthe, in a little white pinafore, was raking sand in the walks with her spade.
Suddenly she saw Monsieur Lheureux, the linendraper, come in through the gate.
He came to offer his services "under the sad circumstances."
Emma answered that she thought she could do without. The shopkeeper was not to be beaten.
"I beg your pardon," he said, "but I should like to have a private talk with you."
Charles crimsoned to his ears. "Oh, yes! certainly."
And in his confusion, turning to his wife, "Couldn't you, my darling?"
She seemed to understand him, for she rose; and Charles said to his mother, "It is nothing particular.
No doubt, some household trifle." He did not want her to know the story of the bill, fearing her reproaches.
As soon as they were alone, Monsieur Lheureux in sufficiently clear terms began to congratulate Emma on the inheritance, then to talk of indifferent matters, of the espaliers, of the harvest, and of his own health, which was always so-so, always having ups and downs.
In fact, he had to work devilish hard, although he didn't make enough, in spite of all people said, to find butter for his bread.
"And so you're quite well again?" he went on. "Ma foi!
She asked what misunderstanding, for Charles had said nothing of the dispute about the goods supplied to her.
He had drawn his hat over his eyes, and, with his hands behind his back, smiling and whistling, he looked straight at her in an unbearable manner.
Did he suspect anything?
At last, however, he went on
The doctor, of course, would do as he pleased; he was not to trouble himself, especially just now, when he would have a lot of worry.
"And he would do better to give it over to someone elseto you, for example.
Then, passing to his trade, Lheureux declared that madame must require something.
He would send her a black barege, twelve yards, just enough to make a gown.
He did not send the stuff; he brought it.
Then he came again to measure it; he came again on other pretexts, always trying to make himself agreeable, useful, "enfeoffing himself," as Homais would have said, and always dropping some hint to Emma about the power of attorney.
He never mentioned the bill; she did not think of it.
Charles, at the beginning of her convalescence, had certainly said something about it to her, but so many emotions had passed through her head that she no longer remembered it.
Besides, she took care not to talk of any money questions.
Madame Bovary seemed surprised at this, and attributed the change in her ways to the religious sentiments she had contracted during her illness.
But as soon as she was gone, Emma greatly astounded Bovary by her practical good sense.
She quoted technical terms casually, pronounced the grand words of order, the future, foresight, and constantly exaggerated the difficulties of settling his father's affairs so much, that at last one day she showed him the rough draft of a power of attorney to manage and administer his business, arrange all loans, sign and endorse all bills, pay all sums, etc. She had profited by Lheureux's lessons.
Charles naively asked her where this paper came from.
"Monsieur Guillaumin"; and with the utmost coolness she added, "I don't trust him overmuch.
Then she offered to make the journey, but he thanked her.
At last she cried with affected waywardness
"How good you are!" he said, kissing her forehead.
The next morning she set out in the "Hirondelle" to go to Rouen to consult Monsieur Leon, and she stayed there three days.
She took off her bonnet, and they landed on their island.
Her black dress, whose drapery spread out like a fan, made her seem more slender, taller.
Her head was raised, her hands clasped, her eyes turned towards heaven.
At times the shadow of the willows hid her completely; then she reappeared suddenly, like a vision in the moonlight.
Leon, on the floor by her side, found under his hand a ribbon of scarlet silk.
There was one especially, a tall handsome man with small moustaches, who was that funny!
"You are in pain?" asked Leon, coming closer to her.
"And who doesn't want for women, either," softly added the sailor, thinking he was paying the stranger a compliment.
Then, spitting on his hands, he took the oars again.
He was to send his letters to Mere Rollet, and she gave him such precise instructions about a double envelope that he admired greatly her amorous astuteness.
"So you can assure me it is all right?" she said with her last kiss.
"Yes, certainly." "But why," he thought afterwards as he came back through the streets alone, "is she so very anxious to get this power of attorney?"
Leon soon put on an air of superiority before his comrades, avoided their company, and completely neglected his work.
He waited for her letters; he re-read them; he wrote to her.
He called her to mind with all the strength of his desires and of his memories. Instead of lessening with absence, this longing to see her again grew, so that at last on Saturday morning he escaped from his office.
When, from the summit of the hill, he saw in the valley below the church-spire with its tin flag swinging in the wind, he felt that delight mingled with triumphant vanity and egoistic tenderness that millionaires must experience when they come back to their native village.
He went rambling round her house.
He watched for her shadow behind the curtains, but nothing appeared.
Mere Lefrancois, when she saw him, uttered many exclamations.
She thought he "had grown and was thinner," while Artemise, on the contrary, thought him stouter and darker.
He dined in the little room as of yore, but alone, without the tax-gatherer; for Binet, tired of waiting for the "Hirondelle," had definitely put forward his meal one hour, and now he dined punctually at five, and yet he declared usually the rickety old concern "was late."
Leon, however, made up his mind, and knocked at the doctor's door.
Madame was in her room, and did not come down for a quarter of an hour.
The doctor seemed delighted to see him, but he never stirred out that evening, nor all the next day.
He saw her alone in the evening, very late, behind the garden in the lane; in the lane, as she had the other one!
She was writhing in his arms, weeping.
They came back again to embrace once more, and it was then that she promised him to find soon, by no matter what means, a regular opportunity for seeing one another in freedom at least once a week.
Emma never doubted she should be able to do this.
Besides, she was full of hope.
Some money was coming to her.
On the strength of it she bought a pair of yellow curtains with large stripes for her room, whose cheapness Monsieur Lheureux had commended; she dreamed of getting a carpet, and Lheureux, declaring that it wasn't "drinking the sea," politely undertook to supply her with one.
She could no longer do without his services.
Twenty times a day she sent for him, and he at once put by his business without a murmur.
People could not understand either why Mere Rollet breakfasted with her every day, and even paid her private visits.
It was about this time, that is to say, the beginning of winter, that she seemed seized with great musical fervour.
One evening when Charles was listening to her, she began the same piece four times over, each time with much vexation, while he, not noticing any difference, cried
The next day he begged her to play him something again.
And Charles confessed she had gone off a little.
"Ah! it is no use. I ought to take some lessons; but" She bit her lips and added, "Twenty francs a lesson, that's too dear!"
The next day when he came home he looked at her shyly, and at last could no longer keep back the words.
I went to Barfucheres to-day. Well, Madame Liegard assured me that her three young ladies who are at La Misericorde have lessons at fifty sous apiece, and that from an excellent mistress!"
She shrugged her shoulders and did not open her piano again.
But when she passed by it (if Bovary were there), she sighed
And when anyone came to see her, she did not fail to inform them she had given up music, and could not begin again now for important reasons.
Then people commiserated her "What a pity! she had so much talent!"
This poor piano, that had given her vanity so much satisfactionto see it go was to Bovary like the indefinable suicide of a part of herself.
"If you liked," he said, "a lesson from time to time, that wouldn't after all be very ruinous."
"But lessons," she replied, "are only of use when followed up."
And thus it was she set about obtaining her husband's permission to go to town once a week to see her lover.
At the end of a month she was even considered to have made considerable progress.
She went on Thursdays. She got up and dressed silently, in order not to awaken Charles, who would have made remarks about her getting ready too early.
Next she walked up and down, went to the windows, and looked out at the Place.
The early dawn was broadening between the pillars of the market, and the chemist's shop, with the shutters still up, showed in the pale light of the dawn the large letters of his signboard.
When the clock pointed to a quarter past seven, she went off to the "Lion d'Or," whose door Artemise opened yawning.
The girl then made up the coals covered by the cinders, and Emma remained alone in the kitchen.
Now and again she went out.
Hivert was leisurely harnessing his horses, listening, moreover, to Mere Lefrancois, who, passing her head and nightcap through a grating, was charging him with commissions and giving him explanations that would have confused anyone else.
Emma kept beating the soles of her boots against the pavement of the yard.
At last, when he had eaten his soup, put on his cloak, lighted his pipe, and grasped his whip, he calmly installed himself on his seat.
Hivert called, shouted, swore; then he got down from his seat and went and knocked loudly at the doors.
Emma knew it from end to end; she knew that after a meadow there was a sign-post, next an elm, a barn, or the hut of a lime-kiln tender.
Sometimes even, in the hope of getting some surprise, she shut her eyes, but she never lost the clear perception of the distance to be traversed.
A giddiness seemed to her to detach itself from this mass of existence, and her heart swelled as if the hundred and twenty thousand souls that palpitated there had all at once sent into it the vapour of the passions she fancied theirs. Her love grew in the presence of this vastness, and expanded with tumult to the vague murmurings that rose towards her.
She poured it out upon the square, on the walks, on the streets, and the old Norman city outspread before her eyes as an enormous capital, as a Babylon into which she was entering.
She leant with both hands against the window, drinking in the breeze; the three horses galloped, the stones grated in the mud, the diligence rocked, and Hivert, from afar, hailed the carts on the road, while the bourgeois who had spent the night at the Guillaume woods came quietly down the hill in their little family carriages.
They stopped at the barrier; Emma undid her overshoes, put on other gloves, rearranged her shawl, and some twenty paces farther she got down from the "Hirondelle."
Shop-boys in caps were cleaning up the shop-fronts, and women with baskets against their hips, at intervals uttered sonorous cries at the corners of streets. She walked with downcast eyes, close to the walls, and smiling with pleasure under her lowered black veil.
For fear of being seen, she did not usually take the most direct road.
Often a cart would pass near her, bearing some shaking scenery.
She turned down a street; she recognised him by his curling hair that escaped from beneath his hat.
The curtains were in red levantine, that hung from the ceiling and bulged out too much towards the bell-shaped bedside; and nothing in the world was so lovely as her brown head and white skin standing out against this purple colour, when, with a movement of shame, she crossed her bare arms, hiding her face in her hands.
They always found the furniture in the same place, and sometimes hairpins, that she had forgotten the Thursday before, under the pedestal of the clock.
Emma carved, put bits on his plate with all sorts of coquettish ways, and she laughed with a sonorous and libertine laugh when the froth of the champagne ran over from the glass to the rings on her fingers.
They were so completely lost in the possession of each other that they thought themselves in their own house, and that they would live there till death, like two spouses eternally young. They said "our room," "our carpet," she even said "my slippers," a gift of Leon's, a whim she had had.
When she sat on his knees, her leg, then too short, hung in the air, and the dainty shoe, that had no back to it, was held only by the toes to her bare foot.
He admired the exaltation of her soul and the lace on her petticoat.
Besides, was she not "a lady" and a married womana real mistress, in fine?
By the diversity of her humour, in turn mystical or mirthful, talkative, taciturn, passionate, careless, she awakened in him a thousand desires, called up instincts or memories.
He found again on her shoulder the amber colouring of the "Odalisque Bathing"; she had the long waist of feudal chatelaines, and she resembled the "Pale Woman of Barcelona."
But above all she was the Angel!
Often looking at her, it seemed to him that his soul, escaping towards her, spread like a wave about the outline of her head, and descended drawn down into the whiteness of her breast.
He knelt on the ground before her, and with both elbows on her knees looked at her with a smile, his face upturned.
And she did not listen for his answer in the haste of her lips that fastened to his mouth.
On the clock there was a bronze cupid, who smirked as he bent his arm beneath a golden garland.
Suddenly she seized his head between her hands, kissed him hurriedly on the forehead, crying, "Adieu!" and rushed down the stairs.
She went to a hairdresser's in the Rue de la Comedie to have her hair arranged.
She heard the bell at the theatre calling the mummers to the performance, and she saw, passing opposite, men with white faces and women in faded gowns going in at the stage-door.
The smell of the tongs, together with the greasy hands that handled her head, soon stunned her, and she dozed a little in her wrapper.
Often, as he did her hair, the man offered her tickets for a masked ball.
Then she went away.
She went up the streets; reached the Croix-Rouge, put on her overshoes, that she had hidden in the morning under the seat, and sank into her place among the impatient passengers.
Emma knelt on the cushions and her eyes wandered over the dazzling light.
On the hillside a poor devil wandered about with his stick in the midst of the diligences.
A mass of rags covered his shoulders, and an old staved-in beaver, turned out like a basin, hid his face; but when he took it off he discovered in the place of eyelids empty and bloody orbits.
To speak to you he threw back his head with an idiotic laugh; then his bluish eyeballs, rolling constantly, at the temples beat against the edge of the open wound.
He sang a little song as he followed the carriages
Sometimes he appeared suddenly behind Emma, bareheaded, and she drew back with a cry.
He would advise him to get a booth at the Saint Romain fair, or else ask him, laughing, how his young woman was.
Often they had started when, with a sudden movement, his hat entered the diligence through the small window, while he clung with his other arm to the footboard, between the wheels splashing mud. His voice, feeble at first and quavering, grew sharp; it resounded in the night like the indistinct moan of a vague distress; and through the ringing of the bells, the murmur of the trees, and the rumbling of the empty vehicle, it had a far-off sound that disturbed Emma. It went to the bottom of her soul, like a whirlwind in an abyss, and carried her away into the distances of a boundless melancholy. But Hivert, noticing a weight behind, gave the blind man sharp cuts with his whip. The thong lashed his wounds, and he fell back into the mud with a yell. Then the passengers in the "Hirondelle" ended by falling asleep, some with open mouths, others with lowered chins, leaning against their neighbour's shoulder, or with their arm passed through the strap, oscillating regularly with the jolting of the carriage; and the reflection of the lantern swinging without, on the crupper of the wheeler; penetrating into the interior through the chocolate calico curtains, threw sanguineous shadows over all these motionless people. Emma, drunk with grief, shivered in her clothes, feeling her feet grow colder and colder, and death in her soul.
Charles at home was waiting for her; the "Hirondelle" was always late on Thursdays.
This girl now seemed allowed to do just as she liked.
Often her husband, noting her pallor, asked if she were unwell.
"But," he replied, "you seem so strange this evening."
There were even days when she had no sooner come in than she went up to her room; and Justin, happening to be there, moved about noiselessly, quicker at helping her than the best of maids.
He put the matches ready, the candlestick, a book, arranged her nightgown, turned back the bedclothes.
"Come!" said she, "that will do. Now you can go."
For he stood there, his hands hanging down and his eyes wide open, as if enmeshed in the innumerable threads of a sudden reverie.
The following day was frightful, and those that came after still more unbearable, because of her impatience to once again seize her happiness; an ardent lust, inflamed by the images of past experience, and that burst forth freely on the seventh day beneath Leon's caresses.
Emma tasted this love in a discreet, absorbed fashion, maintained it by all the artifices of her tenderness, and trembled a little lest it should be lost later on.
She often said to him, with her sweet, melancholy voice
"Why, like all men," she replied. Then added, repulsing him with a languid movement
One day, as they were talking philosophically of earthly disillusions, to experiment on his jealousy, or yielding, perhaps, to an over-strong need to pour out her heart, she told him that formerly, before him, she had loved someone. "Not like you," she went on quickly, protesting by the head of her child that "nothing had passed between them."
The young man believed her, but none the less questioned her to find out what he was.
Was this not preventing any inquiry, and, at the same time, assuming a higher ground through this pretended fascination exercised over a man who must have been of warlike nature and accustomed to receive homage?
The clerk then felt the lowliness of his position; he longed for epaulettes, crosses, titles.
All that would please herhe gathered that from her spendthrift habits.
Emma nevertheless concealed many of these extravagant fancies, such as her wish to have a blue tilbury to drive into Rouen, drawn by an English horse and driven by a groom in top-boots.
It was Justin who had inspired her with this whim, by begging her to take him into her service as valet-de-chambre*, and if the privation of it did not lessen the pleasure of her arrival at each rendezvous, it certainly augmented the bitterness of the return.
Often, when they talked together of Paris, she ended by murmuring, "Ah! how happy we should be there!"
"Are we not happy?" gently answered the young man passing his hands over her hair.
"Yes, that is true," she said.
To her husband she was more charming than ever.
So he thought himself the most fortunate of men and Emma was without uneasiness, when, one evening suddenly he said
"Well, I saw her just now," Charles went on, "at Madame Liegeard's.
I spoke to her about you, and she doesn't know you."
However, she replied quite naturally
"Ah! no doubt she forgot my name."
And she went to the writing-table, ransacked all the drawers, rummaged the papers, and at last lost her head so completely that Charles earnestly begged her not to take so much trouble about those wretched receipts.
"Oh, I will find them," she said.
And, in fact, on the following Friday, as Charles was putting on one of his boots in the dark cabinet where his clothes were kept, he felt a piece of paper between the leather and his sock.
"It must," she replied, "have fallen from the old box of bills that is on the edge of the shelf."
From that moment her existence was but one long tissue of lies, in which she enveloped her love as in veils to hide it. It was a want, a mania, a pleasure carried to such an extent that if she said she had the day before walked on the right side of a road, one might know she had taken the left.
One morning, when she had gone, as usual, rather lightly clothed, it suddenly began to snow, and as Charles was watching the weather from the window, he caught sight of Monsieur Bournisien in the chaise of Monsieur Tuvache, who was driving him to Rouen.
Then he went down to give the priest a thick shawl that he was to hand over to Emma as soon as he reached the "Croix-Rouge."
When he got to the inn, Monsieur Bournisien asked for the wife of the Yonville doctor. The landlady replied that she very rarely came to her establishment.
So that evening, when he recognised Madame Bovary in the "Hirondelle," the cure told her his dilemma, without, however, appearing to attach much importance to it, for he began praising a preacher who was doing wonders at the Cathedral, and whom all the ladies were rushing to hear.
Still, if he did not ask for any explanation, others, later on, might prove less discreet.
So she thought well to get down each time at the "Croix-Rouge," so that the good folk of her village who saw her on the stairs should suspect nothing.
One day, however, Monsieur Lheureux met her coming out of the Hotel de Boulogne on Leon's arm; and she was frightened, thinking he would gossip. He was not such a fool.
But three days after he came to her room, shut the door, and said, "I must have some money."
She declared she could not give him any.
Lheureux burst into lamentations and reminded her of all the kindnesses he had shown her.
In fact, of the two bills signed by Charles, Emma up to the present had paid only one. As to the second, the shopkeeper, at her request, had consented to replace it by another, which again had been renewed for a long date.
Then he drew from his pocket a list of goods not paid for; to wit, the curtains, the carpet, the material for the armchairs, several dresses, and divers articles of dress, the bills for which amounted to about two thousand francs.
She bowed her head. He went on
"But if you haven't any ready money, you have an estate." And he reminded her of a miserable little hovel situated at Barneville, near Aumale, that brought in almost nothing.
"If I were in your place," he said, "I should clear myself of my debts, and have money left over."
She pointed out the difficulty of getting a purchaser. He held out the hope of finding one; but she asked him how she should manage to sell it.
"Haven't you your power of attorney?" he replied.
The phrase came to her like a breath of fresh air. "Leave me the bill," said Emma.
He came back the following week and boasted of having, after much trouble, at last discovered a certain Langlois, who, for a long time, had had an eye on the property, but without mentioning his price.
"Never mind the price!" she cried.
The thing was worth a journey, and, as she could not undertake it, he offered to go to the place to have an interview with Langlois.
On his return he announced that the purchaser proposed four thousand francs.
"Frankly," he added, "that's a good price."
She drew half the sum at once, and when she was about to pay her account the shopkeeper said
Then she looked at the bank-notes, and dreaming of the unlimited number of rendezvous represented by those two thousand francs, she stammered
"Oh!" he went on, laughing good-naturedly, "one puts anything one likes on receipts.
Don't you think I know what household affairs are?" And he looked at her fixedly, while in his hand he held two long papers that he slid between his nails.
At last, opening his pocket-book, he spread out on the table four bills to order, each for a thousand francs.
"Sign these," he said, "and keep it all!"
And taking a pen he wrote at the bottom of the account, "Received of Madame Bovary four thousand francs."
Emma grew rather confused in her calculations, and her ears tingled as if gold pieces, bursting from their bags, rang all round her on the floor.
At last Lheureux explained that he had a very good friend, Vincart, a broker at Rouen, who would discount these four bills.
Then he himself would hand over to madame the remainder after the actual debt was paid.
But instead of two thousand francs he brought only eighteen hundred, for the friend Vincart (which was only fair) had deducted two hundred francs for commission and discount.
Then he carelessly asked for a receipt.
If she had not told him about this bill, it was only to spare him such domestic worries; she sat on his knees, caressed him, cooed to him, gave him a long enumeration of all the indispensable things that had been got on credit.
Charles, at his wit's end, soon had recourse to the eternal Lheureux, who swore he would arrange matters if the doctor would sign him two bills, one of which was for seven hundred francs, payable in three months.
In order to arrange for this he wrote his mother a pathetic letter.
Instead of sending a reply she came herself; and when Emma wanted to know whether he had got anything out of her, "Yes," he replied; "but she wants to see the account."
The next morning at daybreak Emma ran to Lheureux to beg him to make out another account for not more than a thousand francs, for to show the one for four thousand it would be necessary to say that she had paid two-thirds, and confess, consequently, the sale of the estatea negotiation admirably carried out by the shopkeeper, and which, in fact, was only actually known later on.
In my time there was a single arm-chair in a house, for elderly personsat any rate it was so at my mother's, who was a good woman, I can tell you.
The other went on lecturing her, predicting they would end in the workhouse.
Luckily he had promised to destroy that power of attorney.
"Ah! he swore he would," went on the good woman.
Emma opened the window, called Charles, and the poor fellow was obliged to confess the promise torn from him by his mother.
"Thank you," said the old woman. And she threw the power of attorney into the fire.
Emma began to laugh, a strident, piercing, continuous laugh; she had an attack of hysterics.
You come here and make scenes with her!"
His mother, shrugging her shoulders, declared it was "all put on."
But Charles, rebelling for the first time, took his wife's part, so that Madame Bovary, senior, said she would leave.
She went the very next day, and on the threshold, as he was trying to detain her, she replied
You love her better than me, and you are right.
Charles nevertheless was very crestfallen before Emma, who did not hide the resentment she still felt at his want of confidence, and it needed many prayers before she would consent to have another power of attorney.
He even accompanied her to Monsieur Guillaumin to have a second one, just like the other, drawn up.
"I understand," said the notary; "a man of science can't be worried with the practical details of life."
And Charles felt relieved by this comfortable reflection, which gave his weakness the flattering appearance of higher pre-occupation.
One night she did not return to Yonville at all.
Charles lost his head with anxiety, and little Berthe would not go to bed without her mamma, and sobbed enough to break her heart.
Justin had gone out searching the road at random. Monsieur Homais even had left his pharmacy.
At last, at eleven o'clock, able to bear it no longer, Charles harnessed his chaise, jumped in, whipped up his horse, and reached the "Croix-Rouge" about two o'clock in the morning.
He thought that the clerk had perhaps seen her; but where did he live?
Happily, Charles remembered his employer's address, and rushed off there.
Day was breaking, and he could distinguish the escutcheons over the door, and knocked.
Charles knocked loudly at the shutters with his hands.
Then he was frightened, and went away.
"I am mad," he said; "no doubt they kept her to dinner at Monsieur Lormeaux'." But the Lormeaux no longer lived at Rouen.
Where can she be?"
At a cafe he asked for a Directory, and hurriedly looked for the name of Mademoiselle Lempereur, who lived at No. 74 Rue de la Renelle-des-Maroquiniers.
As he was turning into the street, Emma herself appeared at the other end of it.
He threw himself upon her rather than embraced her, crying
She passed her hand over her forehead and answered, "At Mademoiselle Lempereur's."
This was a sort of permission that she gave herself, so as to get perfect freedom in her escapades.
And she profited by it freely, fully.
When she was seized with the desire to see Leon, she set out upon any pretext; and as he was not expecting her on that day, she went to fetch him at his office.
It was a great delight at first, but soon he no longer concealed the truth, which was, that his master complained very much about these interruptions.
"Pshaw! come along," she said.
And he slipped out.
She wanted to see his lodgings; thought them poor.
He blushed at them, but she did not notice this, then advised him to buy some curtains like hers, and as he objected to the expense
"Ah! ah! you care for your money," she said laughing.
Each time Leon had to tell her everything that he had done since their last meeting.
She asked him for some versessome verses "for herself," a "love poem" in honour of her.
But he never succeeded in getting a rhyme for the second verse; and at last ended by copying a sonnet in a "Keepsake."
This was less from vanity than from the one desire of pleasing her.
He did not question her ideas; he accepted all her tastes; he was rather becoming her mistress than she his.
She had tender words and kisses that thrilled his soul.
Where could she have learnt this corruption almost incorporeal in the strength of its profanity and dissimulation?
During the journeys he made to see her, Leon had often dined at the chemist's, and he felt obliged from politeness to invite him in turn.
"Oh, my dear!" tenderly murmured Madame Homais, alarmed at the vague perils he was preparing to brave.
The druggist would formerly have taken good care not to use such an expression, but he was cultivating a gay Parisian style, which he thought in the best taste; and, like his neighbour, Madame Bovary, he questioned the clerk curiously about the customs of the capital; he even talked slang to dazzle the bourgeois, saying bender, crummy, dandy, macaroni, the cheese, cut my stick and "I'll hook it," for "I am going."
So one Thursday Emma was surprised to meet Monsieur Homais in the kitchen of the "Lion d'Or," wearing a traveller's costume, that is to say, wrapped in an old cloak which no one knew he had, while he carried a valise in one hand and the foot-warmer of his establishment in the other.
He had confided his intentions to no one, for fear of causing the public anxiety by his absence.
The idea of seeing again the place where his youth had been spent no doubt excited him, for during the whole journey he never ceased talking, and as soon as he had arrived, he jumped quickly out of the diligence to go in search of Leon.
In vain the clerk tried to get rid of him. Monsieur Homais dragged him off to the large Cafe de la Normandie, which he entered majestically, not raising his hat, thinking it very provincial to uncover in any public place.
At last she ran to his office; and, lost in all sorts of conjectures, accusing him of indifference, and reproaching herself for her weakness, she spent the afternoon, her face pressed against the window-panes.
Although he was even more intoxicated with the luxury than the rich fare, the Pommard wine all the same rather excited his faculties; and when the omelette au rhum* appeared, he began propounding immoral theories about women.
What seduced him above all else was chic. He admired an elegant toilette in a well-furnished apartment, and as to bodily qualities, he didn't dislike a young girl.
"You must be very lonely," he said suddenly, "here at Rouen. To be sure your lady-love doesn't live far away."
The young man stammered something.
He was not joking; but vanity getting the better of all prudence, Leon, in spite of himself protested.
Besides, he only liked dark women.
And whispering into his friend's ear, he pointed out the symptoms by which one could find out if a woman had passion.
He even launched into an ethnographic digression: the German was vapourish, the French woman licentious, the Italian passionate.
But before leaving he wanted to see the proprietor of the establishment and made him a few compliments.
Then the young man, to be alone, alleged he had some business engagement.
And all the while he was walking through the streets with him he talked of his wife, his children; of their future, and of his business; told him in what a decayed condition it had formerly been, and to what a degree of perfection he had raised it.
Arrived in front of the Hotel de Boulogne, Leon left him abruptly, ran up the stairs, and found his mistress in great excitement.
At mention of the chemist she flew into a passion.
He, however, piled up good reasons; it wasn't his fault; didn't she know Homaisdid she believe that he would prefer his company?
But she turned away; he drew her back, and, sinking on his knees, clasped her waist with his arms in a languorous pose, full of concupiscence and supplication.
She was standing up, her large flashing eyes looked at him seriously, almost terribly. Then tears obscured them, her red eyelids were lowered, she gave him her hands, and Leon was pressing them to his lips when a servant appeared to tell the gentleman that he was wanted.
"You will come back?" she said.
"It's a trick," said the chemist, when he saw Leon. "I wanted to interrupt this visit, that seemed to me to annoy you.
Leon vowed that he must get back to his office.
Be a man!
You'll see his dog.
Then, through cowardice, through stupidity, through that indefinable feeling that drags us into the most distasteful acts, he allowed himself to be led off to Bridoux', whom they found in his small yard, superintending three workmen, who panted as they turned the large wheel of a machine for making seltzer-water.
At last he managed to get rid of him, and rushed straight to the hotel.
This failing to keep their rendezvous seemed to her an insult, and she tried to rake up other reasons to separate herself from him.
He was incapable of heroism, weak, banal, more spiritless than a woman, avaricious too, and cowardly.
Then, growing calmer, she at length discovered that she had, no doubt, calumniated him.
They gradually came to talking more frequently of matters outside their love, and in the letters that Emma wrote him she spoke of flowers, verses, the moon and the stars, naive resources of a waning passion striving to keep itself alive by all external aids.
She was constantly promising herself a profound felicity on her next journey. Then she confessed to herself that she felt nothing extraordinary.
She undressed brutally, tearing off the thin laces of her corset that nestled around her hips like a gliding snake.
She went on tiptoe, barefooted, to see once more that the door was closed, then, pale, serious, and, without speaking, with one movement, she threw herself upon his breast with a long shudder.
He did not dare to question her; but, seeing her so skilled, she must have passed, he thought, through every experience of suffering and of pleasure.
Besides, he rebelled against his absorption, daily more marked, by her personality.
He even strove not to love her; then, when he heard the creaking of her boots, he turned coward, like drunkards at the sight of strong drinks.
She brought roses to her breast from Yonville, which she threw into his face; was anxious about his health, gave him advice as to his conduct; and, in order the more surely to keep her hold on him, hoping perhaps that heaven would take her part, she tied a medal of the Virgin round his neck.
She inquired like a virtuous mother about his companions.
She would have liked to be able to watch over his life; and the idea occurred to her of having him followed in the streets.
But her pride revolted at this.
One day, when they had parted early and she was returning alone along the boulevard, she saw the walls of her convent; then she sat down on a form in the shade of the elm-trees.
How she longed for the ineffable sentiments of love that she had tried to figure to herself out of books!
The first month of her marriage, her rides in the wood, the viscount that waltzed, and Lagardy singing, all repassed before her eyes.
And Leon suddenly appeared to her as far off as the others.
"Yet I love him," she said to herself.
Whence came this insufficiency in lifethis instantaneous turning to decay of everything on which she leant?
And it seemed to her that she had been there on that form an eternity.
Once, however, a wretched-looking man, rubicund and bald, came to her house, saying he had been sent by Monsieur Vincart of Rouen.
He took out the pins that held together the side-pockets of his long green overcoat, stuck them into his sleeve, and politely handed her a paper.
It was a bill for seven hundred francs, signed by her, and which Lheureux, in spite of all his professions, had paid away to Vincart. She sent her servant for him.
He could not come. Then the stranger, who had remained standing, casting right and left curious glances, that his thick, fair eyebrows hid, asked with a naive air
I will send next week; he must wait; yes, till next week."
But the next day at twelve o'clock she received a summons, and the sight of the stamped paper, on which appeared several times in large letters, "Maitre Hareng, bailiff at Buchy," so frightened her that she rushed in hot haste to the linendraper's.
She found him in his shop, doing up a parcel.
"Your obedient!" he said; "I am at your service."
But Lheureux, all the same, went on with his work, helped by a young girl of about thirteen, somewhat hunch-backed, who was at once his clerk and his servant.
Then, his clogs clattering on the shop-boards, he went up in front of Madame Bovary to the first door, and introduced her into a narrow closet, where, in a large bureau in sapon-wood, lay some ledgers, protected by a horizontal padlocked iron bar. Against the wall, under some remnants of calico, one glimpsed a safe, but of such dimensions that it must contain something besides bills and money. Monsieur Lheureux, in fact, went in for pawnbroking, and it was there that he had put Madame Bovary's gold chain, together with the earrings of poor old Tellier, who, at last forced to sell out, had bought a meagre store of grocery at Quincampoix, where he was dying of catarrh amongst his candles, that were less yellow than his face.
And she showed him the paper.
Then she grew angry, reminding him of the promise he had given not to pay away her bills.
"And what will happen now?" she went on.
You don't know him; he's more ferocious than an Arab!"
And opening one of his ledgers, "See," he said.
Then running up the page with his finger, "Let's see! let's see! August 3d, two hundred francs; June 17th, a hundred and fifty; March 23d, forty-six.
She wept; she even called him "her good Monsieur Lheureux."
But he always fell back upon "that rascal Vincart."
Besides, he hadn't a brass farthing; no one was paying him now-a-days; they were eating his coat off his back; a poor shopkeeper like him couldn't advance money.
Emma was silent, and Monsieur Lheureux, who was biting the feathers of a quill, no doubt became uneasy at her silence, for he went on
"Besides," said she, "as soon as the balance of Barneville"
And on hearing that Langlois had not yet paid he seemed much surprised.
On this he closed his eyes to reflect, wrote down a few figures, and declaring it would be very difficult for him, that the affair was shady, and that he was being bled, he wrote out four bills for two hundred and fifty francs each, to fall due month by month.
Next he carelessly showed her several new goods, not one of which, however, was in his opinion worthy of madame.
He hoped by this confession of dishonesty to others to quite convince her of his probity to her.
Then he called her back to show her three yards of guipure that he had lately picked up "at a sale."
And, more ready than a juggler, he wrapped up the guipure in some blue paper and put it in Emma's hands.
"Yes, another time," he replied, turning on his heel.
That same evening she urged Bovary to write to his mother, to ask her to send as quickly as possible the whole of the balance due from the father's estate.
The mother-in-law replied that she had nothing more, the winding up was over, and there was due to them besides Barneville an income of six hundred francs, that she would pay them punctually.
Then Madame Bovary sent in accounts to two or three patients, and she made large use of this method, which was very successful.
She was always careful to add a postscript: "Do not mention this to my husband; you know how proud he is. Excuse me.
There were some complaints; she intercepted them.
To get money she began selling her old gloves, her old hats, the old odds and ends, and she bargained rapaciously, her peasant blood standing her in good stead.
Then on her journey to town she picked up nick-nacks secondhand, that, in default of anyone else, Monsieur Lheureux would certainly take off her hands.
She bought ostrich feathers, Chinese porcelain, and trunks; she borrowed from Felicite, from Madame Lefrancois, from the landlady at the Croix-Rouge, from everybody, no matter where.
With the money she at last received from Barneville she paid two bills; the other fifteen hundred francs fell due.
Sometimes, it is true, she tried to make a calculation, but she discovered things so exorbitant that she could not believe them possible.
Then she recommenced, soon got confused, gave it all up, and thought no more about it.
If Charles timidly ventured a remark, she answered roughly that it wasn't her fault.
He explained everything through her old nervous illness, and reproaching himself with having taken her infirmities for faults, accused himself of egotism, and longed to go and take her in his arms.
"Ah, no!" he said to himself; "I should worry her."
And he did not stir.
After dinner he walked about alone in the garden; he took little Berthe on his knees, and unfolding his medical journal, tried to teach her to read.
Then he comforted her; went to fetch water in her can to make rivers on the sand path, or broke off branches from the privet hedges to plant trees in the beds.
Then the child grew cold and asked for her mother.
Autumn was setting in, and the leaves were already falling, as they did two years ago when she was ill.
And he walked up and down, his hands behind his back.
Madame was in her room, which no one entered.
She stayed there all day long, torpid, half dressed, and from time to time burning Turkish pastilles which she had bought at Rouen in an Algerian's shop.
In order not to have at night this sleeping man stretched at her side, by dint of manoeuvring, she at last succeeded in banishing him to the second floor, while she read till morning extravagant books, full of pictures of orgies and thrilling situations.
Often, seized with fear, she cried out, and Charles hurried to her.
"Oh, go away!" she would say.
Or at other times, consumed more ardently than ever by that inner flame to which adultery added fuel, panting, tremulous, all desire, she threw open her window, breathed in the cold air, shook loose in the wind her masses of hair, too heavy, and, gazing upon the stars, longed for some princely love. She thought of him, of Leon.
She would then have given anything for a single one of those meetings that surfeited her.
One day she drew six small silver-gilt spoons from her bag (they were old Roualt's wedding present), begging him to pawn them at once for her, and Leon obeyed, though the proceeding annoyed him. He was afraid of compromising himself.
Then, on, reflection, he began to think his mistress's ways were growing odd, and that they were perhaps not wrong in wishing to separate him from her.
In fact someone had sent his mother a long anonymous letter to warn her that he was "ruining himself with a married woman," and the good lady at once conjuring up the eternal bugbear of families, the vague pernicious creature, the siren, the monster, who dwells fantastically in depths of love, wrote to Lawyer Dubocage, his employer, who behaved perfectly in the affair. He kept him for three quarters of an hour trying to open his eyes, to warn him of the abyss into which he was falling. Such an intrigue would damage him later on, when he set up for himself. He implored him to break with her, and, if he would not make this sacrifice in his own interest, to do it at least for his, Dubocage's sake.
At last Leon swore he would not see Emma again, and he reproached himself with not having kept his word, considering all the worry and lectures this woman might still draw down upon him, without reckoning the jokes made by his companions as they sat round the stove in the morning. Besides, he was soon to be head clerk; it was time to settle down. So he gave up his flute, exalted sentiments, and poetry; for every bourgeois in the flush of his youth, were it but for a day, a moment, has believed himself capable of immense passions, of lofty enterprises. The most mediocre libertine has dreamed of sultanas; every notary bears within him the debris of a poet.
He was bored now when Emma suddenly began to sob on his breast, and his heart, like the people who can only stand a certain amount of music, dozed to the sound of a love whose delicacies he no longer noted.
She was as sick of him as he was weary of her.
Then, though she might feel humiliated at the baseness of such enjoyment, she clung to it from habit or from corruption, and each day she hungered after them the more, exhausting all felicity in wishing for too much of it.
She accused Leon of her baffled hopes, as if he had betrayed her; and she even longed for some catastrophe that would bring about their separation, since she had not the courage to make up her mind to it herself.
She none the less went on writing him love letters, in virtue of the notion that a woman must write to her lover.
But whilst she wrote it was another man she saw, a phantom fashioned out of her most ardent memories, of her finest reading, her strongest lusts, and at last he became so real, so tangible, that she palpitated wondering, without, however, the power to imagine him clearly, so lost was he, like a god, beneath the abundance of his attributes.
He dwelt in that azure land where silk ladders hang from balconies under the breath of flowers, in the light of the moon. She felt him near her; he was coming, and would carry her right away in a kiss.
Then she fell back exhausted, for these transports of vague love wearied her more than great debauchery.
She now felt constant ache all over her.
Often she even received summonses, stamped paper that she barely looked at. She would have liked not to be alive, or to be always asleep.
On Mid-Lent she did not return to Yonville, but in the evening went to a masked ball. She wore velvet breeches, red stockings, a club wig, and three-cornered hat cocked on one side. She danced all night to the wild tones of the trombones; people gathered round her, and in the morning she found herself on the steps of the theatre together with five or six masks, debardeuses* and sailors, Leon's comrades, who were talking about having supper.
There were a clerk, two medical students, and a shopmanwhat company for her!
Then she was frightened, pushed back her chair, and cast down her eyes.
The others began to eat; she ate nothing.
Her head was on fire, her eyes smarted, and her skin was ice-cold.
In her head she seemed to feel the floor of the ball-room rebounding again beneath the rhythmical pulsation of the thousands of dancing feet.
And now the smell of the punch, the smoke of the cigars, made her giddy.
She fainted, and they carried her to the window.
She slipped away suddenly, threw off her costume, told Leon she must get back, and at last was alone at the Hotel de Boulogne.
Everything, even herself, was now unbearable to her.
She wished that, taking wing like a bird, she could fly somewhere, far away to regions of purity, and there grow young again.
She walked rapidly; the fresh air calming her; and, little by little, the faces of the crowd, the masks, the quadrilles, the lights, the supper, those women, all disappeared like mists fading away.
Then, reaching the "Croix-Rouge," she threw herself on the bed in her little room on the second floor, where there were pictures of the "Tour de Nesle."
At four o'clock Hivert awoke her.
When she got home, Felicite showed her behind the clock a grey paper.
What judgment? As a matter of fact, the evening before another paper had been brought that she had not yet seen, and she was stunned by these words
"To pay the sum of eight thousand francs." And there was even at the bottom, "She will be constrained thereto by every form of law, and notably by a writ of distraint on her furniture and effects."
Lheureux, she thought, wanted to frighten her again; for she saw through all his devices, the object of his kindnesses.
What reassured her was the very magnitude of the sum.
However, by dint of buying and not paying, of borrowing, signing bills, and renewing these bills that grew at each new falling-in, she had ended by preparing a capital for Monsieur Lheureux which he was impatiently awaiting for his speculations.
She presented herself at his place with an offhand air.
He turned away slowly, and, folding his arms, said to her
And she began beating about the bush; she had known nothing about it; it was a surprise.
"It never does any harm," he replied.
She turned coward; she implored him; she even pressed her pretty white and slender hand against the shopkeeper's knee.
"You are a wretch!" she cried.
And Lheureux drew from his strong box the receipt for eighteen hundred francs that she had given him when Vincart had discounted the bills.
"Do you think," he added, "that he'll not understand your little theft, the poor dear man?"
I'll show him!" Then he approached her, and in a soft voice said
"But where am I to get any?" said Emma, wringing her hands.
And he looked at her in so keen, so terrible a fashion, that she shuddered to her very heart.
"I promise you," she said, "to sign"
"Get along!" he said, shrugging his shoulders; "you've not got anything."
And he called through the peep-hole that looked down into the shop
And he pushed her gently towards the staircase.
"What do I care?" said he, shutting the door.
She was stoical the next day when Maitre Hareng, the bailiff, with two assistants, presented himself at her house to draw up the inventory for the distraint.
They began with Bovary's consulting-room, and did not write down the phrenological head, which was considered an "instrument of his profession"; but in the kitchen they counted the plates; the saucepans, the chairs, the candlesticks, and in the bedroom all the nick-nacks on the whatnot. They examined her dresses, the linen, the dressing-room; and her whole existence to its most intimate details, was, like a corpse on whom a post-mortem is made, outspread before the eyes of these three men.
Maitre Hareng, buttoned up in his thin black coat, wearing a white choker and very tight foot-straps, repeated from time to time"Allow me, madame. You allow me?"
"Charming! very pretty." Then he began writing again, dipping his pen into the horn inkstand in his left hand.
"But allow me, for I must make sure the box contains nothing else." And he tipped up the papers lightly, as if to shake out napoleons.
Then she grew angered to see this coarse hand, with fingers red and pulpy like slugs, touching these pages against which her heart had beaten.
Emma had sent her out to watch for Bovary in order to keep him off, and they hurriedly installed the man in possession under the roof, where he swore he would remain.
During the evening Charles seemed to her careworn.
Emma watched him with a look of anguish, fancying she saw an accusation in every line of his face.
Then, when her eyes wandered over the chimney-piece ornamented with Chinese screens, over the large curtains, the armchairs, all those things, in a word, that had, softened the bitterness of her life, remorse seized her or rather an immense regret, that, far from crushing, irritated her passion. Charles placidly poked the fire, both his feet on the fire-dogs.
Once the man, no doubt bored in his hiding-place, made a slight noise.
"No," she replied; "it is a window that has been left open, and is rattling in the wind."
The next day, Sunday, she went to Rouen to call on all the brokers whose names she knew.
She was not discouraged; and those whom she did manage to see she asked for money, declaring she must have some, and that she would pay it back.
Some laughed in her face; all refused.
At two o'clock she hurried to Leon, and knocked at the door.
At length he appeared.
"No; but" And he admitted that his landlord didn't like his having "women" there.
"I must speak to you," she went on.
Then he took down the key, but she stopped him.
On arriving she drank off a large glass of water.
And, shaking him by both hands that she grasped tightly, she added
And thereupon, telling him the story of the distraint, she explained her distress to him; for Charles knew nothing of it; her mother-in-law detested her; old Rouault could do nothing; but he, Leon, he would set about finding this indispensable sum.
"What a coward you are!" she cried.
Then he said stupidly, "You are exaggerating the difficulty.
Besides, Leon, could be security instead of her.
Emma shrugged her shoulders as she stamped her feet.
He heard her murmuring
"At your office." And she looked at him.
An infernal boldness looked out from her burning eyes, and their lids drew close together with a lascivious and encouraging look, so that the young man felt himself growing weak beneath the mute will of this woman who was urging him to a crime.
Then he was afraid, and to avoid any explanation he smote his forehead, crying
"Morel is to come back to-night; he will not refuse me, I hope" (this was one of his friends, the son of a very rich merchant); "and I will bring it you to-morrow," he added.
Emma did not seem to welcome this hope with all the joy he had expected.
Did she suspect the lie?
He pressed her hand, but it felt quite lifeless.
Four o'clock struck, and she rose to return to Yonville, mechanically obeying the force of old habits.
Then she remembered the day when, all anxious and full of hope, she had entered beneath this large nave, that had opened out before her, less profound than her love; and she walked on weeping beneath her veil, giddy, staggering, almost fainting.
Why, it was hethe Viscount.
She was so overwhelmed, so sad, that she had to lean against a wall to keep herself from falling.
Then she thought she had been mistaken.
Anyhow, she did not know.
All within her and around her was abandoning her.
She felt lost, sinking at random into indefinable abysses, and it was almost with joy that, on reaching the "Croix-Rouge," she saw the good Homais, who was watching a large box full of pharmaceutical stores being hoisted on to the "Hirondelle."
In his hand he held tied in a silk handkerchief six cheminots for his wife.
The druggist's wife crunched them up as they had doneheroically, despite her wretched teeth. And so whenever Homais journeyed to town, he never failed to bring her home some that he bought at the great baker's in the Rue Massacre.
"Charmed to see you," he said, offering Emma a hand to help her into the "Hirondelle." Then he hung up his cheminots to the cords of the netting, and remained bare-headed in an attitude pensive and Napoleonic.
But when the blind man appeared as usual at the foot of the hill he exclaimed
The blind man held out his hat, that flapped about at the door, as if it were a bag in the lining that had come unnailed.
And though he knew the poor devil, he pretended to see him for the first time, murmured something about "cornea," "opaque cornea," "sclerotic," "facies," then asked him in a paternal tone
The blind man went on with his song; he seemed, moreover, almost idiotic.
At last Monsieur Homais opened his purse
But the druggist said that he would cure himself with an antiphlogistic pomade of his own composition, and he gave his address"Monsieur Homais, near the market, pretty well known."
The blind man sank down on his haunches, with his head thrown back, whilst he rolled his greenish eyes, lolled out his tongue, and rubbed his stomach with both hands as he uttered a kind of hollow yell like a famished dog.
Emma, filled with disgust, threw him over her shoulder a five-franc piece.
It was all her fortune.
It seemed to her very fine thus to throw it away.
The sight of the well-known objects that defiled before her eyes gradually diverted Emma from her present trouble.
An intolerable fatigue overwhelmed her, and she reached her home stupefied, discouraged, almost asleep.
"Come what may come!" she said to herself. "And then, who knows?
At nine o'clock in the morning she was awakened by the sound of voices in the Place.
There was a crowd round the market reading a large bill fixed to one of the posts, and she saw Justin, who was climbing on to a stone and tearing down the bill.
Monsieur Homais came out of his shop, and Mere Lefrangois, in the midst of the crowd, seemed to be perorating.
And the poor girl, deeply moved, handed her a yellow paper that she had just torn off the door.
Emma read with a glance that all her furniture was for sale.
She dressed, put on her black gown, and her hood with jet beads, and that she might not be seen (there was still a crowd on the Place), she took the path by the river, outside the village.
At the sound of the bell, Theodore in a red waistcoat appeared on the steps; he came to open the door almost familiarly, as to an acquaintance, and showed her into the dining-room.
The notary came in pressing his palm-leaf dressing-gown to his breast with his left arm, while with the other hand he raised and quickly put on again his brown velvet cap, pretentiously cocked on the right side, whence looked out the ends of three fair curls drawn from the back of the head, following the line of his bald skull.
After he had offered her a seat he sat down to breakfast, apologising profusely for his rudeness.
"I have come," she said, "to beg you, sir"
And she began explaining her position to him.
Monsieur Guillaumin knew it, being secretly associated with the linendraper, from whom he always got capital for the loans on mortgages that he was asked to make.
So he knew (and better than she herself) the long story of the bills, small at first, bearing different names as endorsers, made out at long dates, and constantly renewed up to the day, when, gathering together all the protested bills, the shopkeeper had bidden his friend Vincart take in his own name all the necessary proceedings, not wishing to pass for a tiger with his fellow-citizens.
She mingled her story with recriminations against Lheureux, to which the notary replied from time to time with some insignificant word.
Eating his cutlet and drinking his tea, he buried his chin in his sky-blue cravat, into which were thrust two diamond pins, held together by a small gold chain; and he smiled a singular smile, in a sugary, ambiguous fashion.
But noticing that her feet were damp, he said
Then she tried to move him, and, growing moved herself, she began telling him about the poorness of her home, her worries, her wants. He could understand that; an elegant woman! and, without leaving off eating, he had turned completely round towards her, so that his knee brushed against her boot, whose sole curled round as it smoked against the stove.
But when she asked for a thousand sous, he closed his lips, and declared he was very sorry he had not had the management of her fortune before, for there were hundreds of ways very convenient, even for a lady, of turning her money to account.
They might, either in the turf-peats of Grumesnil or building-ground at Havre, almost without risk, have ventured on some excellent speculations; and he let her consume herself with rage at the thought of the fabulous sums that she would certainly have made.
"How was it," he went on, "that you didn't come to me?"
"I hardly know," she said.
He held out his hand, took hers, covered it with a greedy kiss, then held it on his knee; and he played delicately with her fingers whilst he murmured a thousand blandishments.
His insipid voice murmured like a running brook; a light shone in his eyes through the glimmering of his spectacles, and his hand was advancing up Emma's sleeve to press her arm. She felt against her cheek his panting breath.
This man oppressed her horribly.
He dragged himself towards her on his knees, regardless of his dressing-gown.
He seized her by her waist.
And she went out.
The notary remained quite stupefied, his eyes fixed on his fine embroidered slippers.
Besides, he reflected that such an adventure might have carried him too far.
"What a wretch! what a scoundrel! what an infamy!" she said to herself, as she fled with nervous steps beneath the aspens of the path. The disappointment of her failure increased the indignation of her outraged modesty; it seemed to her that Providence pursued her implacably, and, strengthening herself in her pride, she had never felt so much esteem for herself nor so much contempt for others. A spirit of warfare transformed her. She would have liked to strike all men, to spit in their faces, to crush them, and she walked rapidly straight on, pale, quivering, maddened, searching the empty horizon with tear-dimmed eyes, and as it were rejoicing in the hate that was choking her.
When she saw her house a numbness came over her.
She could not go on; and yet she must.
Besides, whither could she flee?
Felicite was waiting for her at the door. "Well?"
And for a quarter of an hour the two of them went over the various persons in Yonville who might perhaps be inclined to help her.
She had tried everything; there was nothing more to be done now; and when Charles came in she would have to say to him
In your own house you do not possess a chair, a pin, a straw, and it is I, poor man, who have ruined you."
Then there would be a great sob; next he would weep abundantly, and at last, the surprise past, he would forgive her.
"Yes," she murmured, grinding her teeth, "he will forgive me, he who would give a million if I would forgive him for having known me! Never! never!"
This thought of Bovary's superiority to her exasperated her.
Then, whether she confessed or did not confess, presently, immediately, to-morrow, he would know the catastrophe all the same; so she must wait for this horrible scene, and bear the weight of his magnanimity.
The desire to return to Lheureux's seized herwhat would be the use?
To write to her fatherit was too late; and perhaps, she began to repent now that she had not yielded to that other, when she heard the trot of a horse in the alley.
It was he; he was opening the gate; he was whiter than the plaster wall.
Rushing to the stairs, she ran out quickly to the square; and the wife of the mayor, who was talking to Lestiboudois in front of the church, saw her go in to the tax-collector's.
He was alone in his garret, busy imitating in wood one of those indescribable bits of ivory, composed of crescents, of spheres hollowed out one within the other, the whole as straight as an obelisk, and of no use whatever; and he was beginning on the last piecehe was nearing his goal. In the twilight of the workshop the white dust was flying from his tools like a shower of sparks under the hoofs of a galloping horse; the two wheels were turning, droning; Binet smiled, his chin lowered, his nostrils distended, and, in a word, seemed lost in one of those complete happinesses that, no doubt, belong only to commonplace occupations, which amuse the mind with facile difficulties, and satisfy by a realisation of that beyond which such minds have not a dream.
"Ah! there she is!" exclaimed Madame Tuvache.
But it was impossible because of the lathe to hear what she was saying.
"She is begging him to give her time for paying her taxes."
They saw her walking up and down, examining the napkin-rings, the candlesticks, the banister rails against the walls, while Binet stroked his beard with satisfaction.
"Do you think she wants to order something of him?" said Madame Tuvache.
"Why, he doesn't sell anything," objected her neighbour.
The tax-collector seemed to be listening with wide-open eyes, as if he did not understand. She went on in a tender, suppliant manner. She came nearer to him, her breast heaving; they no longer spoke.
"Is she making him advances?" said Madame Tuvache.
Binet was scarlet to his very ears.
She took hold of his hands.
And no doubt she was suggesting something abominable to him; for the tax-collectoryet he was brave, had fought at Bautzen and at Lutzen, had been through the French campaign, and had even been recommended for the crosssuddenly, as at the sight of a serpent, recoiled as far as he could from her, crying
"But where is she?" continued Madame Caron, for she had disappeared whilst they spoke; then catching sight of her going up the Grande Rue, and turning to the right as if making for the cemetery, they were lost in conjectures.
"Nurse Rollet," she said on reaching the nurse's, "I am choking; unlace me!"
Nurse Rollet covered her with a petticoat and remained standing by her side.
Then, as she did not answer, the good woman withdrew, took her wheel and began spinning flax.
"Oh, leave off!" she murmured, fancying she heard Binet's lathe.
"What's bothering her?" said the nurse to herself. "Why has she come here?"
She had rushed thither; impelled by a kind of horror that drove her from her home.
Lying on her back, motionless, and with staring eyes, she saw things but vaguely, although she tried to with idiotic persistence.
She looked at the scales on the walls, two brands smoking end to end, and a long spider crawling over her head in a rent in the beam.
At last she began to collect her thoughts.
Then, carried away as by a rushing torrent, she soon began to recall the day before.
"What time is it?" she asked.
Mere Rollet went out, raised the fingers of her right hand to that side of the sky that was brightest, and came back slowly, saying
For he would come; he would have found some money. But he would, perhaps, go down yonder, not guessing she was here, and she told the nurse to run to her house to fetch him.
She wondered now that she had not thought of him from the first.
Yesterday he had given his word; he would not break it.
And she already saw herself at Lheureux's spreading out her three bank-notes on his bureau.
Then she would have to invent some story to explain matters to Bovary.
The nurse, however, was a long while gone. But, as there was no clock in the cot, Emma feared she was perhaps exaggerating the length of time. She began walking round the garden, step by step; she went into the path by the hedge, and returned quickly, hoping that the woman would have come back by another road. At last, weary of waiting, assailed by fears that she thrust from her, no longer conscious whether she had been here a century or a moment, she sat down in a corner, closed her eyes, and stopped her ears. The gate grated; she sprang up. Before she had spoken Mere Rollet said to her
She gasped as she turned her eyes about her, while the peasant woman, frightened at her face, drew back instinctively, thinking her mad.
Suddenly she struck her brow and uttered a cry; for the thought of Rodolphe, like a flash of lightning in a dark night, had passed into her soul.
And besides, should he hesitate to do her this service, she would know well enough how to constrain him to it by re-waking, in a single moment, their lost love.
So she set out towards La Huchette, not seeing that she was hastening to offer herself to that which but a while ago had so angered her, not in the least conscious of her prostitution.
She asked herself as she walked along, "What am I going to say?
How shall I begin?" And as she went on she recognised the thickets, the trees, the sea-rushes on the hill, the chateau yonder.
All the sensations of her first tenderness came back to her, and her poor aching heart opened out amorously.
A warm wind blew in her face; the melting snow fell drop by drop from the buds to the grass.
She entered, as she used to, through the small park-gate. She reached the avenue bordered by a double row of dense lime-trees.
When she placed her fingers on the lock her strength suddenly deserted her.
She was afraid, almost wished he would not be there, though this was her only hope, her last chance of salvation.
She collected her thoughts for one moment, and, strengthening herself by the feeling of present necessity, went in.
He was in front of the fire, both his feet on the mantelpiece, smoking a pipe.
"What! it is you!" he said, getting up hurriedly.
And, despite all her efforts, it was impossible for her to open her lips.
"Oh," she replied bitterly, "they are poor charms since you disdained them."
Then he began a long explanation of his conduct, excusing himself in vague terms, in default of being able to invent better.
She yielded to his words, still more to his voice and the sight of him, so that, she pretended to believe, or perhaps believed; in the pretext he gave for their rupture; this was a secret on which depended the honour, the very life of a third person.
"No matter!" she said, looking at him sadly. "I have suffered much."
"You think so?" she said, drawing nearer, and she sighed.
It was then that she took his hand, and they remained some time, their fingers intertwined, like that first day at the Show.
With a gesture of pride he struggled against this emotion.
But sinking upon his breast she said to him
For, all the three years, he had carefully avoided her in consequence of that natural cowardice that characterises the stronger sex.
You are indeed a man; you have everything to make one love you.
And she was charming to see, with her eyes, in which trembled a tear, like the rain of a storm in a blue corolla.
He had drawn her upon his knees, and with the back of his hand was caressing her smooth hair, where in the twilight was mirrored like a golden arrow one last ray of the sun.
She bent down her brow; at last he kissed her on the eyelids quite gently with the tips of his lips.
Rodolphe thought this was an outburst of her love. As she did not speak, he took this silence for a last remnant of resistance, and then he cried out
He was kneeling by her.
"Butbut" said he, getting up slowly, while his face assumed a grave expression.
"You know," she went on quickly, "that my husband had placed his whole fortune at a notary's.
"Ah!" thought Rodolphe, turning very pale, "that was what she came for." At last he said with a calm air
If he had had them, he would, no doubt, have given them, although it is generally disagreeable to do such fine things: a demand for money being, of all the winds that blow upon love, the coldest and most destructive.
First she looked at him for some moments.
"You have not got them!" she repeated several times. "You have not got them!
Rodolphe interrupted her, declaring he was "hard up" himself.
And fixing her eyes upon an embossed carabine, that shone against its panoply, "But when one is so poor one doesn't have silver on the butt of one's gun. One doesn't buy a clock inlaid with tortoise shell," she went on, pointing to a buhl timepiece, "nor silver-gilt whistles for one's whips," and she touched them, "nor charms for one's watch.
Oh, he wants for nothing! even to a liqueur-stand in his room!
Why, if it were but that," she cried, taking up two studs from the mantelpiece, "but the least of these trifles, one can get money for them.
And then when I come back to himto him, rich, happy, freeto implore the help the first stranger would give, a suppliant, and bringing back to him all my tenderness, he repulses me because it would cost him three thousand francs!"
The walls trembled, the ceiling was crushing her, and she passed back through the long alley, stumbling against the heaps of dead leaves scattered by the wind.
At last she reached the ha-ha hedge in front of the gate; she broke her nails against the lock in her haste to open it.
Then a hundred steps farther on, breathless, almost falling, she stopped.
And now turning round, she once more saw the impassive chateau, with the park, the gardens, the three courts, and all the windows of the facade.
She remained lost in stupor, and having no more consciousness of herself than through the beating of her arteries, that she seemed to hear bursting forth like a deafening music filling all the fields.
The earth beneath her feet was more yielding than the sea, and the furrows seemed to her immense brown waves breaking into foam.
Everything in her head, of memories, ideas, went off at once like a thousand pieces of fireworks.
She saw her father, Lheureux's closet, their room at home, another landscape.
Madness was coming upon her; she grew afraid, and managed to recover herself, in a confused way, it is true, for she did not in the least remember the cause of the terrible condition she was in, that is to say, the question of money.
She suffered only in her love, and felt her soul passing from her in this memory; as wounded men, dying, feel their life ebb from their bleeding wounds.
Suddenly it seemed to her that fiery spheres were exploding in the air like fulminating balls when they strike, and were whirling, whirling, to melt at last upon the snow between the branches of the trees.
They multiplied and drew near her, penetrating, her.
It all disappeared; she recognised the lights of the houses that shone through the fog.
Now her situation, like an abyss, rose up before her.
She was panting as if her heart would burst.
Then in an ecstasy of heroism, that made her almost joyous, she ran down the hill, crossed the cow-plank, the foot-path, the alley, the market, and reached the chemist's shop.
She was about to enter, but at the sound of the bell someone might come, and slipping in by the gate, holding her breath, feeling her way along the walls, she went as far as the door of the kitchen, where a candle stuck on the stove was burning.
Justin in his shirt-sleeves was carrying out a dish.
He returned; she tapped at the window.
"The key! the one for upstairs where he keeps the"
And he looked at her, astonished at the pallor of her face, that stood out white against the black background of the night.
Without understanding what she wanted, he had the presentiment of something terrible.
But she went on quickly in a love voice; in a sweet, melting voice, "I want it; give it to me."
She pretended that she wanted to kill the rats that kept her from sleeping.
And he followed her.
The key turned in the lock, and she went straight to the third shelf, so well did her memory guide her, seized the blue jar, tore out the cork, plunged in her hand, and withdrawing it full of a white powder, she began eating it.
"Stop!" he cried, rushing at her.
Then she went home, suddenly calmed, and with something of the serenity of one that had performed a duty.
He cried aloud, wept, fainted, but she did not return.
Where could she be?
He sent Felicite to Homais, to Monsieur Tuvache, to Lheureux, to the "Lion d'Or," everywhere, and in the intervals of his agony he saw his reputation destroyed, their fortune lost, Berthe's future ruined.
At last, unable to bear it any longer, and fancying she had gone to Rouen, he set out along the highroad, walked a mile, met no one, again waited, and returned home.
She sat down at her writing-table and wrote a letter, which she sealed slowly, adding the date and the hour.
Then she said in a solemn tone:
She lay down full length on her bed.
A bitter taste that she felt in her mouth awakened her.
She saw Charles, and again closed her eyes.
She was studying herself curiously, to see if she were not suffering.
She heard the ticking of the clock, the crackling of the fire, and Charles breathing as he stood upright by her bed.
"Ah! it is but a little thing, death!" she thought. "I shall fall asleep and all will be over."
"I am thirsty; oh! so thirsty," she sighed.
"What is it?" said Charles, who was handing her a glass.
She was seized with a sickness so sudden that she had hardly time to draw out her handkerchief from under the pillow.
"Take it away," she said quickly; "throw it away."
He spoke to her; she did not answer.
She lay motionless, afraid that the slightest movement might make her vomit.
But she felt an icy cold creeping from her feet to her heart.
"Ah! it is beginning," she murmured.
She turned her head from side to side with a gentle movement full of agony, while constantly opening her mouth as if something very heavy were weighing upon her tongue.
"This is extraordinaryvery singular," he repeated.
But she said in a firm voice, "No, you are mistaken."
Then gently, and almost as caressing her, he passed his hand over her stomach.
Then she began to groan, faintly at first.
Her shoulders were shaken by a strong shuddering, and she was growing paler than the sheets in which her clenched fingers buried themselves.
Drops of sweat oozed from her bluish face, that seemed as if rigid in the exhalations of a metallic vapour. Her teeth chattered, her dilated eyes looked vaguely about her, and to all questions she replied only with a shake of the head; she even smiled once or twice. Gradually, her moaning grew louder; a hollow shriek burst from her; she pretended she was better and that she would get up presently. But she was seized with convulsions and cried out
He threw himself on his knees by her bed.
And he looked at her with a tenderness in his eyes such as she had never seen.
"Well, therethere!" she said in a faint voice.
He flew to the writing-table, tore open the seal, and read aloud: "Accuse no one." He stopped, passed his hands across his eyes, and read it over again.
Distraught, faltering, reeling, Charles wandered about the room. He knocked against the furniture, tore his hair, and the chemist had never believed that there could be so terrible a sight.
He lost his head, and made more than fifteen rough copies.
Hippolyte went to Neufchatel, and Justin so spurred Bovary's horse that he left it foundered and three parts dead by the hill at Bois-Guillaume.
Charles tried to look up his medical dictionary, but could not read it; the lines were dancing.
For he knew that in cases of poisoning an analysis must be made; and the other, who did not understand, answered
"Oh, do anything! save her!"
Then going back to her, he sank upon the carpet, and lay there with his head leaning against the edge of her bed, sobbing.
"Don't cry," she said to him. "Soon I shall not trouble you any more."
And she passed her hand slowly over his hair.
The sweetness of this sensation deepened his sadness; he felt his whole being dissolving in despair at the thought that he must lose her, just when she was confessing more love for him than ever.
And he could think of nothing; he did not know, he did not dare; the urgent need for some immediate resolution gave the finishing stroke to the turmoil of his mind.
So she had done, she thought, with all the treachery; and meanness, and numberless desires that had tortured her.
She hated no one now; a twilight dimness was settling upon her thoughts, and, of all earthly noises, Emma heard none but the intermittent lamentations of this poor heart, sweet and indistinct like the echo of a symphony dying away.
"Bring me the child," she said, raising herself on her elbow.
The child, serious, and still half-asleep, was carried in on the servant's arm in her long white nightgown, from which her bare feet peeped out. She looked wonderingly at the disordered room, and half-closed her eyes, dazzled by the candles burning on the table. They reminded her, no doubt, of the morning of New Year's day and Mid-Lent, when thus awakened early by candle-light she came to her mother's bed to fetch her presents, for she began saying
Felicite held her over the bed while she still kept looking towards the mantelpiece.
"Has nurse taken it?" she asked.
And at this name, that carried her back to the memory of her adulteries and her calamities, Madame Bovary turned away her head, as at the loathing of another bitterer poison that rose to her mouth.
Her mother looked at her. "I am frightened!" cried the child, recoiling.
Emma took her hand to kiss it; the child struggled.
Take her away," cried Charles, who was sobbing in the alcove.
Then the symptoms ceased for a moment; she seemed less agitated; and at every insignificant word, at every respiration a little more easy, he regained hope.
At last, when Canivet came in, he threw himself into his arms.
But she is better.
See! look at her."
His colleague was by no means of this opinion, and, as he said of himself, "never beating about the bush," he prescribed, an emetic in order to empty the stomach completely.
Her limbs were convulsed, her whole body covered with brown spots, and her pulse slipped beneath the fingers like a stretched thread, like a harp-string nearly breaking.
After this she began to scream horribly.
She cursed the poison, railed at it, and implored it to be quick, and thrust away with her stiffened arms everything that Charles, in more agony than herself, tried to make her drink.
He stood up, his handkerchief to his lips, with a rattling sound in his throat, weeping, and choked by sobs that shook his whole body.
Felicite was running hither and thither in the room. Homais, motionless, uttered great sighs; and Monsieur Canivet, always retaining his self-command, nevertheless began to feel uneasy.
"The devil! yet she has been purged, and from the moment that the cause ceases"
"Oh, save her!" cried Bovary.
Bovary raised his hands; Canivet stopped short; and Homais pulled off his skull-cap long before the doctor had come in.
Everyone in his hospital trembled when he was angry; and his students so revered him that they tried, as soon as they were themselves in practice, to imitate him as much as possible.
So that in all the towns about they were found wearing his long wadded merino overcoat and black frock-coat, whose buttoned cuffs slightly covered his brawny handsvery beautiful hands, and that never knew gloves, as though to be more ready to plunge into suffering.
Disdainful of honours, of titles, and of academies, like one of the old Knight-Hospitallers, generous, fatherly to the poor, and practising virtue without believing in it, he would almost have passed for a saint if the keenness of his intellect had not caused him to be feared as a demon.
His glance, more penetrating than his bistouries, looked straight into your soul, and dissected every lie athwart all assertions and all reticences.
And thus he went along, full of that debonair majesty that is given by the consciousness of great talent, of fortune, and of forty years of a labourious and irreproachable life.
He frowned as soon as he had passed the door when he saw the cadaverous face of Emma stretched out on her back with her mouth open.
Then, while apparently listening to Canivet, he rubbed his fingers up and down beneath his nostrils, and repeated
But he made a slow gesture with his shoulders.
Bovary watched him; they looked at one another; and this man, accustomed as he was to the sight of pain, could not keep back a tear that fell on his shirt-frill.
"She is very ill, isn't she?
Charles caught him in both his arms, and gazed at him wildly, imploringly, half-fainting against his breast.
He went out only to give an order to the coachman, with Monsieur Canivet, who did not care either to have Emma die under his hands.
He could not by temperament keep away from celebrities, so he begged Monsieur Lariviere to do him the signal honour of accepting some breakfast.
"But how did she poison herself?"
"I don't know, doctor, and I don't even know where she can have procured the arsenious acid."
At this question the young man dropped the whole lot on the ground with a crash.
"You would have done better," said the physician, "to introduce your fingers into her throat."
His colleague was silent, having just before privately received a severe lecture about his emetic, so that this good Canivet, so arrogant and so verbose at the time of the clubfoot, was to-day very modest.
Homais dilated in Amphytrionic pride, and the affecting thought of Bovary vaguely contributed to his pleasure by a kind of egotistic reflex upon himself.
He displayed his erudition, cited pell-mell cantharides, upas, the manchineel, vipers.
Madame Homais reappeared, carrying one of those shaky machines that are heated with spirits of wine; for Homais liked to make his coffee at table, having, moreover, torrefied it, pulverised it, and mixed it himself.
"Saccharum, doctor?" said he, offering the sugar.
Then he had all his children brought down, anxious to have the physician's opinion on their constitutions.
At last Monsieur Lariviere was about to leave, when Madame Homais asked for a consultation about her husband.
He was making his blood too thick by going to sleep every evening after dinner.
And, smiling a little at his unnoticed joke, the doctor opened the door.
But the chemist's shop was full of people; he had the greatest difficulty in getting rid of Monsieur Tuvache, who feared his spouse would get inflammation of the lungs, because she was in the habit of spitting on the ashes; then of Monsieur Binet, who sometimes experienced sudden attacks of great hunger; and of Madame Caron, who suffered from tinglings; of Lheureux, who had vertigo; of Lestiboudois, who had rheumatism; and of Madame Lefrancois, who had heartburn.
At last the three horses started; and it was the general opinion that he had not shown himself at all obliging.
Homais, as was due to his principles, compared priests to ravens attracted by the odour of death.
The sight of an ecclesiastic was personally disagreeable to him, for the cassock made him think of the shroud, and he detested the one from some fear of the other.
Nevertheless, not shrinking from what he called his mission, he returned to Bovary's in company with Canivet whom Monsieur Lariviere, before leaving, had strongly urged to make this visit; and he would, but for his wife's objections, have taken his two sons with him, in order to accustom them to great occasions; that this might be a lesson, an example, a solemn picture, that should remain in their heads later on.
Emma, her chin sunken upon her breast, had her eyes inordinately wide open, and her poor hands wandered over the sheets with that hideous and soft movement of the dying, that seems as if they wanted already to cover themselves with the shroud.
Pale as a statue and with eyes red as fire, Charles, not weeping, stood opposite her at the foot of the bed, while the priest, bending one knee, was muttering words in a low voice.
She turned her face slowly, and seemed filled with joy on seeing suddenly the violet stole, no doubt finding again, in the midst of a temporary lull in her pain, the lost voluptuousness of her first mystical transports, with the visions of eternal beatitude that were beginning.
The priest rose to take the crucifix; then she stretched forward her neck as one who is athirst, and glueing her lips to the body of the Man-God, she pressed upon it with all her expiring strength the fullest kiss of love that she had ever given.
Then he recited the Misereatur and the Indulgentiam, dipped his right thumb in the oil, and began to give extreme unction.
The cure wiped his fingers, threw the bit of cotton dipped in oil into the fire, and came and sat down by the dying woman, to tell her that she must now blend her sufferings with those of Jesus Christ and abandon herself to the divine mercy.
Finishing his exhortations, he tried to place in her hand a blessed candle, symbol of the celestial glory with which she was soon to be surrounded.
Emma, too weak, could not close her fingers, and the taper, but for Monsieur Bournisien would have fallen to the ground.
However, she was not quite so pale, and her face had an expression of serenity as if the sacrament had cured her.
The priest did not fail to point this out; he even explained to Bovary that the Lord sometimes prolonged the life of persons when he thought it meet for their salvation; and Charles remembered the day when, so near death, she had received the communion. Perhaps there was no need to despair, he thought.
In fact, she looked around her slowly, as one awakening from a dream; then in a distinct voice she asked for her looking-glass, and remained some time bending over it, until the big tears fell from her eyes.
Then she turned away her head with a sigh and fell back upon the pillows.
Her chest soon began panting rapidly; the whole of her tongue protruded from her mouth; her eyes, as they rolled, grew paler, like the two globes of a lamp that is going out, so that one might have thought her already dead but for the fearful labouring of her ribs, shaken by violent breathing, as if the soul were struggling to free itself.
Felicite knelt down before the crucifix, and the druggist himself slightly bent his knees, while Monsieur Canivet looked out vaguely at the Place.
Bournisien had again begun to pray, his face bowed against the edge of the bed, his long black cassock trailing behind him in the room.
Charles was on the other side, on his knees, his arms outstretched towards Emma.
He had taken her hands and pressed them, shuddering at every beat of her heart, as at the shaking of a falling ruin.
As the death-rattle became stronger the priest prayed faster; his prayers mingled with the stifled sobs of Bovary, and sometimes all seemed lost in the muffled murmur of the Latin syllables that tolled like a passing bell.
Emma raised herself like a galvanised corpse, her hair undone, her eyes fixed, staring.
"The blind man!" she cried.
And Emma began to laugh, an atrocious, frantic, despairing laugh, thinking she saw the hideous face of the poor wretch that stood out against the eternal night like a menace.
But still, when he saw that she did not move, Charles threw himself upon her, crying
"Yes." said he, struggling, "I'll be quiet.
I want to see her.
And he wept.
"Cry," said the chemist; "let nature take her course; that will solace you."
On the Place he was accosted by the blind man, who, having dragged himself as far as Yonville, in the hope of getting the antiphlogistic pomade, was asking every passer-by where the druggist lived.
And he entered the shop hurriedly.
No! I want to see her here."
But he did not finish, choking beneath the crowd of memories that this action of the druggist recalled to him.
Charles bowed his head in sign of approbation.
The druggist, at his wit's end, began softly to draw aside the small window-curtain.
He shut himself up in his consulting-room, took a pen, and after sobbing for some time, wrote
"I wish her to be buried in her wedding-dress, with white shoes, and a wreath.
Her hair is to be spread out over her shoulders.
You did not love her.
God was very great, was very good: one must submit to his decrees without a murmur; nay, must even thank him.
He was walking with great strides along by the wall, near the espalier, and he ground his teeth; he raised to heaven looks of malediction, but not so much as a leaf stirred.
A fine rain was falling: Charles, whose chest was bare, at last began to shiver; he went in and sat down in the kitchen.
At six o'clock a noise like a clatter of old iron was heard on the Place; it was the "Hirondelle" coming in, and he remained with his forehead against the windowpane, watching all the passengers get out, one after the other.
So bearing no grudge to poor Charles, he came back again in the evening to sit up with the body; bringing with him three volumes and a pocket-book for taking notes.
Monsieur Bournisien was there, and two large candles were burning at the head of the bed, that had been taken out of the alcove. The druggist, on whom the silence weighed, was not long before he began formulating some regrets about this "unfortunate young woman." and the priest replied that there was nothing to do now but pray for her.
"Yet," Homais went on, "one of two things; either she died in a state of grace (as the Church has it), and then she has no need of our prayers; or else she departed impertinent (that is, I believe, the ecclesiastical expression), and then"
Emma's head was turned towards her right shoulder, the corner of her mouth, which was open, seemed like a black hole at the lower part of her face; her two thumbs were bent into the palms of her hands; a kind of white dust besprinkled her lashes, and her eyes were beginning to disappear in that viscous pallor that looks like a thin web, as if spiders had spun it over. The sheet sunk in from her breast to her knees, and then rose at the tips of her toes, and it seemed to Charles that infinite masses, an enormous load, were weighing upon her.
Monsieur Bournisien from time to time blew his nose noisily, and Homais' pen was scratching over the paper.
"Come, my good friend," he said, "withdraw; this spectacle is tearing you to pieces."
He stood opposite her, the better to see her, and he lost himself in a contemplation so deep that it was no longer painful.
He recalled stories of catalepsy, the marvels of magnetism, and he said to himself that by willing it with all his force he might perhaps succeed in reviving her. Once he even bent towards he, and cried in a low voice, "Emma!
Charles as he embraced her burst into another flood of tears.
He became so angry that she was silent, and he even commissioned her to go to town at once and buy what was necessary.
In the evening he had some visitors.
Homais, when he returned at nine o'clock (for the last two days only Homais seemed to have been on the Place), was laden with a stock of camphor, of benzine, and aromatic herbs.
He also carried a large jar full of chlorine water, to keep off all miasmata. Just then the servant, Madame Lefrancois, and Madame Bovary senior were busy about Emma, finishing dressing her, and they were drawing down the long stiff veil that covered her to her satin shoes.
"Look at her," said the landlady, sighing; "how pretty she still is!
Now, couldn't you swear she was going to get up in a minute?"
Then they bent over her to put on her wreath.
They had to raise the head a little, and a rush of black liquid issued, as if she were vomiting, from her mouth.
"Now, just come and help," she said to the chemist.
"I afraid?" replied he, shrugging his shoulders.
The cure on his arrival inquired how Monsieur Bovary was, and, on the reply of the druggist, went on"The blow, you see, is still too recent."
"For," said the chemist, "it is unnatural that a man should do without women!
Bournisien defended it; he enlarged on the acts of restitution that it brought about.
Then he felt somewhat stifled by the over-heavy atmosphere of the room; he opened the window; this awoke the chemist.
"Come, take a pinch of snuff," he said to him.
"It's like bees; they leave their hives on the decease of any person." Homais made no remark upon these prejudices, for he had again dropped asleep.
Monsieur Bournisien, stronger than he, went on moving his lips gently for some time, then insensibly his chin sank down, he let fall his big black boot, and began to snore.
It was the last time; he came to bid her farewell.
Charles watched them burn, tiring his eyes against the glare of their yellow flame.
Emma was lost beneath it; and it seemed to him that, spreading beyond her own self, she blended confusedly with everything around herthe silence, the night, the passing wind, the damp odours rising from the ground.
Then suddenly he saw her in the garden at Tostes, on a bench against the thorn hedge, or else at Rouen in the streets, on the threshold of their house, in the yard at Bertaux.
He again heard the laughter of the happy boys beneath the apple-trees: the room was filled with the perfume of her hair; and her dress rustled in his arms with a noise like electricity.
For a long while he thus recalled all his lost joys, her attitudes, her movements, the sound of her voice.
Slowly, with the tips of his fingers, palpitating, he lifted her veil.
But he uttered a cry of horror that awoke the other two.
They dragged him down into the sitting-room. Then Felicite came up to say that he wanted some of her hair.
And as she did not dare to, he himself stepped forward, scissors in hand.
He trembled so that he pierced the skin of the temple in several places.
The priest did not need any persuading; he went out to go and say mass, came back, and then they ate and hobnobbed, giggling a little without knowing why, stimulated by that vague gaiety that comes upon us after times of sadness, and at the last glass the priest said to the druggist, as he clapped him on the shoulder
Next day they lowered her into her oak coffin, that was fitted into the other two; but as the bier was too large, they had to fill up the gaps with the wool of a mattress.
Old Rouault arrived, and fainted on the Place when he saw the black cloth!
He had only received the chemist's letter thirty-six hours after the event; and, from consideration for his feelings, Homais had so worded it that it was impossible to make out what it was all about.
Next, he understood that she was not dead, but she might be.
At last, he had put on his blouse, taken his hat, fastened his spurs to his boots, and set out at full speed; and the whole of the way old Rouault, panting, was torn by anguish.
Once even he was obliged to dismount.
He was dizzy; he heard voices round about him; he felt himself going mad.
Then he promised the Holy Virgin three chasubles for the church, and that he would go barefooted from the cemetery at Bertaux to the chapel of Vassonville.
He entered Maromme shouting for the people of the inn, burst open the door with a thrust of his shoulder, made for a sack of oats, emptied a bottle of sweet cider into the manger, and again mounted his nag, whose feet struck fire as it dashed along.
He said to himself that no doubt they would save her; the doctors would discover some remedy surely. He remembered all the miraculous cures he had been told about.
Then she appeared to him dead.
She was there; before his eyes, lying on her back in the middle of the road.
At Quincampoix, to give himself heart, he drank three cups of coffee one after the other.
He looked for the letter in his pocket, felt it there, but did not dare to open it.
At last he began to think it was all a joke; someone's spite, the jest of some wag; and besides, if she were dead, one would have known it. But no!
He saw the village; he was seen coming bending forward upon his horse, belabouring it with great blows, the girths dripping with blood.
When he had recovered consciousness, he fell, weeping, into Bovary's arms: "My girl! Emma! my child! tell me"
"Oh," cried the old man, "so I will have, by God!
I'll go along o' her to the end!"
The serpent-player was blowing with all his might.
He bowed before the tabernacle, raising his hands, stretched out his arms.
Lestiboudois went about the church with his whalebone stick.
Yet he tried to stir himself to a feeling of devotion, to throw himself into the hope of a future life in which he should see her again.
He imagined to himself she had gone on a long journey, far away, for a long time.
But when he thought of her lying there, and that all was over, that they would lay her in the earth, he was seized with a fierce, gloomy, despairful rage.
At times he thought he felt nothing more, and he enjoyed this lull in his pain, whilst at the same time he reproached himself for being a wretch.
A man in a coarse brown jacket knelt down painfully.
He had put on his new leg.
The women followed in black cloaks with turned-down hoods; each of them carried in her hands a large lighted candle, and Charles felt himself growing weaker at this continual repetition of prayers and torches, beneath this oppressive odour of wax and of cassocks.
Charles as he passed recognised each courtyard.
He remembered mornings like this, when, after visiting some patient, he came out from one and returned to her.
Then Bournisien took the spade handed to him by Lestiboudois; with his left hand all the time sprinkling water, with the right he vigorously threw in a large spadeful; and the wood of the coffin, struck by the pebbles, gave forth that dread sound that seems to us the reverberation of eternity.
The ecclesiastic passed the holy water sprinkler to his neighbour.
He swung it gravely, then handed it to Charles, who sank to his knees in the earth and threw in handfuls of it, crying, "Adieu!"
He sent her kisses; he dragged himself towards the grave, to engulf himself with her.
They led him away, and he soon grew calmer, feeling perhaps, like the others, a vague satisfaction that it was all over.
Old Rouault on his way back began quietly smoking a pipe, which Homais in his innermost conscience thought not quite the thing.
"Poor little woman!
What a trouble for her husband!"
The druggist continued, "Do you know that but for me he would have committed some fatal attempt upon himself?"
"Such a good woman!
To think that I saw her only last Saturday in my shop."
"I haven't had leisure," said Homais, "to prepare a few words that I would have cast upon her tomb."
Charles on getting home undressed, and old Rouault put on his blue blouse.
It was a new one, and as he had often during the journey wiped his eyes on the sleeves, the dye had stained his face, and the traces of tears made lines in the layer of dust that covered it.
I thought of something to say then, but now" Then, with a loud groan that shook his whole chest, "Ah! this is the end for me, do you see!
I saw my wife go, then my son, and now to-day it's my daughter."
He wanted to go back at once to Bertaux, saying that he could not sleep in this house.
He even refused to see his granddaughter.
Only you'll kiss her many times for me.
And then I shall never forget that," he said, slapping his thigh.
But when he reached the top of the hill he turned back, as he had turned once before on the road of Saint-Victor when he had parted from her.
He put his hand over his eyes, and saw in the horizon an enclosure of walls, where trees here and there formed black clusters between white stones; then he went on his way at a gentle trot, for his nag had gone lame.
Despite their fatigue, Charles and his mother stayed very long that evening talking together.
She would come to live at Yonville; she would keep house for him; they would never part again.
She was ingenious and caressing, rejoicing in her heart at gaining once more an affection that had wandered from her for so many years.
The village as usual was silent, and Charles, awake, thought always of her.
Rodolphe, who, to distract himself, had been rambling about the wood all day, was sleeping quietly in his chateau, and Leon, down yonder, always slept.
On the grave between the pine-trees a child was on his knees weeping, and his heart, rent by sobs, was beating in the shadow beneath the load of an immense regret, sweeter than the moon and fathomless as the night.
It was Lestiboudois; he came to fetch his spade, that he had forgotten.
He recognised Justin climbing over the wall, and at last knew who was the culprit who stole his potatoes.
She asked for her mamma.
They told her she was away; that she would bring her back some playthings.
Berthe spoke of her again several times, then at last thought no more of her.
The child's gaiety broke Bovary's heart, and he had to bear besides the intolerable consolations of the chemist.
Money troubles soon began again, Monsieur Lheureux urging on anew his friend Vincart, and Charles pledged himself for exorbitant sums; for he would never consent to let the smallest of the things that had belonged to HER be sold.
His mother was exasperated with him; he grew even more angry than she did.
Mademoiselle Lempereur presented a bill for six months' teaching, although Emma had never taken a lesson (despite the receipted bill she had shown Bovary); it was an arrangement between the two women.
The man at the circulating library demanded three years' subscriptions; Mere Rollet claimed the postage due for some twenty letters, and when Charles asked for an explanation, she had the delicacy to reply
It was for her business affairs."
With every debt he paid Charles thought he had come to the end of them. But others followed ceaselessly.
He was shown the letters his wife had written. Then he had to apologise.
Felicite now wore Madame Bovary's gowns; not all, for he had kept some of them, and he went to look at them in her dressing-room, locking himself up there; she was about her height, and often Charles, seeing her from behind, was seized with an illusion, and cried out
But at Whitsuntide she ran away from Yonville, carried off by Theodore, stealing all that was left of the wardrobe.
It was about this time that the widow Dupuis had the honour to inform him of the "marriage of Monsieur Leon Dupuis her son, notary at Yvetot, to Mademoiselle Leocadie Leboeuf of Bondeville."
Charles, among the other congratulations he sent him, wrote this sentence
One day when, wandering aimlessly about the house, he had gone up to the attic, he felt a pellet of fine paper under his slipper.
And Charles stood, motionless and staring, in the very same place where, long ago, Emma, in despair, and paler even than he, had thought of dying.
At last he discovered a small R at the bottom of the second page.
What did this mean? He remembered Rodolphe's attentions, his sudden, disappearance, his constrained air when they had met two or three times since.
"Perhaps they loved one another platonically," he said to himself.
Besides, Charles was not of those who go to the bottom of things; he shrank from the proofs, and his vague jealousy was lost in the immensity of his woe.
Everyone, he thought, must have adored her; all men assuredly must have coveted her. She seemed but the more beautiful to him for this; he was seized with a lasting, furious desire for her, that inflamed his despair, and that was boundless, because it was now unrealisable.
To please her, as if she were still living, he adopted her predilections, her ideas; he bought patent leather boots and took to wearing white cravats. He put cosmetics on his moustache, and, like her, signed notes of hand.
He was obliged to sell his silver piece by piece; next he sold the drawing-room furniture.
All the rooms were stripped; but the bedroom, her own room, remained as before.
After his dinner Charles went up there.
He pushed the round table in front of the fire, and drew up her armchair.
Berthe by his side was painting prints.
He suffered, poor man, at seeing her so badly dressed, with laceless boots, and the arm-holes of her pinafore torn down to the hips; for the charwoman took no care of her.
But she was so sweet, so pretty, and her little head bent forward so gracefully, letting the dear fair hair fall over her rosy cheeks, that an infinite joy came upon him, a happiness mingled with bitterness, like those ill-made wines that taste of resin.
He mended her toys, made her puppets from cardboard, or sewed up half-torn dolls.
Then, if his eyes fell upon the workbox, a ribbon lying about, or even a pin left in a crack of the table, he began to dream, and looked so sad that she became as sad as he.
No one now came to see them, for Justin had run away to Rouen, where he was a grocer's assistant, and the druggist's children saw less and less of the child, Monsieur Homais not caring, seeing the difference of their social position, to continue the intimacy.
The blind man, whom he had not been able to cure with the pomade, had gone back to the hill of Bois-Guillaume, where he told the travellers of the vain attempt of the druggist, to such an extent, that Homais when he went to town hid himself behind the curtains of the "Hirondelle" to avoid meeting him.
He detested him, and wishing, in the interests of his own reputation, to get rid of him at all costs, he directed against him a secret battery, that betrayed the depth of his intellect and the baseness of his vanity.
"Yesterday, by the Bois-Guillaume hill, a skittish horse" And then followed the story of an accident caused by the presence of the blind man.
But he was released.
Homais won it, for his foe was condemned to life-long confinement in an asylum.
This success emboldened him, and henceforth there was no longer a dog run over, a barn burnt down, a woman beaten in the parish, of which he did not immediately inform the public, guided always by the love of progress and the hate of priests.
That was his phrase.
Homais was digging and delving; he was becoming dangerous.
However, he was stifling in the narrow limits of journalism, and soon a book, a work was necessary to him.
Then he composed "General Statistics of the Canton of Yonville, followed by Climatological Remarks."
He affected the artistic style, he smoked. He bought two chic Pompadour statuettes to adorn his drawing-room.
He by no means gave up his shop.
On the contrary, he kept well abreast of new discoveries.
He followed the great movement of chocolates; he was the first to introduce "cocoa" and "revalenta" into the Seine-Inferieure.
He was enthusiastic about the hydro-electric Pulvermacher chains; he wore one himself, and when at night he took off his flannel vest, Madame Homais stood quite dazzled before the golden spiral beneath which he was hidden, and felt her ardour redouble for this man more bandaged than a Scythian, and splendid as one of the Magi.
First he proposed a broken column with some drapery, next a pyramid, then a Temple of Vesta, a sort of rotunda, or else a "mass of ruins."
And in all his plans Homais always stuck to the weeping willow, which he looked upon as the indispensable symbol of sorrow.
Charles and he made a journey to Rouen together to look at some tombs at a funeral furnisher's, accompanied by an artist, one Vaufrylard, a friend of Bridoux's, who made puns all the time. At last, after having examined some hundred designs, having ordered an estimate and made another journey to Rouen, Charles decided in favour of a mausoleum, which on the two principal sides was to have a "spirit bearing an extinguished torch."
As to the inscription, Homais could think of nothing so fine as Sta viator*, and he got no further; he racked his brain, he constantly repeated Sta viator. At last he hit upon Amabilen conjugem calcas**, which was adopted.
A strange thing was that Bovary, while continually thinking of Emma, was forgetting her.
He grew desperate as he felt this image fading from his memory in spite of all efforts to retain it.
Yet every night he dreamt of her; it was always the same dream.
He drew near her, but when he was about to clasp her she fell into decay in his arms.
For a week he was seen going to church in the evening.
He thundered against the spirit of the age, and never failed, every other week, in his sermon, to recount the death agony of Voltaire, who died devouring his excrements, as everyone knows.
In spite of the economy with which Bovary lived, he was far from being able to pay off his old debts.
Then he appealed to his mother, who consented to let him take a mortgage on her property, but with a great many recriminations against Emma; and in return for her sacrifice she asked for a shawl that had escaped the depredations of Felicite.
Charles refused to give it her; they quarrelled.
She made the first overtures of reconciliation by offering to have the little girl, who could help her in the house, to live with her.
Charles consented to this, but when the time for parting came, all his courage failed him.
As his affections vanished, he clung more closely to the love of his child.
She made him anxious, however, for she coughed sometimes, and had red spots on her cheeks.
Opposite his house, flourishing and merry, was the family of the chemist, with whom everything was prospering.
"First, having at the time of the cholera distinguished myself by a boundless devotion; second, by having published, at my expense, various works of public utility, such as" (and he recalled his pamphlet entitled, "Cider, its manufacture and effects," besides observation on the lanigerous plant-louse, sent to the Academy; his volume of statistics, and down to his pharmaceutical thesis); "without counting that I am a member of several learned societies" (he was member of a single one).
"In short!" he cried, making a pirouette, "if it were only for distinguishing myself at fires!"
He even addressed a petition to the sovereign in which he implored him to "do him justice"; he called him "our good king," and compared him to Henri IV.
And every morning the druggist rushed for the paper to see if his nomination were in it. It was never there.
At last, unable to bear it any longer, he had a grass plot in his garden designed to represent the Star of the Cross of Honour with two little strips of grass running from the top to imitate the ribband.
From respect, or from a sort of sensuality that made him carry on his investigations slowly, Charles had not yet opened the secret drawer of a rosewood desk which Emma had generally used.
One day, however, he sat down before it, turned the key, and pressed the spring.
Rodolphe's portrait flew full in his face in the midst of the overturned love-letters.
People wondered at his despondency.
He never went out, saw no one, refused even to visit his patients.
Sometimes, however, some curious person climbed on to the garden hedge, and saw with amazement this long-bearded, shabbily clothed, wild man, who wept aloud as he walked up and down.
In the evening in summer he took his little girl with him and led her to the cemetery.
The voluptuousness of his grief was, however, incomplete, for he had no one near him to share it, and he paid visits to Madame Lefrancois to be able to speak of her.
One day when he had gone to the market at Argueil to sell his horsehis last resourcehe met Rodolphe.
Rodolphe, who had only sent his card, first stammered some apologies, then grew bolder, and even pushed his assurance (it was in the month of August and very hot) to the length of inviting him to have a bottle of beer at the public-house.
Leaning on the table opposite him, he chewed his cigar as he talked, and Charles was lost in reverie at this face that she had loved.
He seemed to see again something of her in it.
He would have liked to have been this man.
Charles was not listening to him; Rodolphe noticed it, and he followed the succession of memories that crossed his face.
There was at last a moment when Charles, full of a sombre fury, fixed his eyes on Rodolphe, who, in something of fear, stopped talking.
But soon the same look of weary lassitude came back to his face.
"I don't blame you," he said.
And Charles, his head in his hands, went on in a broken voice, and with the resigned accent of infinite sorrow
He even added a fine phrase, the only one he ever made
Rodolphe, who had managed the fatality, thought the remark very offhand from a man in his position, comic even, and a little mean.
Rays of light were straying through the trellis, the vine leaves threw their shadows on the sand, the jasmines perfumed the air, the heavens were blue, Spanish flies buzzed round the lilies in bloom, and Charles was suffocating like a youth beneath the vague love influences that filled his aching heart.
His head was thrown back against the wall, his eyes closed, his mouth open, and in his hand was a long tress of black hair.
"Come along, papa," she said.
And thinking he wanted to play; she pushed him gently.
When everything had been sold, twelve francs seventy-five centimes remained, that served to pay for Mademoiselle Bovary's going to her grandmother.
The good woman died the same year; old Rouault was paralysed, and it was an aunt who took charge of her.
She is poor, and sends her to a cotton-factory to earn a living.
He questioned himself; he sought to divine who could have been that soul in torment which had not been willing to quit this world without leaving this stigma of crime or unhappiness upon the brow of the ancient church.
The man who wrote that word upon the wall disappeared from the midst of the generations of man many centuries ago; the word, in its turn, has been effaced from the wall of the church; the church will, perhaps, itself soon disappear from the face of the earth.
It was neither an assault by the Picards nor the Burgundians, nor a hunt led along in procession, nor a revolt of scholars in the town of Laas, nor an entry of "our much dread lord, monsieur the king," nor even a pretty hanging of male and female thieves by the courts of Paris.
So the crowd of citizens, male and female, having closed their houses and shops, thronged from every direction, at early morn, towards some one of the three spots designated.
Each had made his choice; one, the bonfire; another, the maypole; another, the mystery play.
With the reader's consent, we will endeavor to retrace in thought, the impression which he would have experienced in company with us on crossing the threshold of that grand hall, in the midst of that tumultuous crowd in surcoats, short, sleeveless jackets, and doublets.
Let the reader picture to himself now, this immense, oblong hall, illuminated by the pallid light of a January day, invaded by a motley and noisy throng which drifts along the walls, and eddies round the seven pillars, and he will have a confused idea of the whole effect of the picture, whose curious details we shall make an effort to indicate with more precision.
The old Palais would be standing still, with its ancient grand hall; I should be able to say to the reader, "Go and look at it," and we should thus both escape the necessity,I of making, and he of reading, a description of it, such as it is. Which demonstrates a new truth: that great events have incalculable results.
It is true that it may be quite possible, in the first place, that Ravaillac had no accomplices; and in the second, that if he had any, they were in no way connected with the fire of 1618.
"Upon my soul, so it's you, 'Joannes Frollo de Molendino!'" cried one of them, to a sort of little, lighthaired imp, with a wellfavored and malign countenance, clinging to the acanthus leaves of a capital; "you are well named John of the Mill, for your two arms and your two legs have the air of four wings fluttering on the breeze.
"He did it for the sake of employing those accursed singers of the King of Sicily!" cried an old woman sharply from among the crowd beneath the window. "I just put it to you!
"Peace, old crone," said a tall, grave person, stopping up his nose on the side towards the fishwife; "a mass had to be founded.
An honorable man is Gilles Lecornu, brother of Master Jehan Lecornu, provost of the king's house, son of Master Mahiet Lecornu, first porter of the Bois de Vincennes,all bourgeois of Paris, all married, from father to son."
The big furrier, without uttering a word in reply, tried to escape all the eyes riveted upon him from all sides; but he perspired and panted in vain; like a wedge entering the wood, his efforts served only to bury still more deeply in the shoulders of his neighbors, his large, apoplectic face, purple with spite and rage.
At length one of these, as fat, short, and venerable as himself, came to his rescue.
"Because he is one of the four sworn booksellers of the university!" said the other.
"Who is as fresh and as gay as though she were a widow."
"Master Andry," pursued Jean Jehan, still clinging to his capital, "hold your tongue, or I'll drop on your head!"
Master Andry raised his eyes, seemed to measure in an instant the height of the pillar, the weight of the scamp, mentally multiplied that weight by the square of the velocity and remained silent.
"And the desks of the scribes!" added his neighbor.
"The end of the world has come!,' muttered Master Andry, stopping up his ears.
"By the way, there's the rector! see, he is passing through the Place," cried one of those in the window.
Each rivalled his neighbor in his haste to turn towards the Place.
"Is it really our venerable rector, Master Thibaut?" demanded Jehan Frollo du Moulin, who, as he was clinging to one of the inner pillars, could not see what was going on outside.
"Yes, yes," replied all the others, "it is really he, Master Thibaut, the rector."
The rector, who was walking at the head of his company, had to support the first broadside; it was severe.
"How does he manage to be here, the old gambler?
Has he abandoned his dice?"
"How he trots along on his mule! her ears are not so long as his!"
"He is on his way, no doubt, to seek a lodging in the Rue Thibautod?"* cried Jehan du M. Moulin.
"Hold on, here's my shoe; you are better placed than I, fling it in his face."
'Tis true; he gave my place in the nation of Normandy to little Ascanio Falzapada, who comes from the province of Bourges, since he is an Italian."
Ho he Lambert Hoctement!"
"One would say that he was a Doge of Venice on his way to his bridal with the sea."
She is paying her four deniers* ~quatuor denarios~."
"Would you like to have her pay you in the face?"
Master Simon Sanguin, the Elector of Picardy, with his wife on the crupper!"
"How happy they are to see all that!" sighed Joannes de Molendino, still perched in the foliage of his capital.
Meanwhile, the sworn bookseller of the university, Master Andry Musnier, was inclining his ear to the furrier of the king's robes, Master Gilles Lecornu.
Then a great hurlyburly ensued; a vast movement of feet, hands, and heads; a general outbreak of coughs and handkerchiefs; each one arranged himself, assumed his post, raised himself up, and grouped himself.
"The mystery, and to the devil with the Flemings!" he exclaimed at the full force of his lungs, twining like a serpent around his pillar.
"Well said," cried the people, "and let us begin the hanging with his sergeants."
The personage, but little reassured, and trembling in every limb, advanced to the edge of the marble table with a vast amount of bows, which, in proportion as he drew nearer, more and more resembled genuflections.
"Messieurs the bourgeois," said he, "and mesdemoiselles the ~bourgeoises~, we shall have the honor of declaiming and representing, before his eminence, monsieur the cardinal, a very beautiful morality which has for its title, 'The Good Judgment of Madame the Virgin Mary.'
His eminence is, at this moment, escorting the very honorable embassy of the Duke of Austria; which is detained, at present, listening to the harangue of monsieur the rector of the university, at the gate Baudets.
As soon as his illustrious eminence, the cardinal, arrives, we will begin."
Jupiter was clad in a coat of mail, covered with black velvet, with gilt nails; and had it not been for the rouge, and the huge red beard, each of which covered onehalf of his face,had it not been for the roll of gilded cardboard, spangled, and all bristling with strips of tinsel, which he held in his hand, and in which the eyes of the initiated easily recognized thunderbolts,had not his feet been fleshcolored, and banded with ribbons in Greek fashion, he might have borne comparison, so far as the severity of his mien was concerned, with a Breton archer from the guard of Monsieur de Berry.
Nevertheless, as be harangued them, the satisfaction and admiration unanimously excited by his costume were dissipated by his words; and when he reached that untoward conclusion: "As soon as his illustrious eminence, the cardinal, arrives, we will begin," his voice was drowned in a thunder of hooting.
Poor Jupiter, haggard, frightened, pale beneath his rouge, dropped his thunderbolt, took his cap in his hand; then he bowed and trembled and stammered: "His eminencethe ambassadorsMadame Marguerite of Flanders."
In truth, he was afraid of being hung.
Hung by the populace for waiting, hung by the cardinal for not having waited, he saw between the two dilemmas only an abyss; that is to say, a gallows.
Luckily, some one came to rescue him from his embarrassment, and assume the responsibility.
An individual who was standing beyond the railing, in the free space around the marble table, and whom no one had yet caught sight of, since his long, thin body was completely sheltered from every visual ray by the diameter of the pillar against which he was leaning; this individual, we say, tall, gaunt, pallid, blond, still young, although already wrinkled about the brow and cheeks, with brilliant eyes and a smiling mouth, clad in garments of black serge, worn and shining with age, approached the marble table, and made a sign to the poor sufferer.
But the other was so confused that he did not see him.
"Jupiter," said he, "my dear Jupiter!"
At last, the tall blond, driven out of patience, shrieked almost in his face, "Michel Giborne!"
"Messeigneurs the bourgeois," he cried, at the top of his lungs to the crowd, which continued to hoot him, "we are going to begin at once."
The hand clapping was deafening, and Jupiter had already withdrawn under his tapestry, while the hall still trembled with acclamations.
In the meanwhile, the personage who had so magically turned the tempest into dead calm, as our old and dear Corneille puts it, had modestly retreated to the halfshadow of his pillar, and would, no doubt, have remained invisible there, motionless, and mute as before, had he not been plucked by the sleeve by two young women, who, standing in the front row of the spectators, had noticed his colloquy with Michel GiborneJupiter.
"Hold your tongue, my dear Linarde," said her neighbor, pretty, fresh, and very brave, in consequence of being dressed up in her best attire. "He is not a clerk, he is a layman; you must not say master to him, but messire."
"What would you have of me, damsels?" he asked, with alacrity.
"Not so," replied Gisquette, blushing; "it was Linarde who called you master; I only told her to say messire."
The man, who asked nothing better than to enter into conversation, looked at them with a smile. "So you have nothing to say to me, damsels?"
The tall, lighthaired young man retreated a step; but the two curious maidens had no mind to let slip their prize.
"Messire," said Gisquette, with the impetuosity of an open sluice, or of a woman who has made up her mind, "do you know that soldier who is to play the part of Madame the Virgin in the mystery?"
"H! yes," said Linarde, "isn't she stupid?
"Of sirens," said Linarde. "And all naked," added the young man.
Linarde lowered her eyes modestly.
Gisquette glanced at her and did the same.
"Without doubt," he replied; then he added, with a certain emphasis,"I am the author of it, damsels."
"Hol h!" he shouted suddenly, in the midst of the peaceable waiting which had followed the tumult. "Jupiter, Madame the Virgin, buffoons of the devil! are you jeering at us?
The first of these personages carried in his right hand a sword; the second, two golden keys; the third, a pair of scales; the fourth, a spade: and, in order to aid sluggish minds which would not have seen clearly through the transparency of these attributes, there was to be read, in large, black letters, on the hem of the robe of brocade, MY NAME IS NOBILITY; on the hem of the silken robe, MY NAME IS CLERGY; on the hem of the woolen robe, MY NAME IS MERCHANDISE; on the hem of the linen robe, MY NAME IS LABOR.
The sex of the two male characters was briefly indicated to every judicious spectator, by their shorter robes, and by the cap which they wore on their heads; while the two female characters, less briefly clad, were covered with hoods.
So they were roaming about the world seeking and searching for this beauty, and, after having successively rejected the Queen of Golconda, the Princess of Trebizonde, the daughter of the Grand Khan of Tartary, etc., Labor and Clergy, Nobility and Merchandise, had come to rest upon the marble table of the Palais de Justice, and to utter, in the presence of the honest audience, as many sentences and maxims as could then be dispensed at the Faculty of Arts, at examinations, sophisms, determinances, figures, and acts, where the masters took their degrees.
He had retreated a few paces from them, behind his pillar, and there he listened, looked, enjoyed.
The amiable applause which had greeted the beginning of his prologue was still echoing in his bosom, and he was completely absorbed in that species of ecstatic contemplation with which an author beholds his ideas fall, one by one, from the mouth of the actor into the vast silence of the audience.
Hardly had Gringoire raised this intoxicating cup of joy and triumph to his lips, when a drop of bitterness was mingled with it.
A tattered mendicant, who could not collect any coins, lost as he was in the midst of the crowd, and who had not probably found sufficient indemnity in the pockets of his neighbors, had hit upon the idea of perching himself upon some conspicuous point, in order to attract looks and alms.
He had, accordingly, hoisted himself, during the first verses of the prologue, with the aid of the pillars of the reserve gallery, to the cornice which ran round the balustrade at its lower edge; and there he had seated himself, soliciting the attention and the pity of the multitude, with his rags and a hideous sore which covered his right arm.
However, he uttered not a word.
The silence which he preserved allowed the prologue to proceed without hindrance, and no perceptible disorder would have ensued, if illluck had not willed that the scholar Joannes should catch sight, from the heights of his pillar, of the mendicant and his grimaces.
A wild fit of laughter took possession of the youngscamp, who, without caring that he was interrupting the spectacle, and disturbing the universal composure, shouted boldly,
The prologue stopped short, and all heads turned tumultuously towards the beggar, who, far from being disconcerted by this, saw, in this incident, a good opportunity for reaping his harvest, and who began to whine in a doleful way, half closing his eyes the while,"Charity, please!"
Hol he, my friend, did your sore bother you on the leg, that you have transferred it to your arm?" So saying, with the dexterity of a monkey, he flung a bit of silver into the gray felt hat which the beggar held in his ailing arm.
This episode considerably distracted the attention of the audience; and a goodly number of spectators, among them Robin Poussepain, and all the clerks at their head, gayly applauded this eccentric duet, which the scholar, with his shrill voice, and the mendicant had just improvised in the middle of the prologue.
On recovering from his first stupefaction, he bestirred himself to shout, to the four personages on the stage, "Go on! What the devil!go on!" without even deigning to cast a glance of disdain upon the two interrupters.
At that moment, he felt some one pluck at the hem of his surtout; he turned round, and not without illhumor, and found considerable difficulty in smiling; but he was obliged to do so, nevertheless.
It was the pretty arm of Gisquette la Gencienne, which, passed through the railing, was soliciting his attention in this manner.
"Monsieur," said the young girl, "are they going to continue?"
"In that case, messire," she resumed, "would you have the courtesy to explain to me"
Gringoire started, like a man whose wound has been probed to the quick.
"A plague on the stupid and dullwitted little girl!" he muttered, between his teeth.
In the meantime, the actors had obeyed his injunction, and the public, seeing that they were beginning to speak again, began once more to listen, not without having lost many beauties in the sort of soldered joint which was formed between the two portions of the piece thus abruptly cut short.
Nevertheless, tranquillity was gradually restored, the scholar held his peace, the mendicant counted over some coins in his hat, and the piece resumed the upper hand.
The exposition, rather long and rather empty, that is to say, according to the rules, was simple; and Gringoire, in the candid sanctuary of his own conscience, admired its clearness.
The said dauphin was then young, was handsome, was stout, and, above all (magnificent origin of all royal virtues), he was the son of the Lion of France.
I declare that this bold metaphor is admirable, and that the natural history of the theatre, on a day of allegory and royal marriage songs, is not in the least startled by a dolphin who is the son of a lion.
And, without reckoning our Pierre Gringoire, who may represent them in the fifteenth century if we succeed in bestowing upon him the distinction which he deserves, it certainly was their spirit which animated Father du Breul, when he wrote, in the sixteenth, these naively sublime words, worthy of all centuries: "I am a Parisian by nation, and a Parrhisian in language, for ~parrhisia~ in Greek signifies liberty of speech; of which I have made use even towards messeigneurs the cardinals, uncle and brother to Monsieur the Prince de Conty, always with respect to their greatness, and without offending any one of their suite, which is much to say."
There was then neither hatred for the cardinal, nor disdain for his presence, in the disagreeable impression produced upon Pierre Gringoire.
Quite the contrary; our poet had too much good sense and too threadbare a coat, not to attach particular importance to having the numerous allusions in his prologue, and, in particular, the glorification of the dauphin, son of the Lion of France, fall upon the most eminent ear.
I affirm that he shared the general beatitude, and that, quite the reverse of La Fontaine, who, at the presentation of his comedy of the "Florentine," asked, "Who is the illbred lout who made that rhapsody?" Gringoire would gladly have inquired of his neighbor, "Whose masterpiece is this?"
That which he had to fear was only too fully realized.
The entrance of his eminence upset the audience.
While he was sending a rather indifferent glance around the audience, the tumult redoubled. Each person wished to get a better view of him.
Each man vied with the other in thrusting his head over his neighbor's shoulder.
Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon, Archbishop and Comte of Lyon, Primate of the Gauls, was allied both to Louis XI., through his brother, Pierre, Seigneur de Beaujeu, who had married the king's eldest daughter, and to Charles the Bold through his mother, Agnes of Burgundy.
The reader can form an idea of the numberless embarrassments which this double relationship had caused him, and of all the temporal reefs among which his spiritual bark had been forced to tack, in order not to suffer shipwreck on either Louis or Charles, that Scylla and that Charybdis which had devoured the Duc de Nemours and the Constable de SaintPol.
Thanks to Heaven's mercy, he had made the voyage successfully, and had reached home without hindrance.
But although he was in port, and precisely because he was in port, he never recalled without disquiet the varied haps of his political career, so long uneasy and laborious.
Thus, he was in the habit of saying that the year 1476 had been "white and black" for himmeaning thereby, that in the course of that year he had lost his mother, the Duchesse de la Bourbonnais, and his cousin, the Duke of Burgundy, and that one grief had consoled him for the other.
Nevertheless, he was a fine man; he led a joyous cardinal's life, liked to enliven himself with the royal vintage of Challuau, did not hate Richarde la Garmoise and Thomasse la Saillarde, bestowed alms on pretty girls rather than on old women,and for all these reasons was very agreeable to the populace of Paris.
He never went about otherwise than surrounded by a small court of bishops and abbs of high lineage, gallant, jovial, and given to carousing on occasion; and more than once the good and devout women of Saint Germain d' Auxerre, when passing at night beneath the brightly illuminated windows of Bourbon, had beenscandalized to hear the same voices which had intoned vespers for them during the day carolling, to the clinking of glasses, the bacchic proverb of Benedict XII., that pope who had added a third crown to the Tiara~Bibamus papaliter~.
It was this justly acquired popularity, no doubt, which preserved him on his entrance from any bad reception at the hands of the mob, which had been so displeased but a moment before, and very little disposed to respect a cardinal on the very day when it was to elect a pope.
Moreover, the Cardinal de Bourbon was a handsome man,he wore a fine scarlet robe, which he carried off very well,that is to say, he had all the women on his side, and, consequently, the best half of the audience.
Assuredly, it would be injustice and bad taste to hoot a cardinal for having come late to the spectacle, when he is a handsome man, and when he wears his scarlet robe well.
He entered, then, bowed to those present with the hereditary smile of the great for the people, and directed his course slowly towards his scarlet velvet armchair, with the air of thinking of something quite different.
His cortegewhat we should nowadays call his staffof bishops and abbs invaded the estrade in his train, not without causing redoubled tumult and curiosity among the audience.
Each man vied with his neighbor in pointing them out and naming them, in seeing who should recognize at least one of them: this one, the Bishop of Marseilles (Alaudet, if my memory serves me right);this one, the primicier of SaintDenis;this one, Robert de Lespinasse, Abb of SaintGermain des Prs, that libertine brother of a mistress of Louis XI.; all with many errors and absurdities.
Poor Saint Louis! how they set him at defiance in his own court of law!
Each one of them selected from the newcomers on the platform, a black, gray, white, or violet cassock as his target.
Joannes Frollo de Molendin, in his quality of brother to an archdeacon, boldly attacked the scarlet; he sang in deafening tones, with his impudent eyes fastened on the cardinal, "~Cappa repleta mero~!"
Moreover, he had another cause for solicitude, and his mien as wholly preoccupied with it, which entered the estrade the same time as himself; this was the embassy from Flanders.
Not that he was a profound politician, nor was he borrowing trouble about the possible consequences of the marriage of his cousin Marguerite de Bourgoyne to his cousin Charles, Dauphin de Vienne; nor as to how long the good understanding which had been patched up between the Duke of Austria and the King of France would last; nor how the King of England would take this disdain of his daughter. All that troubled him but little; and he gave a warm reception every evening to the wine of the royal vintage of Chaillot, without a suspicion that several flasks of that same wine (somewhat revised and corrected, it is true, by Doctor Coictier), cordially offered to Edward IV. by Louis XI., would, some fine morning, rid Louis XI. of Edward IV.
This was, certainly, one of the most irksome grimaces that he had ever executed for the good pleasure of the king.
So he turned toward the door, and with the best grace in the world (so well had he trained himself to it), when the usher announced, in a sonorous voice, "Messieurs the Envoys of Monsieur the Duke of Austria." It is useless to add that the whole hall did the same.
Nevertheless, he was appreciated by the "miner" of Europe; he plotted familiarly with Louis XI., and often lent a hand to the king's secret jobs.
While the pensioner of Ghent and his eminence were exchanging very low bows and a few words in voices still lower, a man of lofty stature, with a large face and broad shoulders, presented himself, in order to enter abreast with Guillaume Rym; one would have pronounced him a bulldog by the side of a fox.
His felt doublet and leather jerkin made a spot on the velvet and silk which surrounded him.
Presuming that he was some groom who had stolen in, the usher stopped him.
The man in the leather jerkin shouldered him aside.
"What does this knave want with me?" said he, in stentorian tones, which rendered the entire hall attentive to this strange colloquy. "Don't you see that I am one of them?"
For two days his eminence had been exerting his utmost efforts to lick these Flemish bears into shape, and to render them a little more presentable to the public, and this freak was startling.
But Guillaume Rym, with his polished smile, approached the usher.
"Announce Master Jacques Coppenole, clerk of the aldermen of the city of Ghent," he whispered, very low.
"No, cross of God?" he exclaimed, in his voice of thunder, "Jacques Coppenole, hosier.
Monsieur the Archduke has more than once sought his ~gant~* in my hose."
This hosier was an equal, who had just held his own before monsieur the cardinal.
Coppenole proudly saluted his eminence, who returned the salute of the allpowerful bourgeois feared by Louis XI.
Then, while Guillaume Rym, a "sage and malicious man," as Philippe de Comines puts it, watched them both with a smile of raillery and superiority, each sought his place, the cardinal quite abashed and troubled, Coppenole tranquil and haughty, and thinking, no doubt, that his title of hosier was as good as any other, after all, and that Marie of Burgundy, mother to that Marguerite whom Coppenole was today bestowing in marriage, would have been less afraid of the cardinal than of the hosier; for it is not a cardinal who would have stirred up a revolt among the men of Ghent against the favorites of the daughter of Charles the Bold; it is not a cardinal who could have fortified the populace with a word against her tears and prayers, when the Maid of Flanders came to supplicate her people in their behalf, even at the very foot of the scaffold; while the hosier had only to raise his leather elbow, in order to cause to fall your two heads, most illustrious seigneurs, Guy d'Hymbercourt and Chancellor Guillaume Hugonet.
Nevertheless, all was over for the poor cardinal, and he was obliged to quaff to the dregs the bitter cup of being in such bad company.
The arrival of the illustrious guests had by no means caused him to relax his hold, and, while the prelates and ambassadors were packing themselves into the stallslike genuine Flemish herringshe settled himself at his ease, and boldly crossed his legs on the architrave.
He, on his side, perceived nothing that was going on in the hall; he wagged his head with the unconcern of a Neapolitan, repeating from time to time, amid the clamor, as from a mechanical habit, "Charity, please!" And, assuredly, he was, out of all those present, the only one who had not deigned to turn his head at the altercation between Coppenole and the usher.
Now, chance ordained that the master hosier of Ghent, with whom the people were already in lively sympathy, and upon whom all eyes were rivetedshould come and seat himself in the front row of the gallery, directly above the mendicant; and people were not a little amazed to see the Flemish ambassador, on concluding his inspection of the knave thus placed beneath his eyes, bestow a friendly tap on that ragged shoulder.
The novelty of this singular scene excited such a murmur of mirth and gayety in the hall, that the cardinal was not slow to perceive it; he half bent forward, and, as from the point where he was placed he could catch only an imperfect view of Trouillerfou's ignominious doublet, he very naturally imagined that the mendicant was asking alms, and, disgusted with his audacity, he exclaimed: "Bailiff of the Courts, toss me that knave into the river!"
The cardinal bit his lips.
He bent towards his neighbor, the Abb of Saint Genevive, and said to him in a low tone,"Fine ambassadors monsieur the archduke sends here, to announce to us Madame Marguerite!"
The cardinal felt a little relieved; he was quits with Coppenole, he also had had his jest applauded.
Who is that man beside the trestle, with a black doublet and a pale face?
Alas! my dear reader, it is Pierre Gringoire and his prologue.
This is precisely what he feared.
From the moment of the cardinal's entrance, Gringoire had never ceased to tremble for the safety of his prologue.
At first he had enjoined the actors, who had stopped in suspense, to continue, and to raise their voices; then, perceiving that no one was listening, he had stopped them; and, during the entire quarter of an hour that the interruption lasted, he had not ceased to stamp, to flounce about, to appeal to Gisquette and Linarde, and to urge his neighbors to the continuance of the prologue; all in vain.
We must also believe, and we say it with regret, that the prologue had begun slightly to weary the audience at the moment when his eminence had arrived, and created a diversion in so terrible a fashion.
Nevertheless, when our poet beheld quiet reestablished to some extent, he devised a stratagem which might have redeemed all.
"Monsieur," he said, turning towards one of his neighbors, a fine, big man, with a patient face, "suppose we begin again."
"What?" said his neighbor.
"As you like," returned his neighbor.
This semiapprobation sufficed for Gringoire, and, conducting his own affairs, he began to shout, confounding himself with the crowd as much as possible: "Begin the mystery again! begin again!"
"Monsieur Bailiff of the Courts," said he to a tall, black man, placed a few paces from him, "are those knaves in a holywater vessel, that they make such a hellish noise?"
He approached his eminence, and not without a good deal of fear of the latter's displeasure, he awkwardly explained to him the seeming disrespect of the audience: that noonday had arrived before his eminence, and that the comedians had been forced to begin without waiting for his eminence.
"Bourgeois, rustics, and citizens, in order to satisfy those who wish the play to begin again, and those who wish it to end, his eminence orders that it be continued."
So the personages on the stage took up their parts, and Gringoire hoped that the rest of his work, at least, would be listened to.
This hope was speedily dispelled like his other illusions; silence had indeed, been restored in the audience, after a fashion; but Gringoire had not observed that at the moment when the cardinal gave the order to continue, the gallery was far from full, and that after the Flemish envoys there had arrived new personages forming part of the cortege, whose names and ranks, shouted out in the midst of his dialogue by the intermittent cry of the usher, produced considerable ravages in it.
This strange accompaniment, which rendered it difficult to follow the piece, made Gringoire all the more indignant because he could not conceal from himself the fact that the interest was continually increasing, and that all his work required was a chance of being heard.
Jupiter, whose thunder could be heard rumbling in the dressingroom, supported her claim, and Venus was on the point of carrying it off,that is to say, without allegory, of marrying monsieur the dauphin, when a young child clad in white damask, and holding in her hand a daisy (a transparent personification of Mademoiselle Marguerite of Flanders) came to contest it with Venus.
There was another good part, that of the king of Mesopotamia; but through so many interruptions, it was difficult to make out what end he served.
With what bitterness did he behold his whole erection of glory and of poetry crumble away bit by bit!
And to think that these people had been upon the point of instituting a revolt against the bailiff through impatience to hear his work! now that they had it they did not care for it.
What would he not have given to be still at that hour of honey!
But this is the way we manage it; we collect a crowd like this one here, then each personin turn passes his head through a hole, and makes a grimace at the rest; time one who makes the ugliest, is elected pope by general acclamation; that's the way it is.
Gringoire hid his face between his two hands, not being so fortunate as to have a mantle with which to veil his head, like Agamemnon of Timantis.
It was settled that each candidate, man or woman (for it was possible to choose a female pope), should, for the sake of leaving the impression of his grimace fresh and complete, cover his face and remain concealed in the chapel until the moment of his appearance.
Coppenole, from his post, ordered all, directed all, arranged all.
During the uproar, the cardinal, no less abashed than Gringoire, had retired with all his suite, under the pretext of business and vespers, without the crowd which his arrival had so deeply stirred being in the least moved by his departure.
Guillaume Rym was the only one who noticed his eminence's discomfiture.
"That damned Perrette Callebotte! she's capable of that!"
In the midst of this witches' sabbath, he was still to be seen on the top of his pillar, like the cabinboy on the topmast.
As for Gringoire, the first moment of depression having passed, he had regained his composure.
He had hardened himself against adversity."Continue!" he had said for the third time, to his comedians, speaking machines; then as he was marching with great strides in front of the marble table, a fancy seized him to go and appear in his turn at the aperture of the chapel, were it only for the pleasure of making a grimace at that ungrateful populace."But no, that would not be worthy of us; no, vengeance! let us combat until the end," he repeated to himself; "the power of poetry over people is great; I will bring them back.
Alas! he had been left the sole spectator of his piece.
The big, patient man, whom he had already consulted in a critical moment, had remained with his face turned towards the stage.
Gringoire was touched to the heart by the fidelity of his only spectator.
He approached him and addressed him, shaking his arm slightly; for the good man was leaning on the balustrade and dozing a little.
"Monsieur," replied the big man with a yawn, "for what?"
"He! he!" replied the fat magistrate, half aroused, "it's tolerably jolly, that's a fact."
Master Coppenole himself applauded, and Clopin Trouillefou, who had been among the competitors (and God knows what intensity of ugliness his visage could attain), confessed himself conquered: We will do the same.
Let the reader dream of this whole, if he can.
But it was then that surprise and admiration attained their highest pitch; the grimace was his face.
Or rather, his whole person was a grimace.
A huge head, bristling with red hair; between his shoulders an enormous hump, a counterpart perceptible in front; a system of thighs and legs so strangely astray that they could touch each other only at the knees, and, viewed from the front, resembled the crescents of two scythes joined by the handles; large feet, monstrous hands; and, with all this deformity, an indescribable and redoubtable air of vigor, agility, and courage,strange exception to the eternal rule which wills that force as well as beauty shall be the result of harmony.
When this species of cyclops appeared on the threshold of the chapel, motionless, squat, and almost as broad as he was tall; squared on the base, as a great man says; with his doublet half red, half violet, sown with silver bells, and, above all, in the perfection of his ugliness, the populace recognized him on the instant, and shouted with one voice,
"As wicked as he is ugly," retorted another.
"The other evening, he came and made a grimace at me through my attic window.
I thought that it was a man.
"I'm sure that he goes to the witches' sabbath.
Once he left a broom on my leads."
One scholar (Robin Poussepain, I think), came and laughed in his face, and too close.
So saying, he placed his hand gayly on his shoulder.
Nevertheless, he began to grow impatient with Coppenole's behavior, and suddenly turned towards him with so formidable a gnashing of teeth, that the Flemish giant recoiled, like a bulldog before a cat.
An old woman explained to Coppenole that Quasimodo was deaf.
"Deaf!" said the hosier, with his great Flemish laugh. "Cross of God!
"He! I recognize him," exclaimed Jehan, who had, at last, descended from his capital, in order to see Quasimodo at closer quarters, "he's the bellringer of my brother, the archdeacon.
"What a devil of a man!" said Robin Poussepain still all bruised with his fall. "He shows himself; he's a hunchback.
And what does this Polyphemus do with his tongue?"
"He speaks when he chooses," said the old woman; "he became deaf through ringing the bells.
"That he lacks," remarks Jehan.
"And he has one eye too many," added Robin Poussepain.
"Not at all," said Jehan wisely. "A oneeyed man is far less complete than a blind man.
Twelve officers of the fraternity of fools raised him on their shoulders; and a sort of bitter and disdainful joy lighted up the morose face of the cyclops, when he beheld beneath his deformed feet all those heads of handsome, straight, wellmade men.
We are delighted to be able to inform the reader, that during the whole of this scene, Gringoire and his piece had stood firm.
His actors, spurred on by him, had not ceased to spout his comedy, and he had not ceased to listen to it.
He had made up his mind about the tumult, and was determined to proceed to the end, not giving up the hope of a return of attention on the part of the public.
This gleam of hope acquired fresh life, when he saw Quasimodo, Coppenole, and the deafening escort of the pope of the procession of fools quit the hall amid great uproar. The throng rushed eagerly after them.
"Good," he said to himself, "there go all the mischief makers." Unfortunately, all the mischiefmakers constituted the entire audience.
Gringoire perceived that his music had been carried off by the procession of the Pope of the Fools. "Skip it," said he, stoically.
He approached a group of bourgeois, who seemed to him to be discussing his piece.
This is the fragment of conversation which he caught,
"What's the meaning of this, of the Esmeralda?" said Gringoire, wringing his hands in despair. "Ah, good heavens! it seems to be the turn of the windows now."
It was precisely at the instant when Jupiter should have appeared with his thunder.
All communication between his plot and its solution was intercepted.
"The rascal," he murmured. "And why did he take that ladder?"
"In order to go and see the Esmeralda," replied Jupiter piteously. "He said, 'Come, here's a ladder that's of no use!' and he took it."
"May the devil fly away with you!" he said to the comedian, "and if I get my pay, you shall receive yours."
Then he beat a retreat, with drooping head, but the last in the field, like a general who has fought well.
And as he descended the winding stairs of the courts:
"A fine rabble of asses and dolts these Parisians!" he muttered between his teeth; "they come to hear a mystery and don't listen to it at all!
This gloom pleased him; he was in haste to reach some obscure and deserted alley, in order there to meditate at his ease, and in order that the philosopher might place the first dressing upon the wound of the poet.
Philosophy, moreover, was his sole refuge, for he did not know where he was to lodge for the night.
After the brilliant failure of his first theatrical venture, he dared not return to the lodging which he occupied in the Rue Greniersurl'Eau, opposite to the PortauFoin, having depended upon receiving from monsieur the provost for his epithalamium, the wherewithal to pay Master Guillaume DoulxSire, farmer of the taxes on clovenfooted animals in Paris, the rent which he owed him, that is to say, twelve sols parisian; twelve times the value of all that he possessed in the world, including his trunkhose, his shirt, and his cap.
After reflecting a moment, temporarily sheltered beneath the little wicket of the prison of the treasurer of the Sainte Chappelle, as to the shelter which he would select for the night, having all the pavements of Paris to choose from, he remembered to have noticed the week previously in the Rue de la Savaterie, at the door of a councillor of the parliament, a stepping stone for mounting a mule, and to have said to himself that that stone would furnish, on occasion, a very excellent pillow for a mendicant or a poet.
He thanked Providence for having sent this happy idea to him; but, as he was preparing to cross the Place, in order to reach the tortuous labyrinth of the city, where meander all those old sister streets, the Rues de la Barillerie, de la VielleDraperie, de la Savaterie, de la Juiverie, etc., still extant today, with their ninestory houses, he saw the procession of the Pope of the Fools, which was also emerging from the court house, and rushing across the courtyard, with great cries, a great flashing of torches, and the music which belonged to him, Gringoire.
This sight revived the pain of his selflove; he fled.
In the bitterness of his dramatic misadventure, everything which reminded him of the festival of that day irritated his wound and made it bleed.
"Pest on firework candles!" said Gringoire; and he fell back on the Pont au Change.
"Happy painter, Jehan Fourbault!" said Gringoire with a deep sigh; and he turned his back upon the bannerets and pennons.
A street opened before him; he thought it so dark and deserted that he hoped to there escape from all the rumors as well as from all the gleams of the festival.
At the end of a few moments his foot came in contact with an obstacle; he stumbled and fell.
Gringoire bore this new disaster heroically; he picked himself up, and reached the water's edge.
After leaving behind him the civic Tournelle* and the criminal tower, and skirted the great walls of the king's garden, on that unpaved strand where the mud reached to his ankles, he reached the western point of the city, and considered for some time the islet of the PasseurauxVaches, which has disappeared beneath the bronze horse of the Pont Neuf.
He was roused from his almost lyric ecstacy, by a big double SaintJean cracker, which suddenly went off from the happy cabin.
It was the cow ferryman, who was taking his part in the rejoicings of the day, and letting off fireworks.
"Accursed festival!" he exclaimed, "wilt thou pursue me everywhere?
Then he looked at the Seine at his feet, and a horrible temptation took possession of him:
"Oh!" said he, "I would gladly drown myself, were the water not so cold!"
It was, since he could not escape from the Pope of the Fools, from Jehan Fourbault's bannerets, from May trusses, from squibs and crackers, to go to the Place de Grve.
"At least," he said to himself, "I shall there have a firebrand of joy wherewith to warm myself, and I can sup on some crumbs of the three great armorial bearings of royal sugar which have been erected on the public refreshmentstall of the city.
When Pierre Gringoire arrived on the Place de Grve, he was paralyzed.
He had directed his course across the Pont aux Meuniers, in order to avoid the rabble on the Pont au Change, and the pennons of Jehan Fourbault; but the wheels of all the bishop's mills had splashed him as he passed, and his doublet was drenched; it seemed to him besides, that the failure of his piece had rendered him still more sensible to cold than usual.
Hence he made haste to draw near the bonfire, which was burning magnificently in the middle of the Place.
"Accursed Parisians!" he said to himself (for Gringoire, like a true dramatic poet, was subject to monologues) "there they are obstructing my fire!
That devil of a Bishop of Paris, with his mills!
Does he expect to become a miller instead of a bishop?
If only my malediction is needed for that, I bestow it upon him! and his cathedral, and his mills!
On looking more closely, he perceived that the circle was much larger than was required simply for the purpose of getting warm at the king's fire, and that this concourse of people had not been attracted solely by the beauty of the hundred fagots which were burning.
In a vast space left free between the crowd and the fire, a young girl was dancing.
Whether this young girl was a human being, a fairy, or an angel, is what Gringoire, sceptical philosopher and ironical poet that he was, could not decide at the first moment, so fascinated was he by this dazzling vision.
She was not tall, though she seemed so, so boldly did her slender form dart about.
She was swarthy of complexion, but one divined that, by day, her skin must possess that beautiful golden tone of the Andalusians and the Roman women.
She danced, she turned, she whirled rapidly about on an old Persian rug, spread negligently under her feet; and each time that her radiant face passed before you, as she whirled, her great black eyes darted a flash of lightning at you.
All around her, all glances were riveted, all mouths open; and, in fact, when she danced thus, to the humming of the Basque tambourine, which her two pure, rounded arms raised above her head, slender, frail and vivacious as a wasp, with her corsage of gold without a fold, her variegated gown puffing out, her bare shoulders, her delicate limbs, which her petticoat revealed at times, her black hair, her eyes of flame, she was a supernatural creature.
"In truth," said Gringoire to himself, "she is a salamander, she is a nymph, she is a goddess, she is a bacchante of the Menelean Mount!"
"H, no!" said he, "she is a gypsy!"
She began her dance once more; she took from the ground two swords, whose points she rested against her brow, and which she made to turn in one direction, while she turned in the other; it was a purely gypsy effect.
It was the face of a man, austere, calm, and sombre.
This man, whose costume was concealed by the crowd which surrounded him, did not appear to be more than five and thirty years of age; nevertheless, he was bald; he had merely a few tufts of thin, gray hair on his temples; his broad, high forehead had begun to be furrowed with wrinkles, but his deepset eyes sparkled with extraordinary youthfulness, an ardent life, a profound passion.
He kept them fixed incessantly on the gypsy, and, while the giddy young girl of sixteen danced and whirled, for the pleasure of all, his revery seemed to become more and more sombre.
From time to time, a smile and a sigh met upon his lips, but the smile was more melancholy than the sigh.
The young girl, stopped at length, breathless, and the people applauded her lovingly.
Then Gringoire saw come up to her, a pretty little white goat, alert, wideawake, glossy, with gilded horns, gilded hoofs, and gilded collar, which he had not hitherto perceived, and which had remained lying curled up on one corner of the carpet watching his mistress dance.
And, seating herself, she gracefully presented her tambourine to the goat.
"Djali," she continued, "what month is this?"
"Djali," pursued the young girl, turning her tambourine round, "what day of the month is this?"
Djali raised his little gilt hoof, and struck six blows on the tambourine.
It was that of the bald man, who never removed his eyes from the gypsy.
It even effaced it so completely from her mind, that she continued to question her goat.
Djali reared himself on his hind legs, and began to bleat, marching along with so much dainty gravity, that the entire circle of spectators burst into a laugh at this parody of the interested devoutness of the captain of pistoliers.
"Djali," resumed the young girl, emboldened by her growing success, "how preaches Master Jacques Charmolue, procurator to the king in the ecclesiastical court?"
The goat seated himself on his hind quarters, and began to bleat, waving his fore feet in so strange a manner, that, with the exception of the bad French, and worse Latin, Jacques Charmolue was there complete,gesture, accent, and attitude.
"Sacrilege! profanation!" resumed the voice of the bald man.
"Ah!" said she, "'tis that villanous man!" Then, thrusting her under lip out beyond the upper, she made a little pout, which appeared to be familiar to her, executed a pirouette on her heel, and set about collecting in her tambourine the gifts of the multitude.
All at once, she passed in front of Gringoire.
Gringoire put his hand so recklessly into his pocket that she halted. "The devil!" said the poet, finding at the bottom of his pocket the reality, that is, to say, a void.
In the meantime, the pretty girl stood there, gazing at him with her big eyes, and holding out her tambourine to him and waiting. Gringoire broke into a violent perspiration.
If he had all Peru in his pocket, he would certainly have given it to the dancer; but Gringoire had not Peru, and, moreover, America had not yet been discovered.
Happily, an unexpected incident came to his rescue.
The young girl turned round in affright.
It was no longer the voice of the bald man; it was the voice of a woman, bigoted and malicious.
Hasn't she supped?
Let's carry her the remains of the city refreshments!"
The children's shouts had reminded him that he, also, had not supped, so he ran to the public buffet.
But the little rascals had better legs than he; when he arrived, they had stripped the table.
No supper, no shelter; he saw himself pressed on all sides by necessity, and he found necessity very crabbed.
He had long ago discovered the truth, that Jupiter created men during a fit of misanthropy, and that during a wise man's whole life, his destiny holds his philosophy in a state of siege.
As for himself, he had never seen the blockade so complete; he heard his stomach sounding a parley, and he considered it very much out of place that evil destiny should capture his philosophy by famine.
Her voice was like her dancing, like her beauty.
Her beautiful face followed, with singular mobility, all the caprices of her song, from the wildest inspiration to the chastest dignity.
One would have pronounced her now a mad creature, now a queen.
The words which she sang were in a tongue unknown to Gringoire, and which seemed to him to be unknown to herself, so little relation did the expression which she imparted to her song bear to the sense of the words.
Thus, these four lines, in her mouth, were madly gay,
And an instant afterwards, at the accents which she imparted to this stanza,
Gringoire felt the tears start to his eyes.
Nevertheless, her song breathed joy, most of all, and she seemed to sing like a bird, from serenity and heedlessness.
It was the first moment in the course of many hours when he did not feel that he suffered.
The same woman's voice, which had interrupted the gypsy's dance, interrupted her song.
Gringoire covered up his ears.
"Oh!" he exclaimed, "accursed saw with missing teeth, which comes to break the lyre!"
And the old invisible killjoy might have had occasion to repent of her aggressions against the gypsy had their attention not been diverted at this moment by the procession of the Pope of the Fools, which, after having traversed many streets and squares, debouched on the Place de Grve, with all its torches and all its uproar.
First came Egypt. The Duke of Egypt headed it, on horseback, with his counts on foot holding his bridle and stirrups for him; behind them, the male and female Egyptians, pellmell, with their little children crying on their shoulders; allduke, counts, and populacein rags and tatters.
Guillaume Rousseau, Emperor of the Empire of Galilee, marched majestically in his robe of purple, spotted with wine, preceded by buffoons wrestling and executing military dances; surrounded by his macebearers, his pickpockets and clerks of the chamber of accounts.
It was the first enjoyment of selflove that he had ever experienced.
Down to that day, he had known only humiliation, disdain for his condition, disgust for his person.
Hence, deaf though he was, he enjoyed, like a veritable pope, the acclamations of that throng, which he hated because he felt that he was hated by it.
What mattered it that his people consisted of a pack of fools, cripples, thieves, and beggars? it was still a people and he was its sovereign.
And he accepted seriously all this ironical applause, all this derisive respect, with which the crowd mingled, it must be admitted, a good deal of very real fear.
For the hunchback was robust; for the bandylegged fellow was agile; for the deaf man was malicious: three qualities which temper ridicule.
We are far from believing, however, that the new Pope of the Fools understood both the sentiments which he felt and the sentiments which he inspired.
Thus, what he felt at the moment was to him, absolutely vague, indistinct, and confused.
It was, then, not without surprise and alarm, that at the very moment when Quasimodo was passing the Pillar House, in that semiintoxicated state, a man was seen to dart from the crowd, and to tear from his hands, with a gesture of anger, his crosier of gilded wood, the emblem of his mock popeship.
This man, this rash individual, was the man with the bald brow, who, a moment earlier, standing with the gypsy's group had chilled the poor girl with his words of menace and of hatred.
At the moment when he stood forth from the crowd, Gringoire, who had not noticed him up to that time, recognized him: "Hold!" he said, with an exclamation of astonishment. "Eh! 'tis my master in Hermes, Dom Claude Frollo, the archdeacon!
What the devil does he want of that old one eyed fellow?
He made one bound as far as the priest, looked at him, and fell upon his knees.
The priest tore off his tiara, broke his crozier, and rent his tinsel cope.
Quasimodo remained on his knees, with head bent and hands clasped.
Then there was established between them a strange dialogue of signs and gestures, for neither of them spoke. The priest, erect on his feet, irritated, threatening, imperious; Quasimodo, prostrate, humble, suppliant.
And, nevertheless, it is certain that Quasimodo could have crushed the priest with his thumb.
Quasimodo placed himself in front of the priest, set in play the muscles of his athletic fists, and glared upon the assailants with the snarl of an angry tiger.
The priest resumed his sombre gravity, made a sign to Quasimodo, and retired in silence.
Quasimodo walked in front of him, scattering the crowd as he passed.
Quasimodo then constituted himself the rearguard, and followed the archdeacon, walking backwards, squat, surly, monstrous, bristling, gathering up his limbs, licking his boar's tusks, growling like a wild beast, and imparting to the crowd immense vibrations, with a look or a gesture.
Both were allowed to plunge into a dark and narrow street, where no one dared to venture after them; so thoroughly did the mere chimera of Quasimodo gnashing his teeth bar the entrance.
He had seen her, accompanied by her goat, take to the Rue de la Coutellerie; he took the Rue de la Coutellerie.
"Why not?" he said to himself.
Gringoire, a practical philosopher of the streets of Paris, had noticed that nothing is more propitious to revery than following a pretty woman without knowing whither she is going.
There was in this voluntary abdication of his freewill, in this fancy submitting itself to another fancy, which suspects it not, a mixture of fantastic independence and blind obedience, something indescribable, intermediate between slavery and liberty, which pleased Gringoire,a spirit essentially compound, undecided, and complex, holding the extremities of all extremes, incessantly suspended between all human propensities, and neutralizing one by the other.
If Gringoire had lived in our day, what a fine middle course he would hold between classicism and romanticism!
But he was not sufficiently primitive to live three hundred years, and 'tis a pity.
Moreover, for the purpose of thus following passersby (and especially female passersby) in the streets, which Gringoire was fond of doing, there is no better disposition than ignorance of where one is going to sleep.
So he walked along, very thoughtfully, behind the young girl, who hastened her pace and made her goat trot as she saw the bourgeois returning home and the tavernsthe only shops which had been open that dayclosing.
"After all," he half thought to himself, "she must lodge somewhere; gypsies have kindly hearts.
And in the points of suspense which he placed after this reticence in his mind, there lay I know not what flattering ideas.
Meanwhile, from time to time, as he passed the last groups of bourgeois closing their doors, he caught some scraps of their conversation, which broke the thread of his pleasant hypotheses.
Further on there were two female neighbors at their windows, holding candles, which the fog caused to sputter.
But Gringoire had lost the thread of his ideas, nevertheless.
Fortunately, he speedily found it again, and he knotted it together without difficulty, thanks to the gypsy, thanks to Djali, who still walked in front of him; two fine, delicate, and charming creatures, whose tiny feet, beautiful forms, and graceful manners he was engaged in admiring, almost confusing them in his contemplation; believing them to be both young girls, from their intelligence and good friendship; regarding them both as goats,so far as the lightness, agility, and dexterity of their walk were concerned.
Gringoire had become involved, in his pursuit of the gypsy, in that inextricable labyrinth of alleys, squares, and closed courts which surround the ancient sepulchre of the SaintsInnocents, and which resembles a ball of thread tangled by a cat. "Here are streets which possess but little logic!" said Gringoire, lost in the thousands of circuits which returned upon themselves incessantly, but where the young girlpursued a road which seemed familiar to her, without hesitation and with a step which became ever more rapid.
As for him, he would have been utterly ignorant of his situation had he not espied, in passing, at the turn of a street, the octagonal mass of the pillory of the fish markets, the openwork summit of which threw its black, fretted outlines clearly upon a window which was still lighted in the Rue Verdelet.
The young girl's attention had been attracted to him for the last few moments; she had repeatedly turned her head towards him with uneasiness; she had even once come to a standstill, and taking advantage of a ray of light which escaped from a halfopen bakery to survey him intently, from head to foot, then, having cast this glance, Gringoire had seen her make that little pout which he had already noticed, after which she passed on.
So he dropped his head, began to count the pavingstones, and to follow the young girl at a little greater distance, when, at the turn of a street, which had caused him to lose sight of her, he heard her utter a piercing cry.
He hastened his steps.
Nevertheless, a twist of tow soaked in oil, which burned in a cage at the feet of the Holy Virgin at the street corner, permitted Gringoire to make out the gypsy struggling in the arms of two men, who were endeavoring to stifle her cries.
The poor little goat, in great alarm, lowered his horns and bleated.
One of the men who held the young girl turned towards him.
Gringoire did not take to flight, but neither did he advance another step.
Quasimodo came up to him, tossed him four paces away on the pavement with a backward turn of the hand, and plunged rapidly into the gloom, bearing the young girl folded across one arm like a silken scarf.
It was a captain of the king's archers, armed from head to foot, with his sword in his hand.
He tore the gypsy from the arms of the dazed Quasimodo, threw her across his saddle, and at the moment when the terrible hunchback, recovering from his surprise, rushed upon him to regain his prey, fifteen or sixteen archers, who followed their captain closely, made their appearance, with their twoedged swords in their fists.
Quasimodo was surrounded, seized, garroted; he roared, he foamed at the mouth, he bit; and had it been broad daylight, there is no doubt that his face alone, rendered more hideous by wrath, would have put the entire squad to flight.
But by night he was deprived of his most formidable weapon, his ugliness.
The gypsy gracefully raised herself upright upon the officer's saddle, placed both hands upon the young man's shoulders, and gazed fixedly at him for several seconds, as though enchanted with his good looks and with the aid which he had just rendered her.
Then breaking silence first, she said to him, making her sweet voice still sweeter than usual,
"Thanks," said she.
And while Captain Phoebus was turning up his moustache in Burgundian fashion, she slipped from the horse, like an arrow falling to earth, and fled.
Gringoire, thoroughly stunned by his fall, remained on the pavement in front of the Holy Virgin at the street corner.
Little by little, he regained his senses; at first, for several minutes, he was floating in a sort of halfsomnolent revery, which was not without its charm, in which aeriel figures of the gypsy and her goat were coupled with Quasimodo's heavy fist.
A decidedly vivid sensation of cold in the part of his body which was in contact with the pavement, suddenly aroused him and caused his spirit to return to the surface.
"Whence comes this chill?" he said abruptly, to himself.
He then perceived that he was lying half in the middle of the gutter.
"That devil of a hunchbacked cyclops!" he muttered between his teeth; and he tried to rise.
But he was too much dazed and bruised; he was forced to remain where he was.
Moreover, his hand was tolerably free; he stopped up his nose and resigned himself.
"The mud of Paris," he said to himselffor decidedly he thought that he was sure that the gutter would prove his refuge for the night; and what can one do in a refuge, except dream?"the mud of Paris is particularly stinking; it must contain a great deal of volatile and nitric salts.
The word "alchemists" suddenly suggested to his mind the idea of Archdeacon Claude Frollo.
He recalled the violent scene which he had just witnessed in part; that the gypsy was struggling with two men, that Quasimodo had a companion; and the morose and haughty face of the archdeacon passed confusedly through his memory.
"That would be strange!" he said to himself.
And on that fact and that basis he began to construct a fantastic edifice of hypothesis, that cardcastle of philosophers; then, suddenly returning once more to reality, "Come! I'm freezing!" he ejaculated.
Each molecule of the gutter bore away a molecule of heat radiating from Gringoire's loins, and the equilibrium between the temperature of his body and the temperature of the brook, began to be established in rough fashion.
We've got his straw pallet, we're going to have a bonfire out of it.
He was caught between fire and water; he made a superhuman effort, the effort of a counterfeiter of money who is on the point of being boiled, and who seeks to escape.
He rose to his feet, flung aside the straw pallet upon the street urchins, and fled.
After having run for some time at the top of his speed, without knowing whither, knocking his head against many a street corner, leaping many a gutter, traversing many an alley, many a court, many a square, seeking flight and passage through all the meanderings of the ancient passages of the Halles, exploring in his panic terror what the fine Latin of the maps calls ~tota via, cheminum et viaria~, our poet suddenly halted for lack of breath in the first place, and in the second, because he had been collared, after a fashion, by a dilemma which had just occurred to his mind. "It strikes me, Master Pierre Gringoire," he said to himself, placing his finger to his brow, "that you are running like a madman.
Then he retraced his steps, and feeling his way and searching, with his nose to the wind and his ears on the alert, he tried to find the blessed pallet again, but in vain.
There was nothing to be found but intersections of houses, closed courts, and crossings of streets, in the midst of which he hesitated and doubted incessantly, being more perplexed and entangled in this medley of streets than he would have been even in the labyrinth of the Htel des Tournelles.
At length he lost patience, and exclaimed solemnly:
"Cursed be cross roads! 'tis the devil who has made them in the shape of his pitchfork!"
This exclamation afforded him a little solace, and a sort of reddish reflection which he caught sight of at that moment, at the extremity of a long and narrow lane, completed the elevation of his moral tone. "God be praised!" said he, "There it is yonder!
There is my pallet burning." And comparing himself to the pilot who suffers shipwreck by night, "~Salve~," he added piously, "~salve, maris stella~!"
Did he address this fragment of litany to the Holy Virgin, or to the pallet?
He had taken but a few steps in the long street, which sloped downwards, was unpaved, and more and more muddy and steep, when he noticed a very singular thing.
On drawing near, he perceived that it was nothing else than a wretched legless cripple in a bowl, who was hopping along on his two hands like a wounded fieldspider which has but two legs left.
At the moment when he passed close to this species of spider with a human countenance, it raised towards him a lamentable voice: "~La buona mancia, signor! la buona mancia~!"*
And he passed on.
It was an impotent man, both halt and crippled, and halt and crippled to such a degree that the complicated system of crutches and wooden legs which sustained him, gave him the air of a mason's scaffolding on the march.
This living tripod saluted him as he passed, but stopping his hat on a level with Gringoire's chin, like a shaving dish, while he shouted in the latter's ears: Give me the means to buy a bit of bread, sir.
"It appears," said Gringoire, "that this one can also talk; but 'tis a rude language, and he is more fortunate than I if he understands it." Then, smiting his brow, in a sudden transition of ideas:
He was minded to augment his pace, but for the third time something barred his way.
This something or, rather, some one was a blind man, a little blind fellow with a bearded, Jewish face, who, rowing away in the space about him with a stick, and towed by a large dog, droned through his nose with a Hungarian accent: "~Facitote caritatem~!"
I must have a very charitable aspect, since they ask alms of me in the present lean condition of my purse. My friend," and he turned towards the blind man, "I sold my last shirt last week; that is to say, since you understand only the language of Cicero: ~Vendidi hebdomade nuper transita meam ultimam chemisan~."
That said, he turned his back upon the blind man, and pursued his way.
But the blind man began to increase his stride at the same time; and, behold! the cripple and the legless man, in his bowl, came up on their side in great haste, and with great clamor of bowl and crutches, upon the pavement.
"~Caritatem~!" chanted the blind man.
And the lame man took up the musical phrase by repeating: "~Un pedaso de pan~!"
Gringoire stopped up his ears. "Oh, tower of Babel!" he exclaimed.
He set out to run. The blind man ran!
The lame man ran! The cripple in the bowl ran!
And then, in proportion as he plunged deeper into the street, cripples in bowls, blind men and lame men, swarmed about him, and men with one arm, and with one eye, and the leprous with their sores, some emerging from little streets adjacent, some from the airholes of cellars, howling, bellowing, yelping, all limping and halting, all flinging themselves towards the light, and humped up in the mire, like snails after a shower.
Gringoire, still followed by his three persecutors, and not knowing very well what was to become of him, marched along in terror among them, turning out for the lame, stepping over the cripples in bowls, with his feet imbedded in that anthill of lame men, like the English captain who got caught in the quicksand of a swarm of crabs.
The idea occurred to him of making an effort to retrace his steps.
This whole legion had closed in behind him, and his three beggars held him fast.
So he proceeded, impelled both by this irresistible flood, by fear, and by a vertigo which converted all this into a sort of horrible dream.
At last he reached the end of the street.
Gringoire flew thither, hoping to escape, by the swiftness of his legs, from the three infirm spectres who had clutched him.
"~Onde vas, hombre~?" (Where are you going, my man?) cried the cripple, flinging away his crutches, and running after him with the best legs that ever traced a geometrical step upon the pavements of Paris.
In the meantime the legless man, erect upon his feet, crowned Gringoire with his heavy iron bowl, and the blind man glared in his face with flaming eyes!
The poor poet cast his eyes about him.
It was, in truth, that redoubtable Cour des Miracles, whither an honest man had never penetrated at such an hour; the magic circle where the officers of the Chtelet and the sergeants of the provostship, who ventured thither, disappeared in morsels; a city of thieves, a hideous wart on the face of Paris; a sewer, from which escaped every morning, and whither returned every night to crouch, that stream of vices, of mendicancy and vagabondage which always overflows in the streets of capitals; a monstrous hive, to which returned at nightfall, with their booty, all the drones of the social order; a lying hospital where the bohemian, the disfrocked monk, the ruined scholar, the ne'erdowells of all nations, Spaniards, Italians, Germans,of all religions, Jews, Christians, Mahometans, idolaters, covered with painted sores, beggars by day, were transformed by night into brigands; an immense dressingroom, in a word, where, at that epoch, the actors of that eternal comedy, which theft, prostitution, and murder play upon the pavements of Paris, dressed and undressed.
At times, upon the ground, where trembled the light of the fires, mingled with large, indefinite shadows, one could behold a dog passing, which resembled a man, a man who resembled a dog.
The poor and flickering flames of the fire permitted Gringoire to distinguish, amid his trouble, all around the immense place, a hideous frame of ancient houses, whose wormeaten, shrivelled, stunted faades, each pierced with one or two lighted attic windows, seemed to him, in the darkness, like enormous heads of old women, ranged in a circle, monstrous and crabbed, winking as they looked on at the Witches' Sabbath.
Gringoire, more and more terrified, clutched by the three beggars as by three pairs of tongs, dazed by a throng of other faces which frothed and yelped around him, unhappy Gringoire endeavored to summon his presence of mind, in order to recall whether it was a Saturday.
But his efforts were vain; the thread of his memory and of his thought was broken; and, doubting everything, wavering between what he saw and what he felt, he put to himself this unanswerable question,
Each vied with the other in laying his claws upon him.
While traversing the horrible place, his vertigo vanished.
At the first moment there had arisen from his poet's head, or, simply and prosaically, from his empty stomach, a mist, a vapor, so to speak, which, spreading between objects and himself, permitted him to catch a glimpse of them only in the incoherent fog of nightmare,in those shadows of dreams which distort every outline, agglomerating objects into unwieldy groups, dilating things into chimeras, and men into phantoms.
Reality made its way to the light around him, struck his eyes, struck his feet, and demolished, bit by bit, all that frightful poetry with which he had, at first, believed himself to be surrounded.
He was forced to perceive that he was not walking in the Styx, but in mud, that he was elbowed not by demons, but by thieves; that it was not his soul which was in question, but his life (since he lacked that precious conciliator, which places itself so effectually between the bandit and the honest mana purse).
In short, on examining the orgy more closely, and with more coolness, he fell from the witches' sabbath to the dramshop.
The spectacle which presented itself to his eyes, when his ragged escort finally deposited him at the end of his trip, was not fitted to bear him back to poetry, even to the poetry of hell.
There was a man with a huge belly and a jovial face, noisily kissing a woman of the town, thickset and brawny. There was a sort of sham soldier, a "naquois," as the slang expression runs, who was whistling as he undid the bandages from his fictitious wound, and removing the numbness from his sound and vigorous knee, which had been swathed since morning in a thousand ligatures.
On the other hand, there was a wretched fellow, preparing with celandine and beef's blood, his "leg of God," for the next day.
Two tables further on, a palmer, with his pilgrim's costume complete, was practising the lament of the Holy Queen, not forgetting the drone and the nasal drawl.
Beside him, a man with the dropsy was getting rid of his swelling, and making four or five female thieves, who were disputing at the same table, over a child who had been stolen that evening, hold their noses.
Each one held his own course, carping and swearing, without listening to his neighbor.
A big dog, seated on his tail, gazed at the fire.
Another, a big boy four years of age, seated with legs dangling, upon a bench that was too high for him, before a table that reached to his chin, and uttering not a word.
A third, gravely spreading out upon the table with his finger, the melted tallow which dripped from a candle.
Last of all, a little fellow crouching in the mud, almost lost in a cauldron, which he was scraping with a tile, and from which he was evoking a sound that would have made Stradivarius swoon.
This was the king on his throne.
Gringoire dared neither breathe nor raise his eyes.
"~Hombre, quita tu sombrero~!" said one of the three knaves, in whose grasp he was, and, before he had comprehended the meaning, the other had snatched his hata wretched headgear, it is true, but still good on a sunny day or when there was but little rain.
Meanwhile the king addressed him, from the summit of his cask,
That voice, although accentuated by menace, recalled to him another voice, which, that very morning, had dealt the deathblow to his mystery, by drawling, nasally, in the midst of the audience, "Charity, please!" He raised his head.
Clopin Trouillefou, arrayed in his royal insignia, wore neither one rag more nor one rag less.
The sore upon his arm had already disappeared.
He held in his hand one of those whips made of thongs of white leather, which police sergeants then used to repress the crowd, and which were called ~boullayes~.
On his head he wore a sort of headgear, bound round and closed at the top. But it was difficult to make out whether it was a child's cap or a king's crown, the two things bore so strong a resemblance to each other.
Meanwhile Gringoire, without knowing why, had regained some hope, on recognizing in the King of the Cour des Miracles his accursed mendicant of the Grand Hall.
"Master," stammered he; "monseigneursirehow ought I to address you?" he said at length, having reached the culminating point of his crescendo, and knowing neither how to mount higher, nor to descend again.
"Monseigneur, his majesty, or comrade, call me what you please.
He resumed, stuttering, "I am he, who this morning"
One really must behold the grimace of an honest man above the hempen collar now and then; that renders the thing honorable.
If you have any mummery to go through with, there's a very good God the Father in that mortar yonder, in stone, which we stole from SaintPierre aux Boeufs.
You have four minutes in which to fling your soul at his head."
Clopin Trouillefou preaches like the Holy Father the Pope!" exclaimed the Emperor of Galilee, smashing his pot in order to prop up his table.
"Messeigneurs, emperors, and kings," said Gringoire coolly (for I know not how, firmness had returned to him, and he spoke with resolution), "don't think of such a thing; my name is Pierre Gringoire. I am the poet whose morality was presented this morning in the grand hall of the Courts."
Nevertheless, he made one more effort: "I don't see why poets are not classed with vagabonds," said he.
The little boy scraped away at his cauldron with more spirit than ever; and, to crown all, an old woman had just placed on the tripod a fryingpan of grease, which hissed away on the fire with a noise similar to the cry of a troop of children in pursuit of a masker.
Then he shouted shrilly: "Silence!" and, as the cauldron and the fryingpan did not heed him, and continued their duet, he jumped down from his hogshead, gave a kick to the boiler, which rolled ten paces away bearing the child with it, a kick to the fryingpan, which upset in the fire with all its grease, and gravely remounted his throne, without troubling himself about the stifled tears of the child, or the grumbling of the old woman, whose supper was wasting away in a fine white flame.
In the midst of this Round Table of beggary, Clopin Trouillefou,as the doge of this senate, as the king of this peerage, as the pope of this conclave, dominated; first by virtue of the height of his hogshead, and next by virtue of an indescribable, haughty, fierce, and formidable air, which caused his eyes to flash, and corrected in his savage profile the bestial type of the race of vagabonds.
"Listen," said he to Gringoire, fondling his misshapen chin with his horny hand; "I don't see why you should not be hung.
The reader can judge of the effect which this proposition produced upon Gringoire, who beheld life slipping away from him, and who was beginning to lose his hold upon it.
"Certainly I will, and right heartily," said he.
I am a vagabond, a thief, a sharper, a man of the knife, anything you please; and I am all that already, monsieur, King of Thunes, for I am a philosopher; ~et omnia in philosophia, omnes in philosopho continentur~,all things are contained in philosophy, all men in the philosopher, as you know."
So saying, he pointed his finger at the little, bearded Hungarian Jew who had accosted Gringoire with his ~facitote caritatem~, and who, understanding no other language beheld with surprise the King of Thunes's illhumor overflow upon him.
"So you will be a vagabond, you knave?" he said to our poet.
A sound of bells, which he heard at that moment, put an end to his anxiety; it was a stuffed manikin, which the vagabonds were suspending by the neck from the rope, a sort of scarecrow dressed in red, and so hung with mulebells and larger bells, that one might have tricked out thirty Castilian mules with them.
Gringoire mounted the stool, and succeeded, not without some oscillations of head and arms, in regaining his centre of gravity.
Clopin tossed his head.
"Come, make haste," said the king, stamping upon his cask, which resounded like a huge drum! Search the manikin, and let there be an end to this!
The band of thieves applauded Clopin's words, and arranged themselves in a circle round the gibbet, with a laugh so pitiless that Gringoire perceived that he amused them too much not to have everything to fear from them.
No hope was left for him, accordingly, unless it were the slight chance of succeeding in the formidable operation which was imposed upon him; he decided to risk it, but it was not without first having addressed a fervent prayer to the manikin he was about to plunder, and who would have been easier to move to pity than the vagabonds.
"Oh!" he said, in a very low voice, "is it possible that my life depends on the slightest vibration of the least of these bells? Oh!" he added, with clasped hands, "bells, do not ring, handbells do not clang, mulebells do not quiver!"
Perceiving that no respite, nor reprieve, nor subterfuge was possible, he bravely decided upon his course of action; he wound his right foot round his left leg, raised himself on his left foot, and stretched out his arm: but at the moment when his hand touched the manikin, his body, which was now supported upon one leg only, wavered on the stool which had but three; he made an involuntary effort to support himself by the manikin, lost his balance, and fell heavily to the ground, deafened by the fatal vibration of the thousand bells of the manikin, which, yielding to the impulse imparted by his hand, described first a rotary motion, and then swayed majestically between the two posts.
"Malediction!" he cried as he fell, and remained as though dead, with his face to the earth.
Meanwhile, he heard the dreadful peal above his head, the diabolical laughter of the vagabonds, and the voice of Trouillefou saying,
He rose. They had already detached the manikin to make room for him.
The thieves made him mount the stool, Clopin came to him, passed the rope about his neck, and, tapping him on the shoulder,
The word "Mercy!" died away upon Gringoire's lips. He cast his eyes about him; but there was no hope: all were laughing.
Bellevigne de l'Etoile nimbly mounted the transverse beam, and in another minute, Gringoire, on raising his eyes, beheld him, with terror, seated upon the beam above his head.
A moment of horrible suspense ensued for the poor victim, during which Clopin tranquilly thrust into the fire with the tip of his foot, some bits of vine shoots which the flame had not caught.
"Are you ready?" he repeated, and opened his hands to clap.
But he paused, as though struck by a sudden thought.
"One moment!" said he; "I forgot!
It is our custom not to hang a man without inquiring whether there is any woman who wants him.
You must wed either a female vagabond or the noose."
This was the second time that he had returned to life within an hour.
So he did not dare to trust to it too implicitly.
"Hol!" cried Clopin, mounted once more upon his cask, "hol! women, females, is there among you, from the sorceress to her cat, a wench who wants this rascal?
A man for nothing!
The female vagabonds did not seem to be much affected by the proposition.
The girl made a wry face.
"Old rag!" she muttered, and addressing Gringoire, "Let's see your cloak!"
"Let them hang you, then, and say 'Thank you!'" retorted the vagabond wench, turning her back on him.
He almost trembled lest she should want him.
But she mumbled between her teeth, "He's too thin," and went off.
The third was a young girl, quite fresh, and not too ugly. "Save me!" said the poor fellow to her, in a low tone.
She gazed at him for a moment with an air of pity, then dropped her eyes, made a plait in her petticoat, and remained in indecision.
He followed all these movements with his eyes; it was the last gleam of hope. "No," said the young girl, at length, "no!
Then rising to his feet, upon his hogshead. "No one wants him," he exclaimed, imitating the accent of an auctioneer, to the great delight of all; "no one wants him? once, twice, three times!"
and, turning towards the gibbet with a sign of his hand, "Gone!" Bellevigne de l'Etoile, Andry the Red, Franois ChantePrune, stepped up to Gringoire.
"La Esmeralda!" said Gringoire, stupefied in the midst of his emotions, by the abrupt manner in which that magic word knotted together all his reminiscences of the day.
This rare creature seemed, even in the Cour des Miracles, to exercise her sway of charm and beauty.
The vagabonds, male and female, ranged themselves gently along her path, and their brutal faces beamed beneath her glance.
She approached the victim with her light step.
Her pretty Djali followed her.
"You are going to hang this man?" she said gravely, to Clopin.
"Yes, sister," replied the King of Thunes, "unless you will take him for your husband." She made her pretty little pout with her under lip.
"I'll take him," said she.
Gringoire firmly believed that he had been in a dream ever since morning, and that this was the continuation of it.
His emotion was so lively that he was obliged to sit down.
"Fling it on the ground," said she.
"Brother," then said the Duke of Egypt, laying his hands upon their foreheads, "she is your wife; sister, he is your husband for four years.
A few moments later our poet found himself in a tiny arched chamber, very cosy, very warm, seated at a table which appeared to ask nothing better than to make some loans from a larder hanging near by, having a good bed in prospect, and alone with a pretty girl.
He began seriously to take himself for a personage in a fairy tale; he cast his eyes about him from time to time to time, as though to see if the chariot of fire, harnessed to twowinged chimeras, which alone could have so rapidly transported him from Tartarus to Paradise, were still there.
At times, also, he fixed his eyes obstinately upon the holes in his doublet, in order to cling to reality, and not lose the ground from under his feet completely.
The young girl did not appear to pay any attention to him; she went and came, displaced a stool, talked to her goat, and indulged in a pout now and then.
At last she came and seated herself near the table, and Gringoire was able to scrutinize her at his ease.
Recall these impressions, and you will readily appreciate what Gringoire felt on contemplating, beneath her visible and palpable form, that Esmeralda of whom, up to that time, he had only caught a glimpse, amidst a whirlwind of dance, song, and tumult.
Sinking deeper and deeper into his revery: "So this," he said to himself, following her vaguely with his eyes, "is la Esmeralda! a celestial creature! a street dancer! so much, and so little!
'Twas she who dealt the deathblow to my mystery this morning, 'tis she who saves my life this evening!
A pretty woman, on my word! and who must needs love me madly to have taken me in that fashion.
By the way," said he, rising suddenly, with that sentiment of the true which formed the foundation of his character and his philosophy, "I don't know very well how it happens, but I am her husband!"
With this idea in his head and in his eyes, he stepped up to the young girl in a manner so military and so gallant that she drew back.
"What do you want of me?" said she.
"Can you ask me, adorable Esmeralda?" replied Gringoire, with so passionate an accent that he was himself astonished at it on hearing himself speak.
The gypsy opened her great eyes. "I don't know what you mean."
"What!" resumed Gringoire, growing warmer and warmer, and supposing that, after all, he had to deal merely with a virtue of the Cour des Miracles; "am I not thine, sweet friend, art thou not mine?"
And, quite ingenuously, he clasped her waist.
The gypsy's corsage slipped through his hands like the skin of an eel.
She bounded from one end of the tiny room to the other, stooped down, and raised herself again, with a little poniard in her hand, before Gringoire had even had time to see whence the poniard came; proud and angry, with swelling lips and inflated nostrils, her cheeks as red as an api apple,* and her eyes darting lightnings.
At the same time, the white goat placed itself in front of her, and presented to Gringoire a hostile front, bristling with two pretty horns, gilded and very sharp.
Our philosopher was speechless, and turned his astonished eyes from the goat to the young girl.
"Holy Virgin!" he said at last, when surprise permitted him to speak, "here are two hearty dames!"
The gypsy broke the silence on her side.
"So," said the poet, somewhat disappointed in his amorous hopes. "You had no other idea in marrying me than to save me from the gibbet?"
Gringoire bit his lips. "Come," said he, "I am not yet so triumphant in Cupido, as I thought.
In the matter of love, as in all other affairs, he willingly assented to temporizing and adjusting terms; and a good supper, and an amiable tteatte appeared to him, especially when he was hungry, an excellent interlude between the prologue and the catastrophe of a love adventure.
She made her disdainful little grimace, drew up her head like a bird, then burst out laughing, and the tiny poniard disappeared as it had come, without Gringoire being able to see where the wasp concealed its sting.
One would have said, to hear the furious clashing of his iron fork and his earthenware plate, that all his love had turned to appetite.
The young girl seated opposite him, watched him in silence, visibly preoccupied with another thought, at which she smiled from time to time, while her soft hand caressed the intelligent head of the goat, gently pressed between her knees.
Meanwhile, the first cravings of his stomach having been stilled, Gringoire felt some false shame at perceiving that nothing remained but one apple. "You do not eat, Mademoiselle Esmeralda?"
She replied by a negative sign of the head, and her pensive glance fixed itself upon the vault of the ceiling.
"What the deuce is she thinking of?" thought Gringoire, staring at what she was gazing at; "'tis impossible that it can be that stone dwarf carved in the keystone of that arch, which thus absorbs her attention.
He raised his voice, "Mademoiselle!"
The young girl's mind was elsewhere, and Gringoire's voice had not the power to recall it.
She began to pull her mistress gently by the sleeve. "What dost thou want, Djali?" said the gypsy, hastily, as though suddenly awakened.
Esmeralda began to crumble some bread, which Djali ate gracefully from the hollow of her hand.
Moreover, Gringoire did not give her time to resume her revery.
"So you don't want me for your husband?" The young girl looked at him intently, and said, "No."
"Do you know what friendship is?" he asked.
"Oh! love!" said she, and her voice trembled, and her eye beamed. "That is to be two and to be but one.
A man and a woman mingled into one angel.
The street dancer had a beauty as she spoke thus, that struck Gringoire singularly, and seemed to him in perfect keeping with the almost oriental exaltation of her words.
Her pure, red lips half smiled; her serene and candid brow became troubled, at intervals, under her thoughts, like a mirror under the breath; and from beneath her long, drooping, black eyelashes, there escaped a sort of ineffable light, which gave to her profile that ideal serenity which Raphael found at the mystic point of intersection of virginity, maternity, and divinity.
"A man."
"And I" said he, "what, then, am I?"
"A man has a hemlet on his head, a sword in his hand, and golden spurs on his heels."
"Good," said Gringoire, "without a horse, no man.
"I can never love a man who cannot protect me."
Gringoire colored, and took the hint. It was evident that the young girl was alluding to the slight assistance which he had rendered her in the critical situation in which she had found herself two hours previously.
This memory, effaced by his own adventures of the evening, now recurred to him.
He smote his brow.
"Oh! the horrible hunchback," said she, hiding her face in her hands.
And she shuddered as though with violent cold.
"Horrible, in truth," said Gringoire, who clung to his idea; "but how did you manage to escape him?" La Esmeralda smiled, sighed, and remained silent.
"Do you know why he followed you?" began Gringoire again, seeking to return to his question by a circuitous route.
"I don't know," said the young girl, and she added hastily, "but you were following me also, why were you following me?"
Gringoire slashed the table with his knife.
The young girl smiled and seemed to be gazing through the wall at something.
All at once she began to sing in a barely articulate voice,
She is my sister," she answered.
"But why?" She drew from her bosom a sort of little oblong bag, suspended from her neck by a string of adrzarach beads.
"Perhaps it is because of this," said she.
Gringoire was on the point of taking the bag in his hand. She drew back.
"Who gave it to you?" She laid one finger on her mouth and concealed the amulet in her bosom.
He tried a few more questions, but she hardly replied.
"I don't know," said she. "To what language do they belong?"
She began to sing, to an ancient air, My father is a bird, my mother is a bird. I cross the water without a barque, I cross the water without a boat.
She retired into her laconics again.
"Is that man whom you call the Duke of Egypt, the chief of your tribe?"
"But it was he who married us," remarked the poet timidly.
She made her customary pretty grimace. "I don't even know your name."
"I know a prettier one," said she.
"Naughty girl!" retorted the poet. "Never mind, you shall not provoke me.
You must know, then, that my name is Pierre Gringoire, and that I am a son of the farmer of the notary's office of Gonesse.
My father was hung by the Burgundians, and my mother disembowelled by the Picards, at the siege of Paris, twenty years ago.
He took an interest in me, and it is to him that I today owe it that I am a veritable man of letters, who knows Latin from the ~de Officiis~ of Cicero to the mortuology of the Celestine Fathers, and a barbarian neither in scholastics, nor in politics, nor in rhythmics, that sophism of sophisms.
I have also made a book which will contain six hundred pages, on the wonderful comet of 1465, which sent one man mad.
Gringoire ceased, awaiting the effect of his harangue on the young girl.
"'Phoebus,'" she said in a low voice.
Gringoire, without exactly understanding what the connection could be between his address and this question, was not sorry to display his erudition.
Assuming an air of importance, he replied,
"Sun!" she repeated.
"A god!" repeated the gypsy, and there was something pensive and passionate in her tone.
At that moment, one of her bracelets became unfastened and fell.
Gringoire stooped quickly to pick it up; when he straightened up, the young girl and the goat had disappeared.
"Has she left me a bed, at least?" said our philosopher.
He made the tour of his cell.
There was no piece of furniture adapted to sleeping purposes, except a tolerably long wooden coffer; and its cover was carved, to boot; which afforded Gringoire, when he stretched himself out upon it, a sensation somewhat similar to that which Micromgas would feel if he were to lie down on the Alps.
"Come!" said he, adjusting himself as well as possible, "I must resign myself.
On the face of this aged queen of our cathedrals, by the side of a wrinkle, one always finds a scar. ~Tempus edax, homo edacior*~; which I should be glad to translate thus: time is blind, man is stupid.
He would remember that it was the color with which the hangman smeared "accursed" edifices; he would recall the Htel du PetitBourbon, all smeared thus, on account of the constable's treason. "Yellow, after all, of so good a quality," said Sauval, "and so well recommended, that more than a century has not yet caused it to lose its color."
This central mother church is, among the ancient churches of Paris, a sort of chimera; it has the head of one, the limbs of another, the haunches of another, something of all.
Each wave of time contributes its alluvium, each race deposits its layer on the monument, each individual brings his stone.
The man, the artist, the individual, is effaced in these great masses, which lack the name of their author; human intelligence is there summed up and totalized.
The service of religion once assured and provided for, architecture does what she pleases.
Statues, stained glass, rose windows, arabesques, denticulations, capitals, basreliefs,she combines all these imaginings according to the arrangement which best suits her.
The mighty city had cracked, in succession, its four enclosures of walls, like a child grown too large for his garments of last year.
The City, which occupied the island, was the most ancient, the smallest, and the mother of the other two, crowded in between them like (may we be pardoned the comparison) a little old woman between two large and handsome maidens.
Its wall included a large part of that plain where Julian had built his hot baths.
In the first place, the City."The island of the City," as Sauval says, who, in spite of his confused medley, sometimes has such happy turns of expression,"the island of the city is made like a great ship, stuck in the mud and run aground in the current, near the centre of the Seine."
One could there distinguish, very well, though cleverly united with the principal building by long galleries, decked with painted glass and slender columns, the three Htels which Charles V. had amalgamated with his palace: the Htel du PetitMuce, with the airy balustrade, which formed a graceful border to its roof; the Htel of the Abbe de SaintMaur, having the vanity of a stronghold, a great tower, machicolations, loopholes, iron gratings, and over the large Saxon door, the armorial bearings of the abb, between the two mortises of the drawbridge; the Htel of the Comte d' Etampes, whose donjon keep, ruined at its summit, was rounded and notched like a cock's comb; here and there, three or four ancient oaks, forming a tuft together like enormous cauliflowers; gambols of swans, in the clear water of the fishponds, all in folds of light and shade; many courtyards of which one beheld picturesque bits; the Htel of the Lions, with its low, pointed arches on short, Saxon pillars, its iron gratings and its perpetual roar; shooting up above the whole, the scale ornamented spire of the AveMaria; on the left, the house of the Provost of Paris, flanked by four small towers, delicately grooved, in the middle; at the extremity, the Htel SaintPol, properly speaking, with its multiplied faades, its successive enrichments from the time of Charles V., the hybrid excrescences, with which the fancy of thearchitects had loaded it during the last two centuries, with all the apses of its chapels, all the gables of its galleries, a thousand weathercocks for the four winds, and its two lofty contiguous towers, whose conical roof, surrounded by battlements at its base, looked like those pointed caps which have their edges turned up.
Rault, the sculptor, only placed them in position in 1526, and received twenty francs for his pains.)
Fortunately, Voltaire was the author of "Candide" in spite of this, and in spite of this, he is, among all the men who have followed each other in the long series of humanity, the one who has best possessed the diabolical laugh.
Did not Moliere imagine that he was doing Raphael and MichaelAngelo a very great honor, by calling them "those Mignards of their age?"
"To think that Monsieur of Reims sent this enormity to Monsieur of Paris," added la Gaultire, clasping her hands.
"How innocent that poor la Herme is!" resumed Jehanne; "don't you see, sister, that this little monster is at least four years old, and that he would have less appetite for your breast than for a turnspit."
Dame Aloise de Gondelaurier, a rich and noble woman, who held by the hand a pretty girl about five or six years of age, and dragged a long veil about, suspended to the golden horn of her headdress, halted as she passed the wooden bed, and gazed for a moment at the wretched creature, while her charming little daughter, FleurdeLys de Gondelaurier, spelled out with her tiny, pretty finger, the permanent inscription attached to the wooden bed: "Foundlings."
She turned her back, throwing into the basin a silver florin, which rang among the liards, and made the poor goodwives of the chapel of Etienne Haudry open their eyes.
A moment later, the grave and learned Robert Mistricolle, the king's protonotary, passed, with an enormous missal under one arm and his wife on the other (Damoiselle Guillemette la Mairesse), having thus by his side his two regulators,spiritual and temporal.
"Foundling!" he said, after examining the object; "found, apparently, on the banks of the river Phlegethon."
"Ah! good heavens!" said an old woman among the spectators, "and that besides our having had a considerable pestilence last year, and that they say that the English are going to disembark in a company at Harfleur."
"A fine, flaming fagot," added the old woman.
He thrust the crowd silently aside, scrutinized the "little magician," and stretched out his hand upon him.
He took it in his cassock and carried it off.
A moment later, he had disappeared through the "Red Door," which then led from the church to the cloister.
As possessor of this fief, Claude Frollo was one of the twentyseven seigneurs keeping claim to a manor in fee in Paris and its suburbs; and for a long time, his name was to be seen inscribed in this quality, between the Htel de Tancarville, belonging to Master Franois Le Rez, and the college of Tours, in the records deposited at Saint Martin des Champs.
Claude Frollo had been destined from infancy, by his parents, to the ecclesiastical profession.
He had been taught to read in Latin; he had been trained to keep his eyes on the ground and to speak low.
While still a child, his father had cloistered him in the college of Torchi in the University.
There it was that he had grown up, on the missal and the lexicon.
Moreover, he was a sad, grave, serious child, who studied ardently, and learned quickly; he never uttered a loud cry in recreation hour, mixed but little in the bacchanals of the Rue du Fouarre, did not know what it was to ~dare alapas et capillos laniare~, and had cut no figure in that revolt of 1463, which the annalists register gravely, under the title of "The sixth trouble of the University."
On the other hand, he was assiduous at the great and the small schools of the Rue Saint Jean de Beauvais.
The first pupil whom the Abb de Saint Pierre de Val, at the moment of beginning his reading on canon law, always perceived, glued to a pillar of the school SaintVendregesile, opposite his rostrum, was Claude Frollo, armed with his horn inkbottle, biting his pen, scribbling on his threadbare knee, and, in winter, blowing on his fingers.
Thus, at sixteen years of age, the young clerk might have held his own, in mystical theology, against a father of the church; in canonical theology, against a father of the councils; in scholastic theology, against a doctor of Sorbonne.
Theology conquered, he had plunged into decretals.
From the "Master of Sentences," he had passed to the "Capitularies of Charlemagne;" and he had devoured in succession, in his appetite for science, decretals upon decretals, those of Theodore, Bishop of Hispalus; those of Bouchard, Bishop of Worms; those of Yves, Bishop of Chartres; next the decretal of Gratian, which succeeded the capitularies of Charlemagne; then the collection of Gregory IX.; then the Epistle of ~Superspecula~, of Honorius III.
Decretals digested, he flung himself upon medicine, on the liberal arts.
He studied the science of herbs, the science of unguents; he became an expert in fevers and in contusions, in sprains and abcesses.
At the age of eighteen, he had made his way through the four faculties; it seemed to the young man that life had but one sole object: learning.
When he entered it, he found that both father and mother had died on the preceding day.
A very young brother of his, who was in swaddling clothes, was still alive and crying abandoned in his cradle.
This was all that remained to Claude of his family; the young man took the child under his arm and went off in a pensive mood.
Up to that moment, he had lived only in science; he now began to live in life.
This catastrophe was a crisis in Claude's existence. Orphaned, the eldest, head of the family at the age of nineteen, he felt himself rudely recalled from the reveries of school to the realities of this world.
Then, moved with pity, he was seized with passion and devotion towards that child, his brother; a sweet and strange thing was a human affection to him, who had hitherto loved his books alone.
Separated since infancy from his parents, whom he had hardly known; cloistered and immured, as it were, in his books; eager above all things to study and to learn; exclusively attentive up to that time, to his intelligence which broadened in science, to his imagination, which expanded in letters,the poor scholar had not yet had time to feel the place of his heart.
This young brother, without mother or father, this little child which had fallen abruptly from heaven into his arms, made a new man of him.
He perceived that there was something else in the world besides the speculations of the Sorbonne, and the verses of Homer; that man needed affections; that life without tenderness and without love was only a set of dry, shrieking, and rending wheels.
Only, he imagined, for he was at the age when illusions are as yet replaced only by illusions, that the affections of blood and family were the sole ones necessary, and that a little brother to love sufficed to fill an entire existence.
He threw himself, therefore, into the love for his little Jehan with the passion of a character already profound, ardent, concentrated; that poor frail creature, pretty, fair haired, rosy, and curly,that orphan with another orphan for his only support, touched him to the bottom of his heart; and grave thinker as he was, he set to meditating upon Jehan with an infinite compassion.
He was more than a brother to the child; he became a mother to him.
Little Jehan had lost his mother while he was still at the breast; Claude gave him to a nurse.
Besides the fief of Tirechappe, he had inherited from his father the fief of Moulin, which was a dependency of the square tower of Gentilly; it was a mill on a hill, near the chteau of Winchestre (Bictre).
There was a miller's wife there who was nursing a fine child; it was not far from the university, and Claude carried the little Jehan to her in his own arms.
From that time forth, feeling that he had a burden to bear, he took life very seriously.
The thought of his little brother became not only his recreation, but the object of his studies.
He resolved to consecrate himself entirely to a future for which he was responsible in the sight of God, and never to have any other wife, anyother child than the happiness and fortune of his brother.
Therefore, he attached himself more closely than ever to the clerical profession.
His merits, his learning, his quality of immediate vassal of the Bishop of Paris, threw the doors of the church wide open to him.
At the age of twenty, by special dispensation of the Holy See, he was a priest, and served as the youngest of the chaplains of NotreDame the altar which is called, because of the late mass which is said there, ~altare pigrorum~.
There, plunged more deeply than ever in his dear books, which he quitted only to run for an hour to the fief of Moulin, this mixture of learning and austerity, so rare at his age, had promptly acquired for him the respect and admiration of the monastery.
From the cloister, his reputation as a learned man had passed to the people, among whom it had changed a little, a frequent occurrence at that time, into reputation as a sorcerer.
It was at the moment when he was returning, on Quasimodo day, from saying his mass at the Altar of the Lazy, which was by the side of the door leading to the nave on the right, near the image of the Virgin, that his attention had been attracted by the group of old women chattering around the bed for foundlings.
Then it was that he approached the unhappy little creature, which was so hated and so menaced.
That distress, that deformity, that abandonment, the thought of his young brother, the idea which suddenly occurred to him, that if he were to die, his dear little Jehan might also be flung miserably on the plank for foundlings,all this had gone to his heart simultaneously; a great pity had moved in him, and he had carried off the child.
When he removed the child from the sack, he found it greatly deformed, in very sooth.
The poor little wretch had a wart on his left eye, his head placed directly on his shoulders, his spinal column was crooked, his breast bone prominent, and his legs bowed; but he appeared to be lively; and although it was impossible to say in what language he lisped, his cry indicated considerable force and health.
Claude's compassion increased at the sight of this ugliness; and he made a vow in his heart to rear the child for the love of his brother, in order that, whatever might be the future faults of the little Jehan, he should have beside him that charity done for his sake.
It was a sort of investment of good works, which he was effecting in the name of his young brother; it was a stock of good works which he wished to amass in advance for him, in case the little rogue should some day find himself short of that coin, the only sort which is received at the tollbar of paradise.
He baptized his adopted child, and gave him the name of Quasimodo, either because he desired thereby to mark the day, when he had found him, or because he wished to designate by that name to what a degree the poor little creature was incomplete, and hardly sketched out.
He had become a few years previously the bellringer of NotreDame, thanks to his father by adoption, Claude Frollo,who had become archdeacon of Josas, thanks to his suzerain, Messire Louis de Beaumont,who had become Bishop of Paris, at the death of Guillaume Chartier in 1472, thanks to his patron, Olivier Le Daim, barber to Louis XI., king by the grace of God.
Separated forever from the world, by the double fatality of his unknown birth and his natural deformity, imprisoned from his infancy in that impassable double circle, the poor wretch had grown used to seeing nothing in this world beyond the religious walls which had received him under their shadow.
NotreDame had been to him successively, as he grew up and developed, the egg, the nest, the house, the country, the universe.
When, still a little fellow, he had dragged himself tortuously and by jerks beneath the shadows of its vaults, he seemed, with his human face and his bestial limbs, the natural reptile of that humid and sombre pavement, upon which the shadow of the Romanesque capitals cast so many strange forms.
Later on, the first time that he caught hold, mechanically, of the ropes to the towers, and hung suspended from them, and set the bell to clanging, it produced upon his adopted father, Claude, the effect of a child whose tongue is unloosed and who begins to speak.
It is thus that, little by little, developing always in sympathy with the cathedral, living there, sleeping there, hardly ever leaving it, subject every hour to the mysterious impress, he came to resemble it, he incrusted himself in it, so to speak, and became an integral part of it.
His salient angles fitted into the retreating angles of the cathedral (if we may be allowed this figure of speech), and he seemed not only its inhabitant but more than that, its natural tenant.
One might almost say that he had assumed its form, as the snail takes on the form of its shell.
It was his dwelling, his hole, his envelope.
There existed between him and the old church so profound an instinctive sympathy, so many magnetic affinities, so many material affinities, that he adhered to it somewhat as a tortoise adheres to its shell. The rough and wrinkled cathedral was his shell.
It is useless to warn the reader not to take literally all the similes which we are obliged to employ here to express the singular, symmetrical, direct, almost consubstantial union of a man and an edifice.
That dwelling was peculiar to him. It had no depths to which Quasimodo had not penetrated, no height which he had not scaled.
The towers, on whose exterior surface he was frequently seen clambering, like a lizard gliding along a perpendicular wall, those two gigantic twins, so lofty, so menacing, so formidable, possessed for him neither vertigo, nor terror, nor shocks of amazement.
To see them so gentle under his hand, so easy to scale, one would have said that he had tamed them.
By dint of leaping, climbing, gambolling amid the abysses of the gigantic cathedral he had become, in some sort, a monkey and a goat, like the Calabrian child who swims before he walks, and plays with the sea while still a babe.
Moreover, it was not his body alone which seemed fashioned after the Cathedral, but his mind also.
Bellringer of NotreDame at the age of fourteen, a new infirmity had come to complete his misfortunes: the bells had broken the drums of his ears; he had become deaf.
The wretched being's misery became as incurable and as complete as his deformity.
Let us add that his deafness rendered him to some extent dumb.
For, in order not to make others laugh, the very moment that he found himself to be deaf, he resolved upon a silence which he only broke when he was alone.
Hence, it came about, that when necessity constrained him to speak, his tongue was torpid, awkward, and like a door whose hinges have grown rusty.
Quasimodo was barely conscious of a soul cast in his own image, moving blindly within him.
The impressions of objects underwent a considerable refraction before reaching his mind.
Hence a thousand optical illusions, a thousand aberrations of judgment, a thousand deviations, in which his thought strayed, now mad, now idiotic.
The first effect of this fatal organization was to trouble the glance which he cast upon things.
The second effect of his misfortune was to render him malicious.
He was malicious, in fact, because he was savage; he was savage because he was ugly.
There was logic in his nature, as there is in ours.
His strength, so extraordinarily developed, was a cause of still greater malevolence: "~Malus puer robustus~," says Hobbes.
From his very first steps among men, he had felt himself, later on he had seen himself, spewed out, blasted, rejected.
As he grew up, he had found nothing but hatred around him.
He had caught the general malevolence.
He had picked up the weapon with which he had been wounded.
After all, he turned his face towards men only with reluctance; his cathedral was sufficient for him.
It was peopled with marble figures,kings, saints, bishops,who at least did not burst out laughing in his face, and who gazed upon him only with tranquillity and kindliness.
The saints were his friends, and blessed him; the monsters were his friends and guarded him.
So he held long communion with them.
If any one came, he fled like a lover surprised in his serenade.
What he loved above all else in the maternal edifice, that which aroused his soul, and made it open its poor wings, which it kept so miserably folded in its cavern, that which sometimes rendered him even happy, was the bells.
From the chime in the spire, over the intersection of the aisles and nave, to the great bell of the front, he cherished a tenderness for them all.
It is true that their voice was the only one which he could still hear.
On this score, the big bell was his beloved.
It was she whom he preferred out of all that family of noisy girls which bustled above him, on festival days.
She was alone in the southern tower, with her sister Jacqueline, a bell of lesser size, shut up in a smaller cage beside hers.
This Jacqueline was so called from the name of the wife of Jean Montagu, who had given it to the church, which had not prevented his going and figuring without his head at Montfauon.
So Quasimodo had fifteen bells in his seraglio; but big Marie was his favorite.
No idea can be formed of his delight on days when the grand peal was sounded.
At the moment when the archdeacon dismissed him, and said, "Go!" he mounted the spiral staircase of the clock tower faster than any one else could have descended it.
He entered perfectly breathless into the aerial chamber of the great bell; he gazed at her a moment, devoutly and lovingly; then he gently addressed her and patted her with his hand, like a good horse, which is about to set out on a long journey.
He pitied her for the trouble that she was about to suffer.
After these first caresses, he shouted to his assistants, placed in the lower story of the tower, to begin.
Quasimodo followed it with his glance and trembled.
"Vah!" he cried, with a senseless burst of laughter.
Then Quasimodo boiled and frothed; he went and came; he trembled from head to foot with the tower.
Quasimodo stationed himself in front of this open throat; he crouched and rose with the oscillations of the bell, breathed in this overwhelming breath, gazed by turns at the deep place, which swarmed with people, two hundred feet below him, and at that enormous, brazen tongue which came, second after second, to howl in his ear.
It was the only speech which he understood, the only sound which broke for him the universal silence.
All of a sudden, the frenzy of the bell seized upon him; his look became extraordinary; he lay in wait for the great bell as it passed, as a spider lies in wait for a fly, and flung himself abruptly upon it, with might and main.
Then, suspended above the abyss, borne to and fro by the formidable swinging of the bell, he seized the brazen monster by the earlaps, pressed it between both knees, spurred it on with his heels, and redoubled the fury of the peal with the whole shock and weight of his body.
Meanwhile, the tower trembled; he shrieked and gnashed his teeth, his red hair rose erect, his breast heaving like a bellows, his eye flashed flames, the monstrous bell neighed, panting, beneath him; and then it was no longer the great bell of Notre Dame nor Quasimodo: it was a dream, a whirlwind, a tempest, dizziness mounted astride of noise; a spirit clinging to a flying crupper, a strange centaur, half man, half bell; a sort of horrible Astolphus, borne away upon a prodigious hippogriff of living bronze.
It sufficed for people to know that he was there, to make them believe thatthey beheld the thousand statues of the galleries and the fronts in motion.
And the cathedral did indeed seem a docile and obedient creature beneath his hand; it waited on his will to raise its great voice; it was possessed and filled with Quasimodo, as with a familiar spirit.
One would have said that he made the immense edifice breathe.
He was everywhere about it; in fact, he multiplied himself on all points of the structure.
Egypt would have taken him for the god of this temple; the Middle Ages believed him to be its demon: he was in fact its soul.
Nevertheless, there was one human creature whom Quasimodo excepted from his malice and from his hatred for others, and whom he loved even more, perhaps, than his cathedral: this was Claude Frollo.
When a little lad, it was between Claude Frollo's legs that he was accustomed to seek refuge, when the dogs and the children barked after him.
Hence Quasimodo's gratitude was profound, passionate, boundless; and although the visage of his adopted father was often clouded or severe, although his speech was habitually curt, harsh, imperious, that gratitude never wavered for a single moment.
We will say then, that Quasimodo loved the archdeacon as never a dog, never a horse, never an elephant loved his master.
He was a priest, austere, grave, morose; one charged with souls; monsieur the archdeacon of Josas, the bishop's second acolyte, having charge of the two deaneries of Montlhry, and Chteaufort, and one hundred and seventyfour country curacies.
He was an imposing and sombre personage, before whom the choir boys in alb and in jacket trembled, as well as the machicots*, and the brothers of SaintAugustine and the matutinal clerks of NotreDame, when he passed slowly beneath the lofty arches of the choir, majestic, thoughtful, with arms folded and his head so bent upon his breast that all one saw of his face was his large, bald brow.
Dom Claude Frollo had, however, abandoned neither science nor the education of his young brother, those two occupations of his life.
Little Jehan Frollo, surnamed (~du Moulin~) "of the Mill" because of the place where he had been reared, had not grown up in the direction which Claude would have liked to impose upon him.
Claude had confided him to that same college of Torchi where he had passed his early years in study and meditation; and it was a grief to him that this sanctuary, formerly edified by the name of Frollo, should today be scandalized by it.
But the sermon over, he none the less tranquilly resumed his course of seditions and enormities.
Now it was a ~bejaune~ or yellow beak (as they called the new arrivals at the university), whom he had been mauling by way of welcome; a precious tradition which has been carefully preserved to our own day.
Again, he had set in movement a band of scholars, who had flung themselves upon a wineshop in classic fashion, quasi ~classico excitati~, had then beaten the tavernkeeper "with offensive cudgels," and joyously pillaged the tavern, even to smashing in the hogsheads of wine in the cellar.
Finally, it was said, a thing quite horrible in a boy of sixteen, that his debauchery often extended as far as the Rue de Glatigny.
Claude, saddened and discouraged in his human affections, by all this, had flung himself eagerly into the arms of learning, that sister which, at least does not laugh in your face, and which always pays you, though in money that is sometimes a little hollow, for the attention which you have paid to her.
Hence, he became more and more learned, and, at the same time, as a natural consequence, more and more rigid as a priest, more andmore sad as a man.
As Claude Frollo had passed through nearly the entire circle of human learningpositive, exterior, and permissiblesince his youth, he was obliged, unless he came to a halt, ~ubi defuit orbis~, to proceed further and seek other aliments for the insatiable activity of his intelligence.
Many grave persons affirm that, after having exhausted the ~fas~ of human learning, he had dared to penetrate into the ~nefas~.
He had taken his place by turns, as the reader has seen, in the conferences of the theologians in Sorbonne,in the assemblies of the doctors of art, after the manner of SaintHilaire,in the disputes of the decretalists, after the manner of SaintMartin,in the congregations of physicians at the holy water font of Notre Dame, ~ad cupam NostroeDominoe~.
All the dishes permitted and approved, which those four great kitchens called the four faculties could elaborate and serve to the understanding, he had devoured, and had been satiated with them before his hunger was appeased.
Then he had penetrated further, lower, beneath all that finished, material, limited knowledge; he had, perhaps, risked his soul, and had seated himself in the cavern at that mysterious table of the alchemists, of the astrologers, of the hermetics, of which Averros, Gillaume de Paris, and Nicolas Flamel hold the end in the Middle Ages; and which extends in the East, by the light of the seven branched candlestick, to Solomon, Pythagoras, and Zoroaster.
It is certain that the archdeacon often visited the cemetery of the SaintsInnocents, where, it is true, his father and mother had been buried, with other victims of the plague of 1466; but that he appeared far less devout before the cross of their grave than before the strange figures with which the tomb of Nicolas Flamel and Claude Pernelle, erected just beside it, was loaded.
It is certain that he had frequently been seen to pass along the Rue des Lombards, and furtively enter a little house which formed the corner of the Rue des Ecrivans and the Rue Marivault.
It was the house which Nicolas Flamel had built, where he had died about 1417, and which, constantly deserted since that time, had already begun to fall in ruins,so greatly had the hermetics and the alchemists of all countries wasted away the walls, merely by carving their names upon them.
But, what every one might have noticed was the interminable hours which he often employed, seated upon the parapet of the area in front of the church, in contemplating the sculptures of the front; examining now the foolish virgins with their lamps reversed, now the wise virgins with their lamps upright; again, calculating the angle of vision of that raven which belongs to the left front, and which is looking at a mysterious point inside the church, where is concealed the philosopher's stone, if it be not in the cellar of Nicolas Flamel.
Furthermore, it is certain that the archdeacon had established himself in that one of the two towers which looks upon the Grve, just beside the frame for the bells, a very secret little cell, into which no one, not even the bishop, entered without his leave, it was said.
This tiny cell had formerly been made almost at the summit of the tower, among the ravens' nests, by Bishop Hugo de Besanon* who had wrought sorcery there in his day.
It was evident that the bellringer was to serve the archdeacon for a given time, at the end of which he would carry away the latter's soul, by way of payment.
Thus the archdeacon, in spite of the excessive austerity of his life, was in bad odor among all pious souls; and there was no devout nose so inexperienced that it could not smell him out to be a magician.
And if, as he grew older, abysses had formed in his science, they had also formed in his heart.
What secret thought caused his mouth to smile with so much bitterness, at the same moment that his scowling brows approached each other like two bulls on the point of fighting?
Why was what hair he had left already gray?
What was that internal fire which sometimes broke forth in his glance, to such a degree that his eye resembled a hole pierced in the wall of a furnace?
More than once a choirboy had fled in terror at finding him alone in the church, so strange and dazzling was his look.
More than once, in the choir, at the hour of the offices, his neighbor in the stalls had heard him mingle with the plain song, ~ad omnem tonum~, unintelligible parentheses.
However, he redoubled his severity, and had never been more exemplary.
By profession as well as by character, he had always held himself aloof from women; he seemed to hate them more than ever.
The mererustling of a silken petticoat caused his hood to fall over his eyes.
Upon this score he was so jealous of austerity and reserve, that when the Dame de Beaujeu, the king's daughter, came to visit the cloister of NotreDame, in the month of December, 1481, he gravely opposed her entrance, reminding the bishop of the statute of the Black Book, dating from the vigil of SaintBarthlemy, 1334, which interdicts access to the cloister to "any woman whatever, old or young, mistress or maid."
And he had refused to appear before the princess.
It was also noticed that his horror for Bohemian women and gypsies had seemed to redouble for some time past.
He had petitioned the bishop for an edict which expressly forbade the Bohemian women to come and dance and beat their tambourines on the place of the Parvis; and for about the same length of time, he had been ransacking the mouldy placards of the officialty, in order to collect the cases of sorcerers and witches condemned to fire or the rope, for complicity in crimes with rams, sows, or goats.
Sometimes a mischievous child risked his skin and bones for the ineffable pleasure of driving a pin into Quasimodo's hump. Again, a young girl, more bold and saucy than was fitting, brushed the priest's black robe, singing in his face the sardonic ditty, "niche, niche, the devil is caught."
It procured for him, at about the epoch when he refused to see Madame de Beaujeu, a visit which he long remembered.
He had just retired, after the office, to his canon's cell in the cloister of NotreDame.
He had rested his elbow upon the open volume of Honorius d'Autun, ~De predestinatione et libero arbitrio~, and he was turning over, in deep meditation, the leaves of a printed folio which he had just brought, the sole product of the press which his cell contained.
In the midst of his revery there came a knock at his door. "Who's there?" cried the learned man, in the gracious tone of a famished dog, disturbed over his bone.
Another man accompanied him.
"God help me, messieurs!" said the archdeacon, showing them in; "I was not expecting distinguished visitors at such an hour." And while speaking in this courteous fashion he cast an uneasy and scrutinizing glance from the physician to his companion.
"'Tis never too late to come and pay a visit to so considerable a learned man as Dom Claude Frollo de Tirechappe," replied Doctor Coictier, whose FrancheComt accent made all his phrases drag along with the majesty of a trainrobe.
However, it is the same nowadays; every wise man's mouth complimenting another wise man is a vase of honeyed gall.
Claude Frollo's felicitations to Jacques Coictier bore reference principally to the temporal advantages which the worthy physician had found means to extract, in the course of his much envied career, from each malady of the king, an operation of alchemy much better and more certain than the pursuit of the philosopher's stone.
Is he not Bishop of Amiens?"
In the compliments which Dom Claude addressed to Jacques Coictier, there was that sardonical, biting, and covertly mocking accent, and the sad cruel smile of a superior and unhappy man who toys for a moment, by way of distraction, with the dense prosperity of a vulgar man.
"Upon my soul," said Claude at length, pressing his hand, "I am glad to see you and in such good health."
"He payeth not sufficiently his physician," replied the doctor, casting a side glance at his companion.
These words, uttered in a tone of surprise and reproach, drew upon this unknown personage the attention of the archdeacon which, to tell the truth, had not been diverted from him a single moment since the stranger had set foot across the threshold of his cell.
It had even required all the thousand reasons which he had for handling tenderly Doctor Jacques Coictier, the allpowerful physician of King Louis XI., to induce him to receive the latter thus accompanied.
Hence, there was nothing very cordial in his manner when Jacques Coictier said to him,
"Monsieur belongs to science?" asked the archdeacon, fixing his piercing eye upon Coictier's companion.
He found beneath the brows of the stranger a glance no less piercing or less distrustful than his own.
He was, so far as the feeble light of the lamp permitted one to judge, an old man about sixty years of age and of medium stature, who appeared somewhat sickly and broken in health.
His profile, although of a very ordinary outline, had something powerful and severe about it; his eyes sparkled beneath a very deep superciliary arch, like a light in the depths of a cave; and beneath his cap which was well drawn down and fell upon his nose, one recognized the broad expanse of a brow of genius.
"Reverend master," he said in a grave tone, "your renown has reached my ears, and I wish to consult you.
I am but a poor provincial gentleman, who removeth his shoes before entering the dwellings of the learned.
Nevertheless, he had a feeling that he was in the presence of a strong and earnest character.
The instinct of his own lofty intellect made him recognize an intellect no less lofty under Gossip Tourangeau's furred cap, and as he gazed at the solemn face, the ironical smile which Jacques Coictier's presence called forth on his gloomy face, gradually disappeared as twilight fades on the horizon of night.
Stern and silent, he had resumed his seat in his great armchair; his elbow rested as usual, on the table, and his brow on his hand.
After a few moments of reflection, he motioned his visitors to be seated, and, turning to Gossip Tourangeau he said,
"Medicine!" said the archdeacon, tossing his head.
Gossip Tourangeau obeyed, and read this inscription engraved above his head: "Medicine is the daughter of dreams.JAMBLIQUE."
Meanwhile, Doctor Jacques Coictier had heard his companion's question with a displeasure which Dom Claude's response had but redoubled.
He bent down to the ear of Gossip Tourangeau, and said to him, softly enough not to be heard by the archdeacon: "I warned you that he was mad.
"'Tis very possible that he is right, madman as he is, Doctor Jacques," replied his comrade in the same low tone, and with a bitter smile.
You deny that eternal pharmacy of flowers and metals, which is called the world, made expressly for that eternal invalid called man!"
Coictier calmed down, muttering in a low tone,"After all, he's mad."
"Indeed!" said the man, with surprise.
"You see that he is mad," he said, in a low tone, to Gossip Tourangeau. "He does not believe in astrology."
"The idea of imagining," pursued Dom Claude, "that every ray of a star is a thread which is fastened to the head of a man!"
The archdeacon hesitated for a moment, then he allowed a gloomy smile to escape, which seemed to give the lie to his response: "~Credo in Deum~."
"No," said the archdeacon, grasping the arm of Gossip Tourangeau, and a ray of enthusiasm lighted up his gloomy eyes, "no, I do not reject science.
"Naught is your science of man, naught is your science of the stars," said the archdeacon, commandingly.
I am not the king's physician, and his majesty has not given me the Garden of Daedalus in which to observe the constellations.
Here alone is the truth." (As he spoke thus, he took from the top of the coffer a phial filled with the powder which we have mentioned above), "here alone is light!
And he fell back in his armchair in a commanding and inspired attitude.
Coictier tried to grin, shrugged his shoulders imperceptibly, and repeated in a low voice,
"If I had made it," replied the archdeacon, articulating his words slowly, like a man who is reflecting, "the king of France would be named Claude and not Louis."
The archdeacon went on, appearing to reply now only to his thoughts,
"Old man, it requires longer years than remain to you, to undertake this voyage across mysterious things.
Science alone knows well how to hollow, wither, and dry up human faces; she needs not to have old age bring her faces already furrowed.
I will not tell you, poor old man, to go and visit the sepulchral chambers of the pyramids, of which ancient Herodotus speaks, nor the brick tower of Babylon, nor the immense white marble sanctuary of the Indian temple of Eklinga.
I will explain to you the statue of Saint Christopher, the symbol of the sower, and that of the two angels which are on the front of the SainteChapelle, and one of which holds in his hands a vase, the other, a cloud"
Here Jacques Coictier, who had been unhorsed by the archdeacon's impetuous replies, regained his saddle, and interrupted him with the triumphant tone of one learned man correcting another,"~Erras amice Claudi~.
You shall come when you will," he continued, turning to Tourangeau, "I will show you the little parcels of gold which remained at the bottom of Nicholas Flamel's alembic, and you shall compare them with the gold of Guillaume de Paris.
We shall go to the portal of Bishop Guillaume and of SaintJean le Rond at the Sainte Chapelle, then to the house of Nicholas Flamel, Rue Manvault, to his tomb, which is at the SaintsInnocents, to his two hospitals, Rue de Montmorency.
For a long time, Gossip Tourangeau, intelligent as was his glance, had appeared not to understand Dom Claude.
And opening the window of his cell he pointed out with his finger the immense church of NotreDame, which, outlining against the starry sky the black silhouette of its two towers, its stone flanks, its monstrous haunches, seemed an enormous twoheaded sphinx, seated in the middle of the city.
The archdeacon gazed at the gigantic edifice for some time in silence, then extending his right hand, with a sigh, towards the printed book which lay open on the table, and his left towards NotreDame, and turning a sad glance from the book to the church,"Alas," he said, "this will kill that."
"You have said it," replied Claude, who seemed absorbed in a profound meditation, and stood resting, his forefinger bent backward on the folio which had come from the famous press of Nuremberg.
Then he added these mysterious words: "Alas! alas! small things come at the end of great things; a tooth triumphs over a mass.
The curfew of the cloister sounded at the moment when Master Jacques was repeating to his companion in low tones, his eternal refrain, "He is mad!"
To which his companion this time replied, "I believe that he is."
The two visitors withdrew. "Master," said Gossip Tourangeau, as he took leave of the archdeacon, "I love wise men and great minds, and I hold you in singular esteem.
The archdeacon returned to his chamber dumbfounded, comprehending at last who Gossip Tourangeau was, and recalling that passage of the register of SainteMartin, of Tours: ~Abbas beati Martini, SCILICET REX FRANCIAE, est canonicus de consuetudine et habet parvam proebendam quam habet sanctus Venantius, et debet sedere in sede thesaurarii~.
It is asserted that after that epoch the archdeacon had frequent conferences with Louis XI., when his majesty came to Paris, and that Dom Claude's influence quite overshadowed that of Olivier le Daim and Jacques Coictier, who, as was his habit, rudely took the king to task on that account.
It was the pulpit and the manuscript taking the alarm at the printed word: something similar to the stupor of a sparrow which should behold the angel Legion unfold his six million wings.
In fact, from the origin of things down to the fifteenth century of the Christian era, inclusive, architecture is the great book of humanity, the principal expression of man in his different stages of development, either as a force or as an intelligence.
Greece crowned her mountains with a temple harmonious to the eye; India disembowelled hers, to chisel therein those monstrous subterranean pagodas, borne up by gigantic rows of granite elephants.
If it were thus,as there comes in all human society a moment when the sacred symbol is worn out and becomes obliterated under freedom of thought, when man escapes from the priest, when the excrescence of philosophies and systems devour the face of religion,architecture could not reproduce this new state of human thought; its leaves, so crowded on the face, would be empty on the back; its work would be mutilated; its book would he incomplete.
One feels everywhere in it authority, unity, the impenetrable, the absolute, Gregory VII.; always the priest, never the man; everywhere caste, never the people.
Like civilization, it has turned a page, and the new spirit of the time finds her ready to write at its dictation.
The artist builds it after his own fashion.
Provided the priest has his basilica and his altar, he has nothing to say. The four walls belong to the artist.
The architect, the poet, the master, summed up in his person the sculpture which carved his faades, painting which illuminated his windows, music which set his bells to pealing, and breathed into his organs.
Thus, in order to enunciate here only summarily, a law which it would require volumes to develop: in the high Orient, the cradle of primitive times, after Hindoo architecture came Phoenician architecture, that opulent mother of Arabian architecture; in antiquity, after Egyptian architecture, of which Etruscan style and cyclopean monuments are but one variety, came Greek architecture (of which the Roman style is only a continuation), surcharged with the Carthaginian dome; in modern times, after Romanesque architecture came Gothic architecture.
In the Hindu, Egyptian, or Romanesque architecture, one feels the priest, nothing but the priest, whether he calls himself Brahmin, Magian, or Pope.
It is the mother of revolution.
Meanwhile, architecture is tormented in her struggles to conceal this nudity.
The humblest fills his hole, or places his stone.
Retif d le Bretonne brings his hod of plaster.
It was already nearly seventeen years since he had received from the king, on November 7, 1465, the comet year,* that fine charge of the provostship of Paris, which was reputed rather a seigneury than an office. ~Dignitas~, says Joannes Loemnoeus, ~quoe cum non exigua potestate politiam concernente, atque proerogativis multis et juribus conjuncta est~. A marvellous thing in '82 was a gentleman bearing the king's commission, and whose letters of institution ran back to the epoch of the marriage of the natural daughter of Louis XI. with Monsieur the Bastard of Bourbon.
It had been "granted to him for safekeeping," as the letters patent said; and certainly he kept it well.
He had clung to it, he had incorporated himself with it, he had so identified himself with it that he had escaped that fury for change which possessed Louis XI., a tormenting and industrious king, whose policy it was to maintain the elasticity of his power by frequent appointments and revocations.
More than this; the brave chevalier had obtained the reversion of the office for his son, and for two years already, the name of the noble man Jacques d'Estouteville, equerry, had figured beside his at the head of the register of the salary list of the provostship of Paris.
It is true that Robert d'Estouteville was a good soldier, that he had loyally raised his pennon against "the league of public good," and that he had presented to the queen a very marvellous stag in confectionery on the day of her entrance to Paris in 14...
Moreover, he possessed the good friendship of Messire Tristan l'Hermite, provost of the marshals of the king's household.
In the first place, very good wages, to which were attached, and from which hung, like extra bunches of grapes on his vine, the revenues of the civil and criminal registries of the provostship, plus the civil and criminal revenues of the tribunals of Embas of the Chtelet, without reckoning some little toll from the bridges of Mantes and of Corbeil, and the profits on the craft of Shagreenmakers of Paris, on the corders of firewood and the measurers of salt.
Add to this the pleasure of displaying himself in rides about the city, and of making his fine military costume, which you may still admire sculptured on his tomb in the abbey of Valmont in Normandy, and his morion, all embossed at Montlhry, stand out a contrast against the particolored red and tawny robes of the aldermen and police.
Can anything sweeter be imagined than rendering judgments and decisions, as Messire Robert d'Estouteville daily did in the Grand Chtelet, under the large and flattened arches of Philip Augustus? and going, as he was wont to do every evening, to that charming house situated in the Rue Galilee, in the enclosure of the royal palace, which he held in right of his wife, Madame Ambroise de Lore, to repose after the fatigue of having sent some poor wretch to pass the night in "that little cell of the Rue de Escorcherie, which the provosts and aldermen of Paris used to make their prison; the same being eleven feet long, seven feet and four inches wide, and eleven feet high?"
And not only had Messire Robert d'Estouteville his special court as provost and vicomte of Paris; but in addition he had a share, both for eye and tooth, in the grand court of the king.
There was no head in the least elevated which had not passed through his hands before it came to the headsman.
It was he who went to seek M. de Nemours at the Bastille Saint Antoine, in order to conduct him to the Halles; and to conduct to the Grve M. de SaintPol, who clamored and resisted, to the great joy of the provost, who did not love monsieur the constable.
Was it because the sky was gray? or was the buckle of his old belt of Montlhry badly fastened, so that it confined his provostal portliness too closely? had he beheld ribald fellows, marching in bands of four, beneath his window, and setting him at defiance, in doublets but no shirts, hats without crowns, with wallet and bottle at their side?
The reader can take his choice; we, for our part, are much inclined to believe that he was in a bad humor, simply because he was in a bad humor.
And then he had to hold a sitting at the Grand Chtelet.
His lieutenants, civil, criminal, and private, were doing his work, according to usage; and from eight o'clock in the morning, some scores of bourgeois and ~bourgeoises~, heaped and crowded into an obscure corner of the audience chamber of Embas du Chtelet, between a stout oaken barrier and the wall, had been gazing blissfully at the varied and cheerful spectacle of civil and criminal justice dispensed by Master Florian Barbedienne, auditor of the Chtelet, lieutenant of monsieur the provost, in a somewhat confused and utterly haphazard manner.
Imagine, in fact, at the provost's table, leaning upon his elbows between two bundles of documents of cases, with his foot on the train of his robe of plain brown cloth, his face buried in his hood of white lamb's skin, of which his brows seemed to be of a piece, red, crabbed, winking, bearing majestically the load of fat on his cheeks which met under his chin, Master Florian Barbedienne, auditor of the Chtelet.
It is certainly quite sufficient for a judge to have the .air of listening; and the venerable auditor fulfilled this condition, the sole one in justice, all the better because his attention could not be distracted by any noise.
Moreover, he had in the audience, a pitiless censor of his deeds and gestures, in the person of our friend Jehan Frollo du Moulin, that little student of yesterday, that "stroller," whom one was sure of encountering all over Paris, anywhere except before the rostrums of the professors.
"Stay," he said in a low tone to his companion, Robin Poussepain, who was grinning at his side, while he was making his comments on the scenes which were being unfolded before his eyes, "yonder is Jehanneton du Buisson. The beautiful daughter of the lazy dog at the MarchNeuf!Upon my soul, he is condemning her, the old rascal! he has no more eyes than ears.
For having been passed and received master of the said trade! That's his entrance money.
That Barbedienne strikes like a deaf man,as he is! I'll be my brother the archdeacon, if that keeps me from gaming; gaming by day, gaming by night, living at play, dying at play, and gaming away my soul after my shirt.
There he is at the table!
He's eating the plaintiff, he's eating the suits, he eats, he chews, he crams, he fills himself.
Fines, lost goods, taxes, expenses, loyal charges, salaries, damages, and interests, gehenna, prison, and jail, and fetters with expenses are Christmas spice cake and marchpanes of SaintJohn to him! Look at him, the pig!Come!
Good! Another amorous woman!
A fine for them both! The deaf old fool! he must have mixed up the two cases!
Ten to one that he makes the wench pay for the oath and the gendarme for the amour! Attention, Robin Poussepain!
And a fine one too! ~Hercle~! 'tis our prince of yesterday, our Pope of the Fools, our bellringer, our oneeyed man, our hunchback, our grimace!
It was he indeed.
The squad of policemen who surrounded him was assisted by the chevalier of the watch in person, wearing the arms of France embroidered on his breast, and the arms of the city on his back.
There was nothing, however, about Quasimodo, except his deformity, which could justify the display of halberds and arquebuses; he was gloomy, silent, and tranquil.
Only now and then did his single eye cast a sly and wrathful glance upon the bonds with which he was loaded.
Thanks to this precaution, which he always was careful to take at the moment when on the point of beginning an examination, he knew beforehand the names, titles, and misdeeds of the accused, made cut and dried responses to questions foreseen, and succeeded in extricating himself from all the windings of the interrogation without allowing his deafness to be too apparent.
The written charges were to him what the dog is to the blind man.
If his deafness did happen to betray him here and there, by some incoherent apostrophe or some unintelligible question, it passed for profundity with some, and for imbecility with others.
Hence he took great care to conceal his deafness from the eyes of all, and he generally succeeded so well that he had reached the point of deluding himself, which is, by the way, easier than is supposed.
As for him, he believed, at the most, that his ear was a little refractory.
It was the sole concession which he made on this point to public opinion, in his moments of frankness and examination of his conscience.
Having, then, thoroughly ruminated Quasimodo's affair, he threw back his head and half closed his eyes, for the sake of more majesty and impartiality, so that, at that moment, he was both deaf and blind. A double condition, without which no judge is perfect.
It was in this magisterial attitude that he began the examination.
Now this was a case which had not been "provided for by law," where a deaf man should be obliged to question a deaf man.
The judge, being deaf, and being in no way warned of the deafness of the accused, thought that the latter had answered, as all accused do in general, and therefore he pursued, with his mechanical and stupid selfpossession,
"That will do," went on the imperturbable auditor, when he supposed that the accused had finished his third reply. "You are accused before us, ~primo~, of nocturnal disturbance; ~secundo~, of a dishonorable act of violence upon the person of a foolish woman, ~in proejudicium meretricis; tertio~, of rebellion and disloyalty towards the archers of the police of our lord, the king.
Quasimodo turned round, shrugging his hump with disdain, while Master Florian, equally astonished, and supposing that the laughter of the spectators had been provoked by some irreverent reply from the accused, rendered visible to him by that shrug of the shoulders, apostrophized him indignantly,"You have uttered a reply, knave, which deserves the halter.
Quasimodo alone preserved his seriousness, for the good reason that he understood nothing of what was going on around him.
The judge, more and more irritated, thought it his duty to continue in the same tone, hoping thereby to strike the accused with a terror which should react upon the audience, and bring it back to respect.
There is no reason why a deaf man talking to a deaf man should stop.
At his entrance Master Florian did not stop short, but, making a halfturn on his heels, and aiming at the provost the harangue with which he had been withering Quasimodo a moment before,
"Monseigneur," said he, "I demand such penalty as you shall deem fitting against the prisoner here present, for grave and aggravated offence against the court."
And he seated himself, utterly breathless, wiping away the great drops of sweat which fell from his brow and drenched, like tears, the parchments spread out before him.
Messire Robert d'Estouteville frowned and made a gesture so imperious and significant to Quasimodo, that the deaf man in some measure understood it.
The poor fellow, supposing that the provost was asking his name, broke the silence which he habitually preserved, and replied, in a harsh and guttural voice, "Quasimodo."
"Bellringer of NotreDame," replied Quasimodo, supposing that what was required of him was to explain to the judge who he was.
"Bellringer!" interpolated the provost, who had waked up early enough to be in a sufficiently bad temper, as we have said, not to require to have his fury inflamed by such strange responses.
"~Ventre Dieu~! 'tis well adjudged!" cried the little scholar, Jehan Frollo du Moulin, from his corner.
The provost turned and fixed his flashing eyes once more on Quasimodo.
The clerk presented the sentence to the provost, who affixed his seal to it, and departed to pursue his round of the audience hall, in a frame of mind which seemed destined to fill all the jails in Paris that day.
However, at the moment when Master Florian Barbedienne was reading the sentence in his turn, before signing it, the clerk felt himself moved with pity for the poor wretch of a prisoner, and, in the hope of obtaining some mitigation of the penalty, he approached as near the auditor's ear as possible, and said, pointing to Quasimodo, "That man is deaf."
He hoped that this community of infirmity would awaken Master Florian's interest in behalf of the condemned man.
But, in the first place, we have already observed that Master Florian did not care to have his deafness noticed.
In the next place, he was so hard of hearing That he did not catch a single word of what the clerk said to him; nevertheless, he wished to have the appearance of hearing, and replied, "Ah! ah! that is different; I did not know that.
And he signed the sentence thus modified.
If the reader, after having contemplated this lively and noisy scene which is being enacted in all parts of the Place, will now transfer his gaze towards that ancient demiGothic, demiRomanesque house of the TourRoland, which forms the corner on the quay to the west, he will observe, at the angle of the faade, a large public breviary, with rich illuminations, protected from the rain by a little penthouse, and from thieves by a small grating, which, however, permits of the leaves being turned.
This little cell had been celebrated in Paris for nearly three centuries, ever since Madame Rolande de la TourRoland, in mourning for her father who died in the Crusades, had caused it to be hollowed out in the wall of her own house, in order to immure herself there forever, keeping of all her palace only this lodging whose door was walled up, and whose window stood open, winter and summer, giving all the rest to the poor and to God.
The afflicted damsel had, in fact, waited twenty years for death in this premature tomb, praying night and day for the soul of her father, sleeping in ashes, without even a stone for a pillow, clothed in a black sack, and subsisting on the bread and water which the compassion of the passersby led them to deposit on the ledge of her window, thus receiving charity after having bestowed it.
At her death, at the moment when she was passing to the other sepulchre, she had bequeathed this one in perpetuity to afflicted women, mothers, widows, or maidens, who should wish to pray much for others or for themselves, and who should desire to inter themselves alive in a great grief or a great penance.
The poor of her day had made her a fine funeral, with tears and benedictions; but, to their great regret, the pious maid had not been canonized, for lack of influence.
The majority had contented themselves with holding the memory of Rolande sacred, and converting her rags into relics.
It brought some pittance to the miserable penitent from time to time, looked through the hole to see whether he were still living, forgot his name, hardly knew how many years ago he had begun to die, and to the stranger, who questioned them about the living skeleton who was perishing in that cellar, the neighbors replied simply, "It is the recluse."
On Mount SainteGenevive a sort of Job of the Middle Ages, for the space of thirty years, chanted the seven penitential psalms on a dunghill at the bottom of a cistern, beginning anew when he had finished, singing loudest at night, ~magna voce per umbras~, and today, the antiquary fancies that he hears his voice as he enters the Rue du Puitsquiparlethe street of the "Speaking Well."
If the reader desires to know by whom, he has only to lend an ear to the conversation of three worthy gossips, who, at the moment when wehave directed his attention to the RatHole, were directing their steps towards the same spot, coming up along the water's edge from the Chtelet, towards the Grve.
Their companion was attired in very much the same manner; but there was that indescribable something about her dress and bearing which suggested the wife of a provincial notary.
One could see, by the way in which her girdle rose above her hips, that she had not been long in Paris.Add to this a plaited tucker, knots of ribbon on her shoesand that the stripes of her petticoat ran horizontally instead of vertically, and a thousand other enormities which shocked good taste.
The provincial held by the hand a big boy, who held in his a large, flat cake.
We regret to be obliged to add, that, owing to the rigor of the season, he was using his tongue as a handkerchief.
The child was making them drag him along, ~non passibus Cequis~, as Virgil says, and stumbling at every moment, to the great indignation of his mother.
It is true that he was looking at his cake more than at the pavement.
Some serious motive, no doubt, prevented his biting it (the cake), for he contented himself with gazing tenderly at it.
But the mother should have rather taken charge of the cake.
It was cruel to make a Tantalus of the chubbychecked boy.
We have seen very fine criminals there, who have killed their father and mother!
It is certain that the provincial was on the point of taking offence, for the honor of her pillory.
"Ah my dear," interrupted provincial Mahiette, assuming in her turn an air of superiority, "what would you say then, if you had seen in '61, at the consecration at Reims, eighteen years ago, the horses of the princes and of the king's company?
And what handsome boy pages rode upon them!"
I believe 'tis the little Esmeralda, who plays her mummeries with her goat.
Eh, be quick, Mahiette! redouble your pace and drag along your boy.
"The gypsy!" said Mahiette, suddenly retracing her steps, and clasping her son's arm forcibly. "God preserve me from it!
Come, Eustache!" And she set out on a run along the quay towards the Grve, until she had left the bridge far behind her.
In the meanwhile, the child whom she was dragging after her fell upon his knees; she halted breathless.
Oudarde and Gervaise rejoined her.
"The singular point is," observed Oudarde, "that ~la sachette~ has the same idea about the Egyptian woman."
"What!" demanded Mahiette, "that poor woman to whom we are carrying this cake?" Oudarde nodded affirmatively.
You will see her presently at her window on the Grve.
No one knows whence comes her horror of the gypsies and Egyptians.
"Oh!" said Mahiette, seizing her child's round head in both hands, "I don't want that to happen to me which happened to Paquette la Chantefleurie."
"Oh! you must tell us that story, my good Mahiette," said Gervaise, taking her arm.
I will tell you then (but 'tis not necessary for us to halt that I may tell you the tale), that Paquette la Chantefleurie was a pretty maid of eighteen when I was one myself, that is to say, eighteen years ago, and 'tis her own fault if she is not today, like me, a good, plump, fresh mother of six and thirty, with a husband and a son.
Well, she was the daughter of Guybertant, minstrel of the barges at Reims, the same who had played before King Charles VII., at his coronation, when he descended our river Vesle from Sillery to Muison, when Madame the Maid of Orleans was also in the boat.
The old father died when Paquette was still a mere child; she had then no one but her mother, the sister of M. Pradon, masterbrazier and coppersmith in Paris, Rue Farm Garlin, who died last year.
You see she was of good family.
The mother was a good simple woman, unfortunately, and she taught Paquette nothing but a bit of embroidery and toymaking which did not prevent the little one from growing very large and remaining very poor.
In '61, the year of the coronation of our King Louis XI. whom God preserve! Paquette was so gay and so pretty that she was called everywhere by no other name than "la Chantefleurie"blossoming song.
Poor girl!
She had handsome teeth, she was fond of laughing and displaying them.
So she was la Chantefleurie.
She and her mother earned a precarious living; they had been very destitute since the death of the minstrel; their embroidery did not bring them in more than six farthings a week, which does not amount to quite two eagle liards.
One winter (it was in that same year of '61), when the two women had neither fagots nor firewood, it was very cold, which gave la Chantefleurie such a fine color that the men called her Paquette!* and many called her Pquerette!** and she was ruined.Eustache, just let me see you bite that cake if you dare!We immediately perceived that she was ruined, one Sunday when she came to church with a gold cross about her neck.
First it was the young Vicomte de Cormontreuil, who has his bell tower three leagues distant from Reims; then Messire Henri de Triancourt, equerry to the King; then less than that, Chiart de Beaulion, sergeantatarms; then, still descending, Guery Aubergeon, carver to the King; then, Mace de Frpus, barber to monsieur the dauphin; then, Thvenin le Moine, King's cook; then, the men growing continually younger and less noble, she fell to Guillaume Racine, minstrel of the hurdy gurdy and to Thierry de Mer, lamplighter.
Then, poor Chantefleurie, she belonged to every one: she had reached the last sou of her gold piece.
At the coronation, in the same year, '61, 'twas she who made the bed of the king of the debauchees!
Mahiette sighed, and wiped away a tear which trickled from her eyes.
"Patience!" resumed Mahiette, "you will see one child.In '66, 'twill be sixteen years ago this month, at Sainte Paule's day, Paquette was brought to bed of a little girl.
The unhappy creature! it was a great joy toher; she had long wished for a child.
Her mother, good woman, who had never known what to do except to shut her eyes, her mother was dead.
Paquette had no longer any one to love in the world or any one to love her.
La Chantefleurie had been a poor creature during the five years since her fall.
She was alone, alone in this life, fingers were pointed at her, she was hooted at in the streets, beaten by the sergeants, jeered at by the little boys in rags.
Folly began to bring her in no more than her trade of embroidery in former days; for every wrinkle that came, a crown fled; winter became hard to her once more, wood became rare again in her brazier, and bread in her cupboard.
She could no longer work because, in becoming voluptuous, she had grown lazy; and she suffered much more because, in growing lazy, she had become voluptuous.
"So she was very sad, very miserable, and furrowed her cheeks with tears.
But in the midst of her shame, her folly, her debauchery, it seemed to her that she should be less wild, less shameful, less dissipated, if there were something or some one in the world whom she could love, and who could love her.
She had recognized this fact after having tried to love a thief, the only man who wanted her; but after a short time, she perceived that the thief despised her.
As she could not have a lover, she turned wholly towards a desire for a child, and as she had not ceased to be pious, she made her constant prayer to the good God for it.
So the good God took pity on her, and gave her a little daughter.
I will not speak to you of her joy; it was a fury of tears, and caresses, and kisses.
She nursed her child herself, made swaddlingbands for it out of her coverlet, the only one which she had on her bed, and no longer felt either cold or hunger.
An old maid makes a young mother.
Gallantry claimed her once more; men came to see la Chantefleurie; she found customers again for her merchandise, and out of all these horrors she made baby clothes, caps and bibs, bodices with shoulderstraps of lace, and tiny bonnets of satin, without even thinking of buying herself another coverlet.Master Eustache, I have already told you not to eat that cake.It is certain that little Agnes, that was the child's name, a baptismal name, for it was a long time since la Chantefleurie had had any surnameit is certain that that little one was more swathed in ribbons and embroideries than a dauphiness of Dauphiny!
Among other things, she had a pair of little shoes, the like of which King Louis XI. certainly never had!
Her mother had stitched and embroidered them herself; she had lavished on them all the delicacies of her art of embroideress, and all the embellishments of a robe for the good Virgin.
I saw her when she was only four months old; she was a love!
She had eyes larger than her mouth, and the most charming black hair, which already curled.
Her mother became more crazy over her every day.
She kissed her, caressed her, tickled her, washed her, decked her out,devoured her!
She lost her head over her, she thanked God for her.
She was always pressing her lips to them, and she could never recover from her amazement at their smallness.
She put them into the tiny shoes, took them out, admired them, marvelled at them, looked at the light through them, was curious to see them try to walk on her bed, and would gladly have passed her life on her knees, putting on and taking off the shoes from those feet, as though they had been those of an Infant Jesus."
And everybody in Reims vied with his neighbor in going to see them.
They looked at your hand, and told you marvellous prophecies; they were equal to predicting to Judas that he would become Pope.
Poor Chantefleurie was seized with curiosity; she wished to know about herself, and whether her pretty little Agnes would not become some day Empress of Armenia, or something else.
So she carried her to the Egyptians; and the Egyptian women fell to admiring the child, and to caressing it, and to kissing it with their black mouths, and to marvelling over its little band, alas! to the great joy of the mother.
They were especially enthusiastic over her pretty feet and shoes.
She already lisped a little, laughed at her mother like a little mad thing, was plump and quite round, and possessed a thousand charming little gestures of the angels of paradise.
But her mother kissed her more warmly and went away enchanted with the good fortune which the soothsayers had foretold for her Agnes.
So she returned to her attic in the Rue FollePeine, very proud of bearing with her a queen.
The next day she took advantage of a moment when the child was asleep on her bed, (for they always slept together), gently left the door a little way open, and ran to tell a neighbor in the Rue de la Schesserie, that the day would come when her daughter Agnes would be served at table by the King of England and the Archduke of Ethiopia, and a hundred other marvels.
On her return, hearing no cries on the staircase, she said to herself: 'Good! the child is still asleep!' She found her door wider open than she had left it, but she entered, poor mother, and ran to the bed.The child was no longer there, the place was empty.
Nothing remained of the child, but one of her pretty little shoes.
She flew out of the room, dashed down the stairs, and began to beat her head against the wall, crying: 'My child! who has my child?
The street was deserted, the house isolated; no one could tell her anything about it.
She was breathless, dishevelled, frightful to see, and there was a fire in her eyes which dried her tears. She stopped the passersby and cried: 'My daughter! my daughter! my pretty little daughter!
If any one will give me back my daughter, I will he his servant, the servant of his dog, and he shall eat my heart if he will.'
She met M. le Cur of Saint Remy, and said to him: 'Monsieur, I will till the earth with my fingernails, but give me back my child!' It was heartrending, Oudarde; and IL saw a very hard man, Master Ponce Lacabre, the procurator, weep.
Ah! poor mother!
In the evening she returned home.
During her absence, a neighbor had seen two gypsies ascend up to it with a bundle in their arms, then descend again, after closing the door.
The mother, burst into shrieks of laughter, ascended the stairs as though on wings, and entered.A frightful thing to tell, Oudarde!
Instead of her pretty little Agnes, so rosy and so fresh, who was a gift of the good God, a sort of hideous little monster, lame, oneeyed, deformed, was crawling and squalling over the floor. She hid her eyes in horror.
'Oh!' said she, 'have the witches transformed my daughter into this horrible animal?' They hastened to carry away the little clubfoot; he would have driven her mad.
It was the monstrous child of some gypsy woman, who had given herself to the devil.
La Chantefleurie flung herself upon the little shoe, all that remained to her of all that she loved.
She remained so long motionless over it, mute, and without breath, that they thought she was dead.
Suddenly she trembled all over, covered her relic with furious kisses, and burst out sobbing as though her heart were broken.
She said: 'Oh, my little daughter! my pretty little daughter! where art thou?'and it wrung your very heart.
Our children are the marrow of our bones, you see.My poor Eustache! thou art so fair!If you only knew how nice he is! yesterday he said to me: 'I want to be a gendarme, that I do.'
When La Chantefleurie learned these horrible things, she did not weep, she moved her lips as though to speak, but could not.
On the morrow, her hair was gray.
On the second day, she had disappeared.
I should not be surprised if la Smralda ate a little of them also, though she pretends to be dainty.
She was absorbed in that revery which is, in some sort, the continuation of a mournful tale, and which ends only after having communicated the emotion, from vibration to vibration, even to the very last fibres of the heart.
Nevertheless, Gervaise addressed her, "And did they ever learn what became of la Chantefleurie?"
Gervaise repeated her question, and shook her arm, calling her by name.
Mahiette appeared to awaken from her thoughts.
"What became of la Chantefleurie?" she said, repeating mechanically the words whose impression was still fresh in her ear; then, ma king an effort to recall her attention to the meaning of her words, "Ah!" she continued briskly, "no one ever found out."
She added, after a pause, "Some said that she had been seen to quit Reims at nightfall by the Flchembault gate; others, at daybreak, by the old Base gate.
A poor man found her gold cross hanging on the stone cross in the field where the fair is held.
It was that ornament which had wrought her ruin, in '61.
It was a gift from the handsome Vicomte de Cormontreuil, her first lover.
Paquette had never been willing to part with it, wretched as she had been.
So, when we saw that cross abandoned, we all thought that she was dead.
Nevertheless, there were people of the Cabaret les Vantes, who said that they had seen her pass along the road to Paris, walking on the pebbles with her bare feet.
But, in that case, she must have gone out through the Porte de Vesle, and all this does not agree.
Or, to speak more truly, I believe that she actually did depart by the Porte de Vesle, but departed from this world."
"Drowned!" resumed Mahiette, "who could have told good Father Guybertant, when he passed under the bridge of Tingueux with the current, singing in his barge, that one day his dear little Paquette would also pass beneath that bridge, but without song or boat.
"Disappeared with the mother," replied Mahiette.
Oudarde, a big and tender woman, would have been well pleased to sigh in company with Mahiette.
But Gervaise, more curious, had not finished her questions.
"And the monster?" she said suddenly, to Mahiette.
"The little gypsy monster left by the sorceresses in Chantefleurie's chamber, in exchange for her daughter.
If Eustache had been more adroit, that is to say, less greedy, he would have continued to wait, and would only have hazarded that simple question, "Mother, can I eat the cake, now?" on their return to the University, to Master Andry Musnier's, Rue Madame la Valence, when he had the two arms of the Seine and the five bridges of the city between the RatHole and the cake.
"By the way," she exclaimed, "we are forgetting the recluse!
Show me the RatHole, that I may carry her her cake."
"Stop! my cake!" said he, rubbing both ears alternatively with his shoulders, which, in such cases, is the supreme sign of discontent.
At the moment when she looked in, a profound pity was depicted on all her features, and her frank, gay visage altered its expression and color as abruptly as though it had passed from a ray of sunlight to a ray of moonlight; her eye became humid; her mouth contracted, like that of a person on the point of weeping.
A moment later, she laid her finger on her lips, and made a sign to Mahiette to draw near and look.
On the bare flagstones which formed the floor, in one corner, a woman was sitting, or rather, crouching.
Her chin rested on her knees, which her crossed arms pressed forcibly to her breast.
Thus doubled up, clad in a brown sack, which enveloped her entirely in large folds, her long, gray hair pulled over in front, falling over her face and along her legs nearly to her feet, she presented, at the first glance, only a strange form outlined against the dark background of the cell, a sort of dusky triangle, which the ray of daylight falling through the opening, cut roughly into two shades, the one sombre, the other illuminated.
It was neither a woman, nor a man, nor a living being, nor a definite form; it was a figure, a sort of vision, in which the real and the fantastic intersected each other, like darkness and day.
It was with difficulty that one distinguished, beneath her hair which spread to the ground, a gaunt and severe profile; her dress barely allowed the extremity of a bare foot to escape, which contracted on the hard, cold pavement.
Lying, in January, in that thin, linen sack, lying on a granite floor, without fire, in the gloom of a cell whose oblique airhole allowed only the cold breeze, but never the sun, to enter from without, she did not appear to suffer or even to think.
One would have said that she had turned to stone with the cell, ice with the season.
Her hands were clasped, her eyes fixed.
At first sight one took her for a spectre; at the second, for a statue.
Nevertheless, at intervals, her blue lips half opened to admit a breath, and trembled, but as dead and as mechanical as the leaves which the wind sweeps aside.
Nevertheless, from her dull eyes there escaped a look, an ineffable look, a profound, lugubrious, imperturbable look, incessantly fixed upon a corner of the cell which could not be seen from without; a gaze which seemed to fix all the sombre thoughts of that soul in distress upon some mysterious object.
Such was the creature who had received, from her habitation, the name of the "recluse"; and, from her garment, the name of "the sacked nun."
Their heads intercepted the feeble light in the cell, without the wretched being whom they thus deprived of it seeming to pay any attention to them. "Do not let us trouble her," said Oudarde, in a low voice, "she is in her ecstasy; she is praying."
Meanwhile, Mahiette was gazing with everincreasing anxiety at that wan, withered, dishevelled head, and her eyes filled with tears. "This is very singular," she murmured.
She thrust her head through the bars, and succeeded in casting a glance at the corner where the gaze of the unhappy woman was immovably riveted.
When she withdrew her head from the window, her countenance was inundated with tears.
"What do you call that woman?" she asked Oudarde.
Oudarde replied, "We call her Sister Gudule."
"And I," returned Mahiette, "call her Paquette la Chantefleurie." Then, laying her finger on her lips, she motioned to the astounded Oudarde to thrust her head through the window and look.
Gervaise looked after Oudarde, and then the three women, gazing upon the unhappy mother, began to weep.
Her hands remained clasped; her lips mute; her eyes fixed; and that little shoe, thus gazed at, broke the heart of any one who knew her history.
She repeated this call three times, raising her voice each time. The recluse did not move; not a word, not a glance, not a sigh, not a sign of life.
Oudarde, in her turn, in a sweeter, more caressing voice,"Sister!" said she, "Sister SainteGudule!" The same silence; the same immobility.
"A singular woman!" exclaimed Gervaise, "and one not to be moved by a catapult!"
"Perchance she is deaf," said Oudarde.
"Perhaps she is blind," added Gervaise.
What shall we do to rouse her?" Eustache, who, up to that moment had been diverted by a little carriage drawn by a large dog, which had just passed, suddenly perceived that his three conductresses were gazing at something through the window, and,curiosity taking possession of him in his turn, he climbed upon a stone post, elevated himself on tiptoe, and applied his fat, red face to the opening, shouting, "Mother, let me see too!"
At the sound of this clear, fresh, ringing child's voice, the recluse trembled; she turned her head with the sharp, abrupt movement of a steel spring, her long, fleshless hands cast aside the hair from her brow, and she fixed upon the child, bitter, astonished, desperate eyes.
"Oh my God!" she suddenly exclaimed, hiding her head on her knees, and it seemed as though her hoarse voice tore her chest as it passed from it, "do not show me those of others!"
A long shiver traversed her frame from head to foot; her teeth chattered; she half raised her head and said, pressing her elbows against her hips, and clasping her feet in her hands as though to warm them,
"Poor woman!" said Oudarde, with great compassion, "would you like a little fire?" She shook her head in token of refusal.
"Well," resumed Oudarde, presenting her with a flagon; "here is some hippocras which will warm you; drink it."
Again she shook her head, looked at Oudarde fixedly and replied, "Water." Oudarde persisted,"No, sister, that is no beverage for January.
She refused the cake which Mahiette offered to her, and said, "Black bread."
"Come," said Gervaise, seized in her turn with an impulse of charity, and unfastening her woolen cloak, "here is a cloak which is a little warmer than yours."
She refused the cloak as she had refused the flagon and the cake, and replied, "A sack."
And as though fatigued with having said so much, she dropped her head on her knees again.
The simple and charitable Oudarde, who fancied that she understood from her last words that she was complaining of the cold, replied innocently, "Then you would like a little fire?"
Every limb was trembling, her voice quivered, her eyes flashed, she had raised herself upon her knees; suddenly she extended her thin, white hand towards the child, who was regarding her with a look of astonishment. "Take away that child!" she cried.
Then she fell face downward on the earth, and her forehead struck the stone, with the sound of one stone against another stone.
The three women thought her dead.
A moment later, however, she moved, and they beheld her drag herself, on her knees and elbows, to the corner where the little shoe was.
Then they dared not look; they no longer saw her; but they heard a thousand kisses and a thousand sighs, mingled with heartrending cries, and dull blows like those of a head in contact with a wall. Then, after one of these blows, so violent that all three of them staggered, they heard no more.
"Can she have killed herself?" said Gervaise, venturing to pass her head through the airhole. "Sister!
"Ah! good heavens! she no longer moves!" resumed Gervaise; "is she dead?
"Wait," said she. Then bending towards the window, "Paquette!" she said, "Paquette le Chantefleurie!"
A child who innocently blows upon the badly ignited fuse of a bomb, and makes it explode in his face, is no more terrified than was Mahiette at the effect of that name, abruptly launched into the cell of Sister Gudule.
The recluse trembled all over, rose erect on her bare feet, and leaped at the window with eyes so glaring that Mahiette and Oudarde, and the other woman and the child recoiled even to the parapet of the quay.
Meanwhile, the sinister face of the recluse appeared pressed to the grating of the airhole. "Oh! oh!" she cried, with an appalling laugh; "'tis the Egyptian who is calling me!"
At that moment, a scene which was passing at the pillory caught her wild eye.
Her brow contracted with horror, she stretched her two skeleton arms from her cell, and shrieked in a voice which resembled a deathrattle, "So 'tis thou once more, daughter of Egypt!
These words were, so to speak, the point of union of two scenes, which had, up to that time, been developed in parallel lines at the same moment, each on its particular theatre; one, that which the reader has just perused, in the RatHole; the other, which he is about to read, on the ladder of the pillory.
The victim was bound upon this wheel, on his knees, with his hands behind his back.
A wooden shaft, which set in motion a capstan concealed in the interior of the little edifice, imparted a rotatory motion to the wheel, which always maintained its horizontal position, and in this manner presented the face of the condemned man to all quarters of the square in succession.
The victim finally arrived, bound to the tail of a cart, and when he had been hoisted upon the platform, where he could be seen from all points of the Place, bound with cords and straps upon the wheel of the pillory, a prodigious hoot, mingled with laughter and acclamations, burst forth upon the Place.
It was he, in fact.
Pilloried on the very place where, on the day before, he had been saluted, acclaimed, and proclaimed Pope and Prince of Fools, in the cortege of the Duke of Egypt, the King of Thunes, and the Emperor of Galilee!
One thing is certain, and that is, that there was not a soul in the crowd, not even himself, though in turn triumphant and the sufferer, who set forth this combination clearly in his thought.
Gringoire and his philosophy were missing at this spectacle.
Then he withdrew behind the cart, with his men in livery surcoats.
All resistance had been rendered impossible to him by what was then called, in the style of the criminal chancellery, "the vehemence and firmness of the bonds" which means that the thongs and chains probably cut into his flesh; moreover, it is a tradition of jail and wardens, which has not been lost, and which the handcuffs still preciously preserve among us, a civilized, gentle, humane people (the galleys and the guillotine in parentheses).
Nothing was to be seen upon his countenance but the astonishment of a savage or an idiot.
They placed him on his knees on the circular plank; he made no resistance.
They removed his shirt and doublet as far as his girdle; he allowed them to have their way.
They entangled him under a fresh system of thongs and buckles; he allowed them to bind and buckle him.
Only from time to time he snorted noisily, like a calf whose head is hanging and bumping over the edge of a butcher's cart.
"The dolt," said Jehan Frollo of the Mill, to his friend Robin Poussepain (for the two students had followed the culprit, as was to have been expected), "he understands no more than a cockchafer shut up in a box!"
There was wild laughter among the crowd when they beheld Quasimodo's hump, his camel's breast, his callous and hairy shoulders laid bare.
During this gayety, a man in the livery of the city, short of stature and robust of mien, mounted the platform and placed himself near the victim.
He began by depositing on an angle of the pillory a black hourglass, the upper lobe of which was filled with red sand, which it allowed to glide into the lower receptacle; then he removed his particolored surtout, and there became visible, suspended from his right hand, a thin and tapering whip of long, white, shining, knotted, plaited thongs, armed with metal nails.
With his left hand, he negligently folded back his shirt around his right arm, to the very armpit.
In the meantime, Jehan Frollo, elevating his curly blonde head above the crowd (he had mounted upon the shoulders of Robin Poussepain for the purpose), shouted: "Come and look, gentle ladies and men! they are going to peremptorily flagellate Master Quasimodo, the bellringer of my brother, monsieur the archdeacon of Josas, a knave of oriental architecture, who has a back like a dome, and legs like twisted columns!"
At length the torturer stamped his foot.
Quasimodo wavered beneath his bonds.
The amazement which was suddenly depicted upon his deformed face caused the bursts of laughter to redouble around him.
All at once, at the moment when the wheel in its revolution presented to Master Pierrat, the humped back of Quasimodo, Master Pierrat raised his arm; the fine thongs whistled sharply through the air, like a handful of adders, and fell with fury upon the wretch's shoulders.
He writhed in his bonds; a violent contraction of surprise and pain distorted the muscles of his face, but he uttered not a single sigh.
He merely turned his head backward, to the right, then to the left, balancing it as a bull does who has been stung in the flanks by a gadfly.
Quasimodo had resumed, to all appearance, his first imperturbability.
He had at first tried, in a quiet way and without much outward movement, to break his bonds.
His eye had been seen to light up, his muscles to stiffen, his members to concentrate their force, and the straps to stretch.
Amazement gave way, on his features, to a sentiment of profound and bitter discouragement.
He closed his single eye, allowed his head to droop upon his breast, and feigned death.
From that moment forth, he stirred no more.
Nothing could force a movement from him. Neither his blood, which did not cease to flow, nor the blows which redoubled in fury, nor the wrath of the torturer, who grew excited himself and intoxicated with the execution, nor the sound of the horrible thongs, more sharp andwhistling than the claws of scorpions.
At length a bailiff from the Chtelet clad in black, mounted on a black horse, who had been stationed beside the ladder since the beginning of the execution, extended his ebony wand towards the hourglass.
Two lackeys of the official torturer bathed the bleeding shoulders of the patient, anointed them with some unguent which immediately closed all the wounds, and threw upon his back a sort of yellow vestment, in cut like a chasuble.
There was hardly a spectator in that crowd who had not or who did not believe that he had reason to complain of the malevolent hunchback of NotreDame.
The joy at seeing him appear thus in the pillory had been universal; and the harsh punishment which he had just suffered, and the pitiful condition in which it had left him, far from softening the populace had rendered its hatred more malicious by arming it with a touch of mirth.
All cherished some rancor against him, some for his malice, others for his ugliness.
"Oh! the deaf man! the oneeyed creature! the hunch back! the monster!"
"A face to make a woman miscarry better than all the drugs and medicines!"
Quasimodo was deaf but his sight was clear, and the public fury was no less energetically depicted on their visages than in their words.
At first he held his ground.
But bound as he was, his glance was powerless to drive away those flies which were stinging his wound.
Then he moved in his bonds, and his furious exertions made the ancient wheel of the pillory shriek on its axle.
Then the wretched man, unable to break his collar, like that of a chained wild beast, became tranquil once more; only at intervals a sigh of rage heaved the hollows of his chest.
There was neither shame nor redness on his face.
As far away as he could see that mule and that priest, the poor victim's visage grew gentler.
It was like the arrival of a Saviour, which the unhappy man was greeting.
But as soon as the mule was near enough to the pillory to allow of its rider recognizing the victim, the priest dropped his eyes, beat a hasty retreat, spurred on rigorously, as though in haste to rid himself of humiliating appeals, and not at all desirous of being saluted and recognized by a poor fellow in such a predicament.
He had been there at least an hour and a half, lacerated, maltreated, mocked incessantly, and almost stoned.
All at once he moved again in his chains with redoubled despair, which made the whole framework that bore him tremble, and, breaking the silence which he had obstinately preserved hitherto, he cried in a hoarse and furious voice, which resembled a bark rather than a human cry, and which was drowned in the noise of the hoots"Drink!"
Not a voice was raised around the unhappy victim, except to jeer at his thirst.
It is certain that at that moment he was more grotesque and repulsive than pitiable, with his face purple and dripping, his eye wild, his mouth foaming with rage and pain, and his tongue lolling half out.
"Drink this!" cried Robin Poussepain, throwing in his face a sponge which had been soaked in the gutter. "There, you deaf villain, I'm your debtor."
A woman hurled a stone at his head,
"He, good, my son!" howled a cripple, making an effort to reach him with his crutch, "will you cast any more spells on us from the top of the towers of NotreDame?"
"Here's a drinking cup!" chimed in a man, flinging a broken jug at his breast. "'Twas you that made my wife, simply because she passed near you, give birth to a child with two heads!"
At that moment he beheld the crowd give way.
A young girl, fantastically dressed, emerged from the throng.
She was accompanied by a little white goat with gilded horns, and carried a tambourine in her hand.
It was the gypsy whom he had attempted to carry off on the preceding night, a misdeed for which he was dimly conscious that he was being punished at that very moment; which was not in the least the case, since he was being chastised only for the misfortune of being deaf, and of having been judged by a deaf man.
He doubted not that she had come to wreak her vengeance also, and to deal her blow like the rest.
He beheld her, in fact, mount the ladder rapidly.
He would have liked to make the pillory crumble into ruins, and if the lightning of his eye could have dealt death, the gypsy would have been reduced to powder before she reached the platform.
She approached, without uttering a syllable, the victim who writhed in a vain effort to escape her, and detaching a gourd from her girdle, she raised it gently to the parched lips of the miserable man.
It was the first, in all probability, that the unfortunate man had ever shed.
The gypsy made her little pout, from impatience, and pressed the spout to the tusked month of Quasimodo, with a smile.
When he had finished, the wretch protruded his black lips, no doubt, with the object of kissing the beautiful hand which had just succoured him.
But the young girl, who was, perhaps, somewhat distrustful, and who remembered the violent attempt of the night, withdrew her hand with the frightened gesture of a child who is afraid of being bitten by a beast.
Then the poor deaf man fixed on her a look full of reproach and inexpressible sadness.
It would have been a touching spectacle anywhere,this beautiful, fresh, pure, and charming girl, who was at the same time so weak, thus hastening to the relief of so much misery, deformity, and malevolence.
It was at that moment that the recluse caught sight, from the window of her bole, of the gypsy on the pillory, and hurled at her her sinister imprecation,
"Accursed be thou, daughter of Egypt!
La Esmeralda turned pale and descended from the pillory, staggering as she went.
The voice of the recluse still pursued her,
"The sacked nun is in one of her tantrums," muttered the populace; and that was the end of it.
For that sort of woman was feared; which rendered them sacred.
Near the Grand Pont, Mahiette, who was returning with her two companions, suddenly halted, "By the way, Eustache! what did you do with that cake?" "Mother," said the child, "while you were talking with that lady in the bole, a big dog took a bite of my cake, and then I bit it also."
"What, sir, did you eat the whole of it?" she went on.
I told him, but he would not listen to me.
"'Tis a terrible child!" said the mother, smiling and scolding at one and the same time. "Do you see, Oudarde?
So his grandfather says that be will be a captain. Just let me catch you at it again, Master Eustache.
They were, in fact, Damoiselle FleurdeLys de Gondelaurier and her companions, Diane de Christeuil, Amelotte de Montmichel, Colombe de Gaillefontaine, and the little de Champchevrier maiden; all damsels of good birth, assembled at that moment at the house of the dame widow de Gondelaurier, on account of Monseigneur de Beaujeu and Madame his wife, who were to come to Paris in the month of April, there to choose maids of honor for the Dauphiness Marguerite, who was to be received in Picardy from the hands of the Flemings.
These four maidens had been confided to the discreet and venerable charge of Madame Aloise de Gondelaurier, widow of a former commander of the king's crossbowmen, who had retired with her only daughter to her house in the Place du Parvis, Notre Dame, in Paris.
At the end of the room, by the side of a lofty chimney blazoned with arms from top to bottom, in a rich red velvet armchair, sat Dame de Gondelaurier, whose five and fifty years were written upon her garments no less distinctly than upon her face.
Beside her stood a young man of imposing mien, although partaking somewhat of vanity and bravadoone of those handsome fellows whom all women agree to admire, although grave men learned in physiognomy shrug their shoulders at them.
This young man wore the garb of a captain of the king's unattached archers, which bears far too much resemblance to the costume of Jupiter, which the reader has already been enabled to admire in the first book of this history, for us to inflict upon him a second description.
Each of them held on her knee a section of a great needlework tapestry, on which they were working in company, while one end of it lay upon the rush mat which covered the floor.
They were chatting together in that whispering tone and with the halfstifled laughs peculiar to an assembly of young girls in whose midst there is a young man.
The young man whose presence served to set in play all these feminine self conceits, appeared to pay very little heed to the matter, and, while these pretty damsels were vying with one another to attract his attention, he seemed to be chiefly absorbed in polishing the buckle of his sword belt with his doeskin glove.
From time to time, the old lady addressed him in a very low tone, and he replied as well as he was able, with a sort of awkward and constrained politeness.
From the smiles and significant gestures of Dame Aloise, from the glances which she threw towards her daughter, FleurdeLys, as she spoke low to the captain, it was easy to see that there was here a question of some betrothal concluded, some marriage near at hand no doubt, between the young man and FleurdeLys.
From the embarrassed coldness of the officer, it was easy to see that on his side, at least, love had no longer any part in the matter.
The poor dame, very much infatuated with her daughter, like any other silly mother, did not perceive the officer's lack of enthusiasm, and strove in low tones to call his attention to the infinite grace with which FleurdeLys used her needle or wound her skein.
"Come, little cousin," she said to him, plucking him by the sleeve, in order to speak in his ear, "Look at her, do! see her stoop."
"Yes, truly," replied the young man, and fell back into his glacial and absentminded silence.
A moment later, he was obliged to bend down again, and Dame Aloise said to him,
Can one be more white and blonde? are not her hands perfect? and that neckdoes it not assume all the curves of the swan in ravishing fashion?
How I envy you at times! and how happy you are to be a man, naughty libertine that you are!
Is not my FleurdeLys adorably beautiful, and are you not desperately in love with her?"
"Of course," he replied, still thinking of something else.
"But do say something," said Madame Aloise, suddenly giving his shoulder a push; "you have grown very timid."
We can assure our readers that timidity was neither the captain's virtue nor his defect.
But he made an effort to do what was demanded of him.
"Fair cousin," he said, approaching FleurdeLys, "what is the subject of this tapestry work which you are fashioning?' "Fair cousin," responded FleurdeLys, in an offended tone, "I have already told you three times.
It was evident that FleurdeLys saw much more clearly than her mother through the captain's cold and absentminded manner.
"For the Abbey of SaintAntoine des Champs," answered FleurdeLys, without raising her eyes.
"Who, my fair cousin, is this big gendarme, who is puffing out his cheeks to their full extent and blowing a trumpet?"
"'Tis Triton," she replied.
The young man understood that it was indispensable that he should whisper something in her ear, a commonplace, a gallant compliment, no matter what.
Accordingly he bent down, but he could find nothing in his imagination more tender and personal than this,
"Why does your mother always wear that surcoat with armorial designs, like our grandmothers of the time of Charles VII.?
Tell her, fair cousin, that 'tis no longer the fashion, and that the hinge (gond) and the laurel (laurier) embroidered on her robe give her the air of a walking mantlepiece.
FleurdeLys raised her beautiful eyes, full of reproach, "Is that all of which you can assure me?" she said, in a low voice.
In the meantime, Dame Aloise, delighted to see them thus bending towards each other and whispering, said as she toyed with the clasps of her prayerbook,
The captain, more and more embarrassed, fell back upon the subject of the tapestry,"'Tis, in sooth, a charming work!" he exclaimed.
Whereupon Colombe de Gaillefontaine, another beautiful blonde, with a white skin, dressed to the neck in blue damask, ventured a timid remark which she addressed to FleurdeLys, in the hope that the handsome captain would reply to it, "My dear Gondelaurier, have you seen the tapestries of the Htel de la RocheGuyon?"
"Is not that the hotel in which is enclosed the garden of the Lingre du Louvre?" asked Diane de Christeuil with a laugh; for she had handsome teeth, and consequently laughed on every occasion.
Charles VI.!" muttered the young captain, twirling his moustache. "Good heavens! what old things the good dame does remember!"
"Look! look!" exclaimed her lively companions; and they all ran to the edge of the balcony, while FleurdeLys, rendered thoughtful by the coldness of her betrothed, followed them slowly, and the latter, relieved by this incident, which put an end to an embarrassing conversation, retreated to the farther end of the room, with the satisfied air of a soldier released from duty.
Moreover, he was of a fickle disposition, and, must we say it, rather vulgar in taste.
Although of very noble birth, he had contracted in his official harness more than one habit of the common trooper.
He was only at his ease amid gross language, military gallantries, facile beauties, and successes yet more easy.
He had, nevertheless, received from his family some education and some politeness of manner; but he had been thrown on the world too young, he had been in garrison at too early an age, and every day the polish of a gentleman became more and more effaced by the rough friction of his gendarme's crossbelt.
While still continuing to visit her from time to time, from a remnant of common respect, he felt doubly embarrassed with FleurdeLys; in the first place, because, in consequence of having scattered his love in all sorts of places, he had reserved very little for her; in the next place, because, amid so many stiff, formal, and decent ladies, he was in constant fear lest his mouth, habituated to oaths, should suddenly take the bit in its teeth, and break out into the language of the tavern.
Let the reader reconcile these things as best he can. I am simply the historian.
He had remained, therefore, for several minutes, leaning in silence against the carved jamb of the chimney, and thinking or not thinking, when FleurdeLys suddenly turned and addressed him.
After all, the poor young girl was pouting against the dictates of her heart.
"Well," she resumed, "perchance 'tis that same gypsy girl who is dancing yonder, on the church square.
Come and see if you recognize her, fair Cousin Phoebus." A secret desire for reconciliation was apparent in this gentle invitation which she gave him to approach her, and in the care which she took to call him by name.
Captain Phoebus de Chteaupers (for it is he whom the reader has had before his eyes since the beginning of this chapter) slowly approached the balcony. "Stay," said FleurdeLys, laying her hand tenderly on Phoebus's arm; "look at that little girl yonder, dancing in that circle.
Is she your Bohemian?"
Phoebus looked, and said, "Yes, I recognize her by her goat."
"Oh! in fact, what a pretty little goat!" said Amelotte, clasping her hands in admiration.
"Are his horns of real gold?" inquired Brangre.
Without moving from her armchair, Dame Aloise interposed, "Is she not one of those gypsy girls who arrived last year by the Gibard gate?"
"Madame my mother," said FleurdeLys gently, "that gate is now called the Porte d'Enfer."
Mademoiselle de Gondelaurier knew how her mother's antiquated mode of speech shocked the captain.
In fact, he began to sneer, and muttered between his teeth: "Porte Gibard!
"Godmother!" exclaimed Brangre, whose eyes, incessantly in motion, had suddenly been raised to the summit of the towers of NotreDame, "who is that black man up yonder?"
A man was, in truth, leaning on the balustrade which surmounted the northern tower, looking on the Grve.
His costume could be plainly discerned, and his face resting on both his hands.
But he stirred no more than if he had been a statue.
"How he is staring at the little dancer!" went on Diane de Christeuil.
"Let the gypsy beware!" said FleurdeLys, "for he loves not Egypt."
"'Tis a great shame for that man to look upon her thus," added Amelotte de Montmichel, "for she dances delightfully."
"Fair cousin Phoebus," said FleurdeLys suddenly, "Since you know this little gypsy, make her a sign to come up here. It will amuse us."
"Why! 'tis not worth while," replied Phoebus. "She has forgotten me, no doubt, and I know not so much as her name.
Nevertheless, as you wish it, young ladies, I will make the trial." And leaning over the balustrade of the balcony, he began to shout, "Little one!"
The dancer was not beating her tambourine at the moment.
She turned her head towards the point whence this call proceeded, her brilliant eyes rested on Phoebus, and she stopped short.
"Little one!" repeated the captain; and he beckoned her to approach.
The young girl looked at him again, then she blushed as though a flame had mounted into her cheeks, and, taking her tambourine under her arm, she made her way through the astonished spectators towards the door of the house where Phoebus was calling her, with slow, tottering steps, and with the troubled look of a bird which is yielding to the fascination of a serpent.
A moment later, the tapestry portire was raised, and the gypsy appeared on the threshold of the chamber, blushing, confused, breathless, her large eyes drooping, and not daring to advance another step.
Brangre clapped her hands.
It is certain that a vague and indistinct desire to please the handsome officer animated them all, that his splendid uniform was the target of all their coquetries, and that from the moment he presented himself, there existed among them a secret, suppressed rivalry, which they hardly acknowledged even to themselves, but which broke forth, none the less, every instant, in their gestures and remarks.
Her beauty was so rare, that, at the moment when she appeared at the entrance of the apartment, it seemed as though she diffused a sort of light which was peculiar to herself.
In that narrow chamber, surrounded by that sombre frame of hangings and woodwork, she was incomparably more beautiful and more radiant than on the public square.
The noble damsels were dazzled by her in spite of themselves.
Each one felt herself, in some sort, wounded in her beauty.
One drop of wine is sufficient to tinge a glass of water red; to diffuse a certain degree of ill temper throughout a whole assembly of pretty women, the arrival of a prettier woman suffices, especially when there is but one man present.
They surveyed her from head to foot, then exchanged glances, and all was said; they understood each other.
Meanwhile, the young girl was waiting to be spoken to, in such emotion that she dared not raise her eyelids.
The captain was the first to break the silence. "Upon my word," said he, in his tone of intrepid fatuity, "here is a charming creature!
What think you of her, fair cousin?"
At length, Madame Aloise, who was not the less jealous because she was so for her daughter, addressed the dancer,"Approach, little one."
"Approach, little one!" repeated, with comical dignity, little Brangre, who would have reached about as high as her hips.
"Fair child," said Phoebus, with emphasis, taking several steps towards her, "I do not know whether I have the supreme honor of being recognized by you."
She interrupted him, with a smile and a look full of infinite sweetness, "Oh! yes," said she.
"You left me in your stead, my beauty," pursued the captain, whose tongue was unloosed when speaking to a girl out of the street, "a crabbed knave, oneeyed and hunchbacked, the bishop's bellringer, I believe.
I have been told that by birth he is the bastard of an archdeacon and a devil.
He has a pleasant name: he is called ~QuatreTemps~ (Ember Days), ~PaquesFleuries~ (Palm Sunday), MardiGras (Shrove Tuesday), I know not what!
The name of some festival when the bells are pealed! So he took the liberty of carrying you off, as though you were made for beadles!
"I do not know," she replied.
However, he paid dearly for it.
Master Pierrat Torterue is the harshest groom that ever curried a knave; and I can tell you, if it will be agreeable to you, that your bellringer's hide got a thorough dressing at his hands."
"Poor man!" said the gypsy, in whom these words revived the memory of the pillory.
"He talks to that creature in her own tongue!" added FleurdeLys, in a low tone, her irritation increasing every moment.
This irritation was not diminished when she beheld the captain, enchanted with the gypsy, and, most of all, with himself, execute a pirouette on his heel, repeating with coarse, nave, and soldierly gallantry,
"Rather savagely dressed," said Diane de Christeuil, laughing to show her fine teeth.
Not being able to impugn her beauty, they attacked her costume.
They seemed to take no heed of her presence, and talked of her aloud, to her face, as of something unclean, abject, and yet, at the same time, passably pretty.
From time to time a flush of shame, a flash of anger inflamed her eyes or her cheeks; with disdain she made that little grimace with which the reader is already familiar, but she remained motionless; she fixed on Phoebus a sad, sweet, resigned look.
One would have said that she endured for fear of being expelled.
"Let them talk, little one!" he repeated, jingling his golden spurs. "No doubt your toilet is a little extravagant and wild, but what difference does that make with such a charming damsel as yourself?"
"Good gracious!" exclaimed the blonde Gaillefontaine, drawing up her swanlike throat, with a bitter smile. "I see that messieurs the archers of the king's police easily take fire at the handsome eyes of gypsies!"
The gypsy, who had dropped her eyes on the floor at the words of Colombe de Gaillefontaine, raised them beaming with joy and pride and fixed them once more on Phoebus.
"Holy Virgin!" she suddenly exclaimed, "what is it moving about my legs?
It was the goat, who had just arrived, in search of his mistress, and who, in dashing towards the latter, had begun by entangling his horns in the pile of stuffs which the noble dame's garments heaped up on her feet when she was seated.
The gypsy disentangled his horns without uttering a word.
The gypsy crouched down on her knees and leaned her cheek against the fondling head of the goat.
One would have said that she was asking pardon for having quitted it thus.
They say she is a sorceress, and that her goat executes very miraculous tricks."
"I do not understand." And she fell to caressing the pretty animal, repeating, "Djali!
At that moment FleurdeLys noticed a little bag of embroidered leather suspended from the neck of the goat, "What is that?" she asked of the gypsy.
The gypsy raised her large eyes upon her and replied gravely, "That is my secret."
But the nearer she approached it, the more her pace slackened.
An irresistible magnet seemed to hold her.
Suddenly she turned her eyes, wet withtears, towards Phoebus, and halted.
"La Esmeralda," said the dancer, never taking her eyes from him.
"You see well enough," retorted Amelotte, "that she is an enchantress."
In the meantime, several minutes previously, Brangre had coaxed the goat into a corner of the room with a marchpane cake, without any one having noticed her.
In a moment they constituted a word, which the goat seemed to have been trained to write, so little hesitation did it show in forming it, and Brangre suddenly exclaimed, clasping her hands in admiration,
"Was it the goat who wrote that?" she inquired in a changed voice.
Meanwhile, at the child's exclamation, all had hastened up, the mother, the young girls, the gypsy, and the officer.
She turned red, then pale, and began to tremble like a culprit before the captain, who gazed at her with a smile of satisfaction and amazement.
Then, bursting into sobs: "Oh!" she stammered mournfully, hiding her face in both her beautiful hands, "she is a magician!" And she heard another and a still more bitter voice at the bottom of her heart, saying, "She is a rival!"
"My daughter! my daughter!" cried the terrified mother. "Begone, you gypsy of hell!"
Captain Phoebus, on being left alone, hesitated for a moment between the two doors, then he followed the gypsy.
(I do not know, by the way be it said, whether it be not the same, the interior of which can be seen today through a little square window, opening to the east at the height of a man above the platform from which the towers spring; a bare and dilapidated den, whose badly plastered walls are ornamented here and there, at the present day, with some wretched yellow engravings representing the faades of cathedrals.
Every day, an hour before sunset, the archdeacon ascended the staircase to the tower, and shut himself up in this cell, where he sometimes passed whole nights.
That day, at the moment when, standing before the low door of his retreat, he was fitting into the lock the complicated little key which he always carried about him in the purse suspended to his side, a sound of tambourine and castanets had reached his ear.
Claude Frollo had hastily withdrawn the key, and an instant later, he was on the top of the tower, in the gloomy and pensive attitude in which the maidens had seen him.
There he stood, grave, motionless, absorbed in one look and one thought.
All Paris lay at his feet, with the thousand spires of its edifices and its circular horizon of gentle hillswith its river winding under its bridges, and its people moving to and fro through its streets,with the clouds of its smoke,with the mountainous chain of its roofs which presses NotreDame in its doubled folds; but out .of all the city, the archdeacon gazed at one corner only of the pavement, the Place du Parvis; in all that throng at but one figure,the gypsy.
It was a fixed gaze, which was, nevertheless, full of trouble and tumult. And, from the profound immobility of his whole body, barely agitated at intervals by an involuntary shiver, as a tree is moved by the wind; from the stiffness of his elbows, more marble than the balustrade on which they leaned; or the sight of the petrified smile which contracted his face, one would have said that nothing living was left about Claude Frollo except his eyes.
The gypsy was dancing; she was twirling her tambourine on the tip of her finger, and tossing it into the air as she danced Provenal sarabands; agile, light, joyous, and unconscious of the formidable gaze which descended perpendicularly upon her head.
The crowd was swarming around her; from time to time, a man accoutred in red and yellow made them form into a circle, and then returned, seated himself on a chair a few paces from the dancer, and took the goat's head on his knees.
This man seemed to be the gypsy's companion.
Claude Frollo could not distinguish his features from his elevated post.
From the moment when the archdeacon caught sight of this stranger, his attention seemed divided between him and the dancer, and his face became more and more gloomy.
All at once he rose upright, and a quiver ran through his whole body: "Who is that man?" he muttered between his teeth: "I have always seen her alone before!"
Then he plunged down beneath the tortuous vault of the spiral staircase, and once more descended.
As he passed the door of the bell chamber, which was ajar, be saw something which struck him; he beheld Quasimodo, who, leaning through an opening of one of those slate penthouses which resemble enormous blinds, appeared also to be gazing at the Place.
He was engaged in so profound a contemplation, that he did not notice the passage of his adopted father. His savage eye had a singular expression; it was a charmed, tender look.
"This is strange!" murmured Claude. "Is it the gypsy at whom he is thus gazing?"
He continued his descent. At the end of a few minutes, the anxious archdeacon entered upon the Place from the door at the base of the tower.
"What has become of the gypsy girl?" he said, mingling with the group of spectators which the sound of the tambourine had collected.
"I know not," replied one of his neighbors, "I think that she has gone to make some of her fandangoes in the house opposite, whither they have called her."
In the place of the gypsy, on the carpet, whose arabesques had seemed to vanish but a moment previously by the capricious figures of her dance, the archdeacon no longer beheld any one but the red and yellow man, who, in order to earn a few testers in his turn, was walking round the circle, with his elbows on his hips, his head thrown back, his face red, his neck outstretched, with a chair between his teeth.
To the chair he had fastened a cat, which a neighbor had lent, and which was spitting in great affright.
"NotreDame!" exclaimed the archdeacon, at the moment when the juggler, perspiring heavily, passed in front of him with his pyramid of chair and his cat, "What is Master Pierre Gringoire doing here?"
The harsh voice of the archdeacon threw the poor fellow into such a commotion that he lost his equilibrium, together with his whole edifice, and the chair and the cat tumbled pellmell upon the heads of the spectators, in the midst of inextinguishable hootings.
It is probable that Master Pierre Gringoire (for it was indeed he) would have had a sorry account to settle with the neighbor who owned the cat, and all the bruised and scratched faces which surrounded him, if he had not hastened to profit by the tumult to take refuge in the church, whither Claude Frollo had made him a sign to follow him.
When they had advanced a few paces, Dom Claude placed his back against a pillar, and gazed intently at Gringoire.
The gaze was not the one which Gringoire feared, ashamed as he was of having been caught by a grave and learned person in the costume of a buffoon.
After all, concede, I grant that it is a sad employment for my intellectual faculties, and that man is not made to pass his life in beating the tambourine and biting chairs.
All at once his deepset eye assumed so sagacious and penetrating an expression, that Gringoire felt himself, so to speak, searched to the bottom of the soul by that glance.
"In faith!" said Gringoire, "'tis because she is my wife and I am her husband."
"Have you done that, you wretch!" he cried, seizing Gringoire's arm with fury; "have you been so abandoned by God as to raise your hand against that girl?"
"On my chance of paradise, monseigneur," replied Gringoire, trembling in every limb, "I swear to you that I have never touched her, if that is what disturbs you."
Gringoire made haste to relate to him as succinctly as possible, all that the reader already knows, his adventure in the Court of Miracles and the brokencrock marriage.
It appeared, moreover, that this marriage had led to no results whatever, and thateach evening the gypsy girl cheated him of his nuptial right as on the first day. "'Tis a mortification," he said in conclusion, "but that is because I have had the misfortune to wed a virgin."
She wears on her neck an amulet which, it is affirmed, will cause her to meet her parents some day, but which will lose its virtue if the young girl loses hers.
"So," resumed Claude, whose brow cleared more and more, "you believe, Master Pierre, that this creature has not been approached by any man?"
"What would you have a man do, Dom Claude, as against a superstition?
She has got that in her head.
But she has three things to protect her: the Duke of Egypt, who has taken her under his safeguard, reckoning, perchance, on selling her to some gay abb; all his tribe, who hold her in singular veneration, like a NotreDame; and a certain tiny poignard, which the buxom dame always wears about her, in some nook, in spite of the ordinances of the provost, and which one causes to fly out into her hands by squeezing her waist.
La Esmeralda, in the judgment of Gringoire, was an inoffensive and charming creature, pretty, with the exception of a pout which was peculiar to her; a nave and passionate damsel, ignorant of everything and enthusiastic about everything; not yet aware of the difference between a man and a woman, even in her dreams; made like that; wild especially over dancing, noise, the open air; a sort of woman bee, with invisible wings on her feet, and living in a whirlwind.
She owed this nature to the wandering life which she had always led.
Gringoire had succeeded in learning that, while a mere child, she had traversed Spain and Catalonia, even to Sicily; he believed that she had even been taken by the caravan of Zingari, of which she formed a part, to the kingdom of Algiers, a country situated in Achaia, which country adjoins, on one side Albania and Greece; on the other, the Sicilian Sea, which is the road to Constantinople.
The Bohemians, said Gringoire, were vassals of the King of Algiers, in his quality of chief of the White Moors.
From all these countries the young girl had brought back fragments of queer jargons, songs, and strange ideas, which made her language as motley as her costume, half Parisian, half African.
However, the people of the quarters which she frequented loved her for her gayety, her daintiness, her lively manners, her dances, and her songs.
She believed herself to be hated, in all the city, by but two persons, of whom she often spoke in terror: the sacked nun of the TourRoland, a villanous recluse who cherished some secret grudge against these gypsies, and who cursed the poor dancer every time that the latter passed before her window; and a priest, who never met her without casting at her looks and words which frightened her.
The mention of this last circumstance disturbed the archdeacon greatly, though Gringoire paid no attention to his perturbation; to such an extent had two months sufficed to cause the heedless poet to forget the singular details of the evening on which he had met the gypsy, and the presence of the archdeacon in it all. Otherwise, the little dancer feared nothing; she did not tell fortunes, which protected her against those trials for magic which were so frequently instituted against gypsy women.
And then, Gringoire held the position of her brother, if not of her husband.
Every morning, he set out from the lair of the thieves, generally with the gypsy; he helped her make her collections of targes* and little blanks** in the squares; each evening he returned to the same roof with her, allowed her to bolt herself into her little chamber, and slept the sleep ofthe just. A very sweet existence, taking it all in all, he said, and well adapted to revery.
And then, on his soul and conscience, the philosopher was not very sure that he was madly in love with the gypsy.
He loved her goat almost as dearly.
"I know not," replied Gringoire. "Perhaps it is a word which she believes to be endowed with some magic and secret virtue.
She often repeats it in a low tone when she thinks that she is alone."
"Are you sure," persisted Claude, with his penetrating glance, "that it is only a word and not a name?"
Let her mumble her Phoebus at her pleasure.
One thing is certain, that Djali loves me almost as much as he does her."
"The goat." The archdeacon dropped his chin into his hand, and appeared to reflect for a moment.
All at once he turned abruptly to Gringoire once more.
"And do you swear to me that you have not touched her?"
"No, that woman."
"You are often alone with her?"
"Upon my soul, I could say the ~Pater~, and the ~Ave Maria~, and the ~Credo in Deum patrem omnipotentem~ without her paying any more attention to me than a chicken to a church."
"Swear to me, by the body of your mother," repeated the archdeacon violently, "that you have not touched that creature with even the tip of your finger."
"I will also swear it by the head of my father, for the two things have more affinity between them.
The archdeacon's pale face became as crimson as the cheek of a young girl.
Woe to you if you approach that woman!
"I tried once," said Gringoire, scratching his ear; "it was the first day: but I got stung."
"On another occasion," continued the poet, with a smile, "I peeped through the keyhole, before going to bed, and I beheld the most delicious dame in her shift that ever made a bed creak under her bare foot."
"Go to the devil!" cried the priest, with a terrible look; and, giving the amazed Gringoire a push on the shoulders, he plunged, with long strides, under the gloomiest arcades of the cathedral.
Was it that the shame and despair of the pillory still lingered in the bottom of his heart, that the lashes of his tormentor's whip reverberated unendingly in his soul, and that the sadness of such treatment had wholly extinguished in him even his passion for the bells? or was it that Marie had a rival inthe heart of the bellringer of NotreDame, and that the great bell and her fourteen sisters were neglected for something more amiable and more beautiful?
That day the air was so pure and light that Quasimodo felt some returning affection for his bells.
On arriving in the lofty bell chamber, Quasimodo gazed for some time at the six bells and shook his head sadly, as though groaning over some foreign element which had interposed itself in his heart between them and him.
But when he had set them to swinging, when he felt that cluster of bells moving under his hand, when he saw, for he did not hear it, the palpitating octave ascend and descend that sonorous scale, like a bird hopping from branch to branch; when the demon Music, that demon who shakes a sparkling bundle of strette, trills and arpeggios, had taken possession of the poor deaf man, he became happy once more, he forgot everything, and his heart expanding, made his face beam.
He went and came, he beat his hands together, he ran from rope to rope, he animated the six singers with voice and gesture, like the leader of an orchestra who is urging on intelligent musicians.
"Go on," said he, "go on, go on, Gabrielle, pour out all thy noise into the Place, 'tis a festival today.
He was wholly absorbed in spurring on his bells, all six of which vied with each other in leaping and shaking their shining haunches, like a noisy team of Spanish mules, pricked on here and there by the apostrophes of the muleteer.
All at once, on letting his glance fall between the large slate scales which cover the perpendicular wall of the bell tower at a certain height, he beheld on the square a young girl, fantastically dressed, stop, spread out on the ground a carpet, on which a small goat took up its post, and a group of spectators collect around her.
This sight suddenly changed the course of his ideas, and congealed his enthusiasm as a breath of air congeals melted rosin.
He halted, turned his back to the bells, and crouched down behind the projecting roof of slate, fixing upon the dancer that dreamy, sweet, and tender look which had already astonished the archdeacon on one occasion.
It chanced that upon a fine morning in this same month of March, I think it was on Saturday the 29th, Saint Eustache's day, our young friend the student, Jehan Frollo du Moulin, perceived, as he was dressing himself, that his breeches, which contained his purse, gave out no metallic ring. "Poor purse," he said, drawing it from his fob, "what! not the smallest parisis! how cruelly the dice, beerpots, and Venus have depleted thee!
An idea had occurred to him as he laced his boots, but he rejected it at first; nevertheless, it returned, and he put on his waistcoat wrong side out, an evident sign of violent internal combat.
At last he dashed his cap roughly on the floor, and exclaimed: "So much the worse!
Then he hastily donned his long jacket with furred half sleeves, picked up his cap, and went out like a man driven to desperation.
As he passed the Rue de la Huchette, the odor of those admirable spits, which were incessantly turning, tickled his olfactory apparatus, and he bestowed a loving glance toward the Cyclopean roast, which one day drew from the Franciscan friar, Calatagirone, this pathetic exclamation: ~Veramente, queste rotisserie sono cosa stupenda~!* But Jehan had not the wherewithal to buy a breakfast, and he plunged, with a profound sigh, under the gateway of the PetitChtelet, that enormous double trefoil of massive towers which guarded the entrance to the City.
He did not even take the trouble to cast a stone in passing, as was the usage, at the miserable statue of that Prinet Leclerc who had delivered up the Paris of Charles VI. to the English, a crime which his effigy, its face battered with stones and soiled with mud, expiated for three centuries at the corner of the Rue de la Harpe and the Rue de Buci, as in an eternal pillory.
Then indecision seized upon him once more, and he paced for several minutes round the statue of M. Legris, repeating to himself with anguish: "The sermon is sure, the crown is doubtful."
He stopped a beadle who emerged from the cloister,"Where is monsieur the archdeacon of Josas?"
"I believe that he is in his secret cell in the tower," said the beadle; "I should advise you not to disturb him there, unless you come from some one like the pope or monsieur the king."
Jehan clapped his hands.
This reflection having brought him to a decision, he plunged resolutely into the small black doorway, and began the ascent of the spiral of SaintGilles, which leads to the upper stories of the tower. "I am going to see," he said to himself on the way.
'Tis said that he lights up the kitchens of hell there, and that he cooks the philosopher's stone there over a hot fire. ~Bdieu~! I care no more for the philosopher's stone than for a pebble, and I would rather find over his furnace an omelette of Easter eggs and bacon, than the biggest philosopher's stone in the world."'
On arriving at the gallery of slender columns, he took breath for a moment, and swore against the interminable staircase by I know not how many million cartloads of devils; then he resumed his ascent through the narrow door of the north tower, now closed to the public.
Several moments after passing the bell chamber, he came upon a little landingplace, built in a lateral niche, and under the vault of a low, pointed door, whose enormous lock and strong iron bars he was enabled to see through a loophole pierced in the opposite circular wall of the staircase.
The key was in the lock, the door was very close to him; he gave it a gentle push and thrust his head through the opening.
The doctor is before this table clad in his large coat and covered to the very eyebrows with his furred cap.
He is visible only to his waist.
He has half risen from his immense armchair, his clenched fists rest on the table, and he is gazing with curiosity and terror at a large luminous circle, formed of magic letters, which gleams from the wall beyond, like the solar spectrum in a dark chamber.
Something very similar to Faust's cell presented itself to Jehan's view, when he ventured his head through the half open door.
A man was seated in the armchair, and bending over the table.
Jehan, to whom his back was turned, could see only his shoulders and the back of his skull; but he had no difficulty in recognizing that bald head, which nature had provided with an eternal tonsure, as though desirous of marking, by this external symbol, the archdeacon's irresistible clerical vocation.
Jehan accordingly recognized his brother; but the door had been opened so softly, that nothing warned Dom Claude of his presence.
The inquisitive scholar took advantage of this circumstance to examine the cell for a few moments at his leisure.
A large furnace, which he had not at first observed, stood to the left of the armchair, beneath the window.
Jehan observed, with a sigh, that there was no fryingpan. "How cold the kitchen utensils are!" he said to himself.
A glass mask, which Jehan noticed among the utensils of alchemy, and which served no doubt, to protect the archdeacon's face when he was working over some substance to be dreaded, lay in one corner covered withdust and apparently forgotten.
The whole chamber, moreover, presented a general aspect of abandonment and dilapidation; and the bad state of the utensils induced the supposition that their owner had long been distracted from his labors by other preoccupations.
Meanwhile, this master, bent over a vast manuscript, ornamented with fantastical illustrations, appeared to be tormented by an idea which incessantly mingled with his meditations.
That at least was Jehan's idea, when he heard him exclaim, with the thoughtful breaks of a dreamer thinking aloud,
The mouth of a woman is constantly pure; it is a running water, it is a ray of sunlight. The name of a woman should be agreeable, sweet, fanciful; it should end in long vowels, and resemble words of benediction.'
And he closed the book violently.
He passed his hand over his brow, as though to brush away the idea which assailed him; then he took from the table a nail and a small hammer, whose handle was curiously painted with cabalistic letters.
"For some time," he said with a bitter smile, "I have failed in all my experiments! one fixed idea possesses me, and sears my brain like fire.
"The deuce!" muttered Jehan in his beard.
"Hence," continued the priest, "one wretched thought is sufficient to render a man weak and beside himself!
Oh! how Claude Pernelle would laugh at me. She who could not turn Nicholas Flamel aside, for one moment, from his pursuit of the great work!
I hold in my hand the magic hammer of Zchil! at every blow dealt by the formidable rabbi, from the depths of his cell, upon this nail, that one of his enemies whom he had condemned, were he a thousand leagues away, was buried a cubit deep in the earth which swallowed him.
The King of France himself, in consequence of once having inconsiderately knocked at the door of the thermaturgist, sank to the knees through the pavement of his own Paris.
And yet all that is required is to find the magic word which Zchil pronounced when he struck his nail."
And he flung away the hammer in a rage.
Then he sank down so deeply on the armchair and the table, that Jehan lost him from view behind the great pile of manuscripts.
For the space of several minutes, all that he saw was his fist convulsively clenched on a book.
The archdeacon returned and seated himself in his armchair, and placed his head on both his hands, as a sick man does, whose head is heavy and burning.
The student watched his brother with surprise.
He did not know, he who wore his heart on his sleeve, he who observed only the good old law of Nature in the world, he who allowed his passions to follow their inclinations, and in whom the lake of great emotions was always dry, so freely did he let it off each day by fresh drains,he did not know with what fury the sea of human passions ferments and boils when all egress is denied to it, how it accumulates, how it swells, how it overflows, how it hollows out the heart; how it breaks in inward sobs, and dull convulsions, until it has rent its dikes and burst its bed.
We do not know whether he suddenly became conscious of these things; but, giddy as he was, he understood that he had seen what he ought not to have seen, that he had just surprised the soul of his elder brother in one of its most secret altitudes, and that Claude must not be allowed to know it.
Seeing that the archdeacon had fallen back into his former immobility, he withdrew his head very softly, and made some noise with his feet outside the door, like a person who has just arrived and is giving warning of his approach.
"Enter!" cried the archdeacon, from the interior of his cell; "I was expecting you.
The archdeacon, who was very much embarrassed by such a visit in such a place, trembled in his armchair.
"'Tis a J, all the same," said the scholar, with his ruddy, merry, and audacious face.
"Brother," replied the scholar, making an effort to assume a decent, pitiful, and modest mien, and twirling his cap in his hands with an innocent air; "I am come to ask of you"
"A little lecture on morality, of which I stand greatly in need," Jehan did not dare to add aloud,"and a little money of which I am in still greater need." This last member of his phrase remained unuttered.
Dom Claude made his armchair describe a quarter circle, and gazed intently at Jehan. "I am very glad to see you."
A malicious page amused himself by splashing the scholars, by making his horse gallop through the mire!"
"Yes," pursued the priest shaking his head, "that is the state of learning and letters at the present day.
The scholar raised his eyes boldly. "Monsieur my brother, doth it please you that I shall explain in good French vernacular that Greek word which is written yonder on the wall?"
Master Jehan, who possessed all the artful ways of a spoiled child, judged that the moment was a favorable one in which to risk his request.
Accordingly, he assumed an extremely soft tone and began, "My good brother, do you hate me to such a degree as to look savagely upon me because of a few mischievous cuffs and blows distributed in a fair war to a pack of lads and brats, ~quibusdam marmosetis~?
"What are you driving at?" he said dryly.
"You know that the official has decided that our twentyone houses should he moved full into the fief of the Bishopric, and that we could redeem this homage only by paying the reverend bishop two marks of silver gilt of the price of six livres parisis.
He resumed his dainty, caressing air.
"Hum," said the archdeacon; "those are names as fit for a good work as a catapult for the chief altar." It is certain that Jehan had made a very bad choice of names for his two friends.
He bit his lips and his wrath was drowned in a crimson flush.
"I' faith! brother what father of the church is it, who says that the errors of heretics have always had for their lurking place the thickets of Aristotle's metaphysics?
I care not to tear my religion on his metaphysics."
"Young man," resumed the archdeacon, "at the king's last entry, there was a young gentleman, named Philippe de Comines, who wore embroidered on the housings of his horse this device, upon which I counsel you to meditate: ~Qui non laborat, non manducet~."
The scholar remained silent for a moment, with his finger in his ear, his eyes on the ground, and a discomfited mien.
All at once he turned round to Claude with the agile quickness of a wagtail.
At this response of the inflexible archdeacon, Jehan hid his head in his hands, like a woman sobbing, and exclaimed with an expression of despair: "~ O ~."
"What indeed!" said the scholar; and he lifted to Claude his impudent eyes into which he had just thrust his fists in order to communicate to them the redness of tears; "'tis Greek! 'tis an anapaest of AEschylus which expresses grief perfectly." And here he burst into a laugh so droll and violent that it made the archdeacon smile.
It was Claude's fault, in fact: why had he so spoiled that child?
The archdeacon promptly returned to his original severity. "I will send you some new boots, but no money."
Dom Claude shook his wrinkled head: "~Qui non laborat~" Jehan did not allow him to finish.
"Well," he exclaimed, "to the devil then!
I will live in the tavern, I will fight, I will break pots and I will go and see the wenches." And thereupon, he hurled his cap at the wall, and snapped his fingers like castanets.
"Oh, come now," cried the student, gazing in turn at his brother and the alembics on the furnace, "everything is preposterous here, both ideas and bottles!"
"'Tis as good a lantern as any other, and perchance with that one, Diogenes would have found his man."
"The gallows is a balance which has a man at one end and the whole earth at the other.
'Tis fine to be the man."
"Silence!" said the archdeacon, laying his finger on his mouth, "here is Master Jacques.
Listen, Jehan," he added, in a low voice; "have a care never to speak of what you shall have seen or heard here.
"Take it, then!" said the archdeacon angrily, flinging his purse at him.
The first point which struck the eye of our Jehan (who, as the reader will readily surmise, had ensconced himself in his nook in such a manner as to enable him to see and hear everything at his good pleasure) was the perfect sadness of the garments and the visage of this newcorner.
He was very gray and wrinkled, and not far from his sixtieth year, his eyes blinked, his eyebrows were white, his lip pendulous, and his hands large.
When Jehan saw that it was only this, that is to say, no doubt a physician or a magistrate, and that this man had a nose very far from his mouth, a sign of stupidity, he nestled down in his hole, in despair at being obliged to pass an indefinite time in such an uncomfortable attitude, and in such bad company.
He had made the latter a sign to seat himself on a stool near the door, and, after several moments of a silence which appeared to be a continuation of a preceding meditation, he said to him in a rather patronizing way, "Good day, Master Jacques."
"Greeting, master," replied the man in black.
Does he confess his witchcraft?
"Alas! no," replied Master Jacques, still with his sad smile; "we have not that consolation.
That man is a stone. We might have him boiled in the March aux Pourceaux, before he would say anything.
Nevertheless, we are sparing nothing for the sake of getting at the truth; he is already thoroughly dislocated, we are applying all the herbs of Saint John's day; as saith the old comedian Plautus,
Nothing answers; that man is terrible.
"You have found nothing new in his house?"
"I' faith, yes," said Master Jacques, fumbling in his pouch; "this parchment.
The criminal advocate, Monsieur Philippe Lheulier, nevertheless, knows a little Hebrew, which he learned in that matter of the Jews of the Rue Kantersten, at Brussels."
"Give it here," said the archdeacon. And casting his eyes upon this writing: "Pure magic, Master Jacques!" he exclaimed.
"We will put the man to the torture once more.
Here again," added Master Jacques, fumbling afresh in his pouch, "is something that we have found at Marc Cenaine's house."
"I will confess to you," continued Master Jacques, with his timid and awkward smile, "that I have tried it over the furnace, but I have succeeded no better than with my own."
The archdeacon began an examination of the vessel. "What has he engraved on his crucible? ~Och! och~! the word which expels fleas!
"That gypsy girl you know, who comes every day to dance on the church square, in spite of the official's prohibition!
"I will tell you that hereafter," he stammered, in a voice that was barely articulate; then he resumed with an effort, "Busy yourself with Marc Cenaine."
But 'tis a devil of a man; he wearies even Pierrat Torterue himself, who hath hands larger than my own.
Poor man! he will have suffered like Mummol.
What an idea to go to the witches' sabbath! a butler of the Court of Accounts, who ought to know Charlemagne's text; ~Stryga vel masea~!In the matter of the little girl,Smelarda, as they call her,I will await your orders.
Dom Claude, buried in his own thoughts, no longer listened to him.
Charmolue, following the direction of his glance, perceived that it was fixed mechanically on the great spider's web which draped the window.
On the agitation of his web, the enormous spider made an abrupt move from his central cell, then with one bound, rushed upon the fly, which he folded together with his fore antennae, while his hideous proboscis dug into the victim's bead. "Poor fly!" said the king's procurator in the ecclesiastical court; and he raised his hand to save it.
The archdeacon, as though roused with a start, withheld his arm with convulsive violence.
"Master Jacques," he cried, "let fate take its course!" The procurator wheeled round in affright; it seemed to him that pincers of iron had clutched his arm.
"Oh, yes!" continued the priest, in a voice which seemed to proceed from the depths of his being, "behold here a symbol of all.
She flies, she is joyous, she is just born; she seeks the spring, the open air, liberty: oh, yes! but let her come in contact with the fatal network, and the spider issues from it, the hideous spider!
"Oh, madman!" he went on, without removing his gaze from the window. "And even couldst thou have broken through that formidable web, with thy gnat's wings, thou believest that thou couldst have reached the light?
The archdeacon shook his head, with a bitter smile. "Master Jacques read Michel Psellus' '~Dialogus de Energia et Operatione Daemonum~.'
"What's that?" he inquired.
It was the scholar, who, ill at ease, and greatly bored in his hidingplace, had succeeded in discovering there a stale crust and a triangle of mouldy cheese, and had set to devouring the whole without ceremony, by way of consolation and breakfast.
As he was very hungry, he made a great deal of noise, and he accented each mouthful strongly, which startled and alarmed the procurator.
"In fact, master," he replied, with a respectful smile, "all great philosophers have their familiar animal.
But Dom Claude, who stood in terror of some new freak on the part of Jehan, reminded his worthy disciple that they had some figures on the faade to study together, and the two quitted the cell, to the accompaniment of a great "ouf!" from the scholar, who began to seriously fear that his knee would acquire the imprint of his chin.
"~Te Deum Laudamus~!" exclaimed Master Jehan, creeping out from his hole, "the screechowls have departed.
He cast a glance of tenderness and admiration into the interior of the precious pouch, readjusted his toilet, rubbed up his boots, dusted his poor half sleeves, all gray with ashes, whistled an air, indulged in a sportive pirouette, looked about to see whether there were not something more in the cell to take, gathered up here and there on the furnace some amulet in glass which might serve to bestow, in the guise of a trinket, on Isabeau la Thierrye, finally pushed open the door which his brother had left unfastened, as a last indulgence, and which he, in his turn, left open as a last piece of malice, and descended the circular staircase, skipping like a bird.
In the midst of the gloom of the spiral staircase, he elbowed something which drew aside with a growl; he took it for granted that it was Quasimodo, and it struck him as so droll that he descended the remainder of the staircase holding his sides with laughter.
On emerging upon the Place, he laughed yet more heartily.
He stamped his foot when he found himself on the ground once again. "Oh!" said he, "good and honorable pavement of Paris, cursed staircase, fit to put the angels of Jacob's ladder out of breath!
At that moment he heard a powerful and sonorous voice articulate behind him a formidable series of oaths. "~Sang Dieu! Ventre.Dieu!
This name of Phoebus reached the ears of the archdeacon at the moment when he was explaining to the king's procurator the dragon which is hiding its tail in a bath, from which issue smoke and the head of a king.
Dom Claude started, interrupted himself and, to the great amazement of Charmolue, turned round and beheld his brother Jehan accosting a tall officer at the door of the Gondelaurier mansion.
He was backed up against a corner of the house of his betrothed and swearing like a heathen.
"Pardon me, good comrade Jehan," exclaimed Phoebus, shaking his hand, "a horse going at a gallop cannot halt short.
Meanwhile, the archdeacon, who had abandoned the dumbfounded Charmolue where he stood, had approached them and halted a fewpaces distant, watching them without their noticing him, so deeply were they absorbed in contemplation of the purse.
And without adding another word, he emptied the purse on a neighboring post, with the air of a Roman saving his country.
Several liards had rolled into the mud; the captain in his enthusiasm stooped to pick them up. Jehan restrained him.
Jehan flung back his blonde and curly head, and said, half closing his eyes disdainfully, "We have a brother who is an archdeacon and a fool."
"~Corne de Dieu~!" exclaimed Phoebus, "the worthy man!"
An old woman sawing a basket handle*; 'tis a rebus, and I like that."
"Well! here goes for Eve and her apple," said the student, and taking Phoebus's arm. "By the way, my dear captain, you just mentioned the Rue CoupeGueule* That is a very bad form of speech; people are no longer so barbarous.
Was this the Phoebus whose accursed name had been mingled with all his thoughts ever since his interview with Gringoire?
He did not know it, but it was at least a Phoebus, and that magic name sufficed to make the archdeacon follow the two heedless comrades with the stealthy tread of a wolf, listening to their words and observing their slightest gestures with anxious attention.
"The little girl with the goat."
I always forget her devil of a name.
Let us make haste, she will recognize me.
I don't want to have that girl accost me in the street."
"Do you know her, Phoebus?"
Here the archdeacon saw Phoebus sneer, bend down to Jehan's ear, and say a few words to him in a low voice; then Phoebus burst into a laugh, and shook his head with a triumphant air.
"Are you sure that she will come?"
His teeth chattered; a visible shiver ran through his whole body.
He halted for a moment, leaned against a post like a drunken man, then followed the two merry knaves.
At the moment when he overtook them once more, they had changed their conversation.
Only at intervals did some little ragged boy raise himself on tiptoe as far as the ledge, and hurl into the drinkingshop, that ancient, jeering hoot, with which drunken men were then pursued: "Aux Houls, saouls, saouls, saouls!"
Nevertheless, one man paced imperturbably back and forth in front of the tavern, gazing at it incessantly, and going no further from it than a pikernan from his sentrybox.
He was enveloped in a mantle to his very nose.
This mantle he had just purchased of the oldclothes man, in the vicinity of the "Eve's Apple," no doubt to protect himself from the cold of the March evening, possibly also, to conceal his costume.
From time to time he paused in front of the dim window with its leaden lattice, listened, looked, and stamped his foot.
This was what he appeared to be waiting for.
The man in the mantle went and stationed himself on the watch under a porch on the other side of the street.
"I tell you," repeated his companion, with a thick tongue, "that I don't live in the Rue des Mauvaises Paroles, ~indignus qui inter mala verba habitat~.
Every one knows that he who once mounts astride a bear is never after afraid; but you have a nose turned to dainties like SaintJacques of the hospital."
It appears that the man who was lying in wait for them had also recognized them, for he slowly followed all the zigzags that the scholar caused the captain to make, who being a more hardened drinker had retained all his selfpossession.
By listening to them attentively, the man in the mantle could catch in its entirety the following interesting conversation,
I have an appointment with a woman."
You know that I made an appointment with that little girl at the end of the Pont Saint Michel, and I can only take her to the Falourdel's, the old crone of the bridge, and that I must pay for a chamber.
"Well, scholar of Antichrist, may you be strangled with the entrails of your mother!" exclaimed Phoebus, and he gave the drunken scholar a rough push; the latter slipped against the wall, and slid flabbily to the pavement of Philip Augustus.
A remnant of fraternal pity, which never abandons the heart of a drinker, prompted Phoebus to roll Jehan with his foot upon one of those pillows of the poor, which Providence keeps in readiness at the corner of all the street posts of Paris, and which the rich blight with the name of "a rubbishheap."
Meanwhile, all malice was not extinguished in the captain's heart. "So much the worse if the devil's cart picks you up on its passage!" he said to the poor, sleeping clerk; and he strode off.
The man in the mantle, who had not ceased to follow him, halted for a moment before the prostrate scholar, as though agitated by indecision; then, uttering a profound sigh, he also strode off in pursuit of the captain.
On glancing sideways by chance, he perceived a sort of shadow crawling after him along the walls.
He halted, it halted; he resumed his march, it resumed its march.
This disturbed him not overmuch. "Ah, bah!" he said to himself, "I have not a sou."
It was at this college that he had sketched out what he called his studies, and, through a scholar's teasing habit which still lingered in him, he never passed the faade without inflicting on the statue of Cardinal Pierre Bertrand, sculptured to the right of the portal, the affront of which Priapus complains so bitterly in the satire of Horace, ~Olim truncus eram ficulnus~.
Therefore, he halted before the statue according to his wont.
At the moment when he was coolly retying his shoulder knots, with his nose in the air, he saw the shadow approaching him with slow steps, so slow that he had ample time to observe that this shadow wore a cloak and a hat.
The captain was brave, and would have cared very little for a highwayman, with a rapier in his hand.
But this walking statue, this petrified man, froze his blood.
There were then in circulation, strange stories of a surly monk, a nocturnal prowler about the streets of Paris, and they recurred confusedly to his memory.
I am the son of a ruined family, my dear fellow.
"I know not your name alone," continued the man in the mantle, with his sepulchral voice. "You have a rendezvous this evening."
"Impious wretch!" muttered the spectre. "With a woman?" I confess."
All his heedlessness had gradually returned.
"Captain Phoebus de Chteaupers, thou liest!" Any one who could have beheld at that moment the captain's inflamed countenance, his leap backwards, so violent that he disengaged himself from the grip which held him, the proud air with which he clapped his hand on his swordhilt, and, in the presence of this wrath the gloomy immobility of the man in the cloak,any one who could have beheld this would have been frightened.
The captain gnashed his teeth.
He no longer beheld anything but a man, and an insult.
"Ah! this is well!" he stammered, in a voice stifled with rage.
He drew his sword, then stammering, for anger as well as fear makes a man tremble: "Here! On the spot!
When he beheld his adversary on guard and ready to parry, "Captain Phoebus," he said, and his tone vibrated with bitterness, "you forget your appointment." The rages of men like Phoebus are milksoups, whose ebullition is calmed by a drop of cold water.
"Captain," pursued the man, "tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, a month hence, ten years hence, you will find me ready to cut your throat; but go first to your rendezvous."
He replaced his sword in its scabbard.
"Go to your rendezvous," said the man.
In fact, there will be ample time tomorrow for us to chop up father Adam's doublet into slashes and buttonholes.
But you strike me as having the air of a gallant man, and it is safer to defer our affair until tomorrow.
So I will betake myself to my rendezvous; it is for seven o'clock, as you know." Here Phoebus scratched his ear.
Phoebus felt the stranger's cold hand slip into his a large piece of money.
"~Vrai Dieu~!" he exclaimed, "you are a good fellow!"
"One condition," said the man. "Prove to me that I have been wrong and that you were speaking the truth.
Hide me in some corner whence I can see whether this woman is really the one whose name you uttered."
"I will first show you the way," said Phoebus to his companion, "I will then go in search of the fair one who is awaiting me near the PetitChtelet."
His companion made no reply; he had not uttered a word since they had been walking side by side.
The door opened instantly, and allowed the newcorners to see an old woman and an old lamp, both of which trembled.
The old woman was bent double, clad in tatters, with a shaking head, pierced with two small eyes, and coiffed with a dish clout; wrinkled everywhere, on hands and face and neck; her lips retreated under hergums, and about her mouth she had tufts of white hairs which gave her the whiskered look of a cat.
The interior of the den was no less dilapitated than she; there were chalk walls, blackened beams in the ceiling, a dismantled chimneypiece, spiders' webs in all the corners, in the middle a staggering herd of tables and lame stools, a dirty child among the ashes, and at the back a staircase, or rather, a wooden ladder, which ended in a trap door in the ceiling.
On entering this lair, Phoebus's mysterious companion raised his mantle to his very eyes.
"The SainteMarthe chamber," said he.
The old woman addressed him as monseigneur, and shut up the crown in a drawer.
It was the coin which the man in the black mantle had given to Phoebus.
While her back was turned, the bushyheaded and ragged little boy who was playing in the ashes, adroitly approached the drawer, abstracted the crown, and put in its place a dry leaf which he had plucked from a fagot.
The old crone made a sign to the two gentlemen, as she called them, to follow her, and mounted the ladder in advance of them.
On arriving at the upper story, she set her lamp on a coffer, and, Phoebus, like a frequent visitor of the house, opened a door which opened on a dark hole. "Enter here, my dear fellow," he said to his companion.
The man in the mantle obeyed without a word in reply, the door closed upon him; he heard Phoebus bolt it, and a moment later descend the stairs again with the aged hag.
Accordingly, Claude crouched down in the dust, and the plaster which cracked beneath him; his head was on fire; rummaging around him with his hands, be found on the floor a bit of broken glass, which he pressed to his brow, and whose cool ness afforded him some relief.
In what order was he arranging in his mind la Esmeralda, Phoebus, Jacques Charmolue, his young brother so beloved, yet abandoned by him in the mire, his archdeacon's cassock, his reputation perhaps dragged to la Falourdel's, all these adventures, all these images? I cannot say.
But it is certain that these ideas formed in his mind a horrible group.
He had been waiting a quarter of an hour; it seemed to him that he had grown a century older.
There was a tolerably large crack in the wormeaten door of his den; he put his face to it.
In this manner he could see all that went on in the adjoining room.
The catfaced old crone was the first to emerge from the trapdoor, lamp in hand; then Phoebus, twirling his moustache, then a third person, that beautiful and graceful figure, la Esmeralda.
The priest beheld her rise from below like a dazzling apparition.
Claude trembled, a cloud spread over his eyes, his pulses beat violently, everything rustled and whirled around him; he no longer saw nor heard anything.
When he recovered himself, Phoebus and Esmeralda were alone seated on the wooden coffer beside the lamp which made these two youthful figures and a miserable pallet at the end of the attic stand out plainly before the archdeacon's eyes.
The young girl was blushing, confused, palpitating.
Her long, drooping lashes shaded her crimson cheeks.
The officer, to whom she dared not lift her eyes, was radiant.
Mechanically, and with a charmingly unconscious gesture, she traced with the tip of her finger incoherent lines on the bench, and watched her finger.
The captain was very gallantly clad; he had tufts of embroidery at his neck and wrists; a great elegance at that day.
It was not without difficulty that Dom Claude managed to hear what they were saying, through the humming of the blood, which was boiling in his temples.
"Oh!" said the young girl, without raising her eyes, "do not despise me, monseigneur Phoebus.
The young girl looked at him in affright: "Hate me! what have I done?"
"Alas!" said she, "'tis because I am breaking a vow.
What need have I of father or mother now?"
So saying, she fixed upon the captain her great black eyes, moist with joy and tenderness.
La Esmeralda remained silent for a moment, then a tear dropped from her eyes, a sigh from her lips, and she said, "Oh! monseigneur, I love you."
Such a perfume of chastity, such a charm of virtue surrounded the young girl, that Phoebus did not feel completely at his ease beside her.
But this remark emboldened him: "You love me!" he said with rapture, and he threw his arm round the gypsy's waist.
The priest saw it, and tested with the tip of his finger the point of a poniard which he wore concealed in his breast.
"Phoebus," continued the Bohemian, gently releasing her waist from the captain's tenacious hands, "You are good, you are generous, you are handsome; you saved me, me who am only a poor child lost in Bohemia.
"Child!" said the captain, and he unsheathed his sword with a smile.
I love my captain." Phoebus again profited by the opportunity to impress upon her beautiful bent neck a kiss which made the young girl straighten herself up as scarlet as a poppy.
The priest gnashed his teeth over it in the dark.
The captain rose to please her, chiding her with a smile of satisfaction,
"Alas! no," she replied.
Phoebus returned and seated himself beside her, but much closer than before.
The gypsy gave him several little taps with her pretty hand on his mouth, with a childish mirth and grace and gayety.
The captain had repeated this phrase so many times, in many similar conjunctures, that he delivered it all in one breath, without committing a single mistake.
"Oh!" she murmured, "this is the moment when one should die!"
Phoebus found "the moment" favorable for robbing her of another kiss, which went to torture the unhappy archdeacon in his nook.
"Good heavens!" said the poor girl, "and I thought my name pretty because of its singularity!
I know a girl who is bursting with rage over it"
The jealous girl interrupted him: "Who?"
"Oh!"said she.
May the great devil Neptunus spear me if I do not make you the happiest woman in the world.
For several moments the young girl, absorbed in her charming thoughts, was dreaming to the sound of his voice, without listening to the sense of his words.
"Oh! how happy you will be!" continued the captain, and at the same time he gently unbuckled the gypsy's girdle.
"What are you doing?" she said quickly.
This "act of violence" had roused her from her revery.
"When I am with you, Phoebus!" said the young girl tenderly.
The captain, emboldened by her gentleness, clasped her waist without resistance; then began softly to unlace the poor child's corsage, and disarranged her tucker to such an extent that the panting priest beheld the gypsy's beautiful shoulder emerge from the gauze, as round and brown as the moon rising through the mists of the horizon.
The young girl allowed Phoebus to have his way.
Suddenly she turned towards him,
"Phoebus," she said, with an expression of infinite love, "instruct me in thy religion."
"In order that we may be married," she replied.
"Ah, bah!" said he, "do people marry?"
The Bohemian turned pale, and her head drooped sadly on her breast.
While speaking thus in his softest voice, he approached extremely near the gypsy; his caressing hands resumed their place around her supple and delicate waist, his eye flashed more and more, and everything announced that Monsieur Phoebus was on the verge of one of those moments when Jupiter himself commits so many follies that Homer is obliged to summon a cloud to his rescue.
The door was made of thoroughly rotten cask staves, which left large apertures for the passage of his hawklike gaze.
This young and beautiful girl given over in disarray to the ardent young man, made melted lead flow in hisveins; his eyes darted with sensual jealousy beneath all those loosened pins.
Any one who could, at that moment, have seen the face of the unhappy man glued to the wormeaten bars, would have thought that he beheld the face of a tiger glaring from the depths of a cage at some jackal devouring a gazelle.
The poor child, who had remained pale and dreamy, awoke with a start; she recoiled hastily from the enterprising officer, and, casting a glance at her bare neck and shoulders, red, confused, mute with shame, she crossed her two beautiful arms on her breast to conceal it.
Had it not been for the flame which burned in her cheeks, at the sight of her so silent and motionless, one would have. declared her a statue of Modesty.
But the captain's gesture had revealed the mysterious amulet which she wore about her neck.
"What is that?" he said, seizing this pretext to approach once more the beautiful creature whom he had just alarmed.
"Don't touch it!" she replied, quickly, "'tis my guardian.
My mother! My poor mother!
My mother! Where art thou?
"I do not love him!" exclaimed the unhappy child, and at the same time she clung to the captain, whom she drew to a seat beside her. "I do not love thee, my Phoebus?
What art thou saying, wicked man, to break my heart?
Whatmatters to me my mother!
'Tis thou who art my mother since I love thee!
Well, no! We will not marry, since that displeases thee; and then, what am I? a miserable girl of the gutters; whilst thou, my Phoebus, art a gentleman.
I was mad. No, Phoebus, no; I will be thy mistress, thy amusement, thy pleasure, when thou wilt; a girl who shall belong to thee.
So saying, she threw her arms round the officer's neck; she looked up at him, supplicatingly, with a beautiful smile, and all in tears.
Her delicate neck rubbed against his cloth doublet with its rough embroideries.
She writhed on her knees, her beautiful body half naked.
The intoxicated captain pressed his ardent lips to those lovely African shoulders.
The young girl, her eyes bent on the ceiling, as she leaned backwards, quivered, all palpitating, beneath this kiss.
All at once, above Phoebus's head she beheld another head; a green, livid, convulsed face, with the look of a lost soul; near this face was a hand grasping a poniard.It was the face and hand of the priest; he had broken the door and he was there.
The young girl remained motionless, frozen with terror, dumb, beneath that terrible apparition, like a dove which should raise its head at the moment when the hawk is gazing into her nest with its round eyes.
At the moment when her eyes closed, when all feeling vanished in her, she thought that she felt a touch of fire imprinted upon her lips, a kiss more burning than the redhot iron of the executioner.
When she recovered her senses, she was surrounded by soldiers of the watch they were carrying away the captain, bathed in his blood the priest had disappeared; the window at the back of the room which opened on the river was wide open; they picked up a cloak which they supposed to belong to the officer and she heard them saying around her,
For a whole month they had not known what had become of la Esmeralda, which greatly pained the Duke of Egypt and his friends the vagabonds, nor what had become of the goat, which redoubled Gringoire's grief.
Some tormenting bootblacks had told Gringoire about meeting her that same evening near the Pont SaintMichel, going offwith an officer; but this husband, after the fashion of Bohemia, was an incredulous philosopher, and besides, he, better than any one else, knew to what a point his wife was virginal.
He had been able to form a judgment as to the unconquerable modesty resulting from the combined virtues of the amulet and the gypsy, and he had mathematically calculated the resistance of that chastity to the second power.
Accordingly, he was at ease on that score.
Still he could not understand this disappearance.
He had forgotten everything, even his literary tastes, even his great work, ~De figuris regularibus et irregularibus~, which it was his intention to have printed with the first money which he should procure (for he had raved over printing, ever since he had seen the "Didascalon" of Hugues de Saint Victor, printed with the celebrated characters of Vindelin de Spire).
One day, as he was passing sadly before the criminal Tournelle, he perceived a considerable crowd at one of the gates of the Palais de Justice.
"What is this?" he inquired of a young man who was coming out.
"I know not, sir," replied the young man. "'Tis said that they are trying a woman who hath assassinated a gendarme.
He dared not tell the young man that he was acquainted with his brother the archdeacon, to whom he had not returned after the scene in the church; a negligence which embarrassed him.
The scholar went his way, and Gringoire set out to follow the crowd which was mounting the staircase of the great chamber.
In his opinion, there was nothing like the spectacle of a criminal process for dissipating melancholy, so exhilaratingly stupid are judges as a rule.
The populace which he had joined walked and elbowed in silence.
After a slow and tiresome march through a long, gloomy corridor, which wound through the courthouse like the intestinal canal of the ancient edifice, he arrived near a low door, opening upon a hall which his lofty stature permitted him to survey with a glance over the waving heads of the rabble.
"Monsieur," Gringoire inquired of one of his neighbors, "who are all those persons ranged yonder, like prelates in council?"
"And those sheep behind him?" continued Gringoire, who as we have seen, did not love the magistracy, which arose, possibly, from the grudge which he cherished against the Palais de Justice since his dramatic misadventure.
"He is monsieur the clerk of the Court of Parliament."
"'Tis a woman, sir.
You cannot see her. She has her back turned to us, and she is hidden from us by the crowd.
Stay, yonder she is, where you see a group of partisans."
"Who is the woman?" asked Gringoire. "Do you know her name?"
"Monsieur," remarked his neighbor, "think you not, that Master Jacques Charmolue has a very sweet air?"
"Messeigneurs," said an old woman in the middle of the hall, whose form was so concealed beneath her garments that one would have pronounced her a walking heap of rags; "Messeigneurs, the thing is as true as that I am la Falourdel, established these forty years at the Pont Saint Michel, and paying regularly my rents, lord's dues, and quit rents; at the gate opposite the house of TassinCaillart, the dyer, which is on the side up the rivera poor old woman now, but a pretty maid in former days, my lords.
Some one said to me lately,'La Falourdel, don't use your spinningwheel too much in the evening; the devil is fond of combing the distaffs of old women with his horns.
Take care, La Falourdel, that he doth not knock at your door.' One evening I was spinning on my wheel, there comes a knock at my door; I ask who it is.
A man in black and a handsome officer.
Of the black man nothing could be seen but his eyes, two coals of fire.
On arriving at the upper chamber, and while my back is turned, the black man disappears.
In about the time it takes to spin a quarter of a handful of flax, be returns with a beautiful young girl, a doll who would have shone like the sun had she been coiffed.
She had with her a goat; a big billy goat, whether black or white, I no longer remember.
The girl does not concern me, but the goat!
They are so like a man.
I know not why I fell to thinking of the surly monk whom the goat had put into my head again, and then the beautiful girl was rather strangely decked out.
We go up stairs, and what do we find? my poor chamber all blood, the captain stretched out at full length with a dagger in his neck, the girl pretending to be dead, and the goat all in a fright. 'Pretty work!'
They carried off the officer, poor young man, and the wench with her bosom all bare. But wait, the worst is that on the next day, when I wanted to take the crown to buy tripe, I found a dead leaf in its place."
The old woman ceased.
"Silence!" said he. "I pray the gentlemen not to lose sight of the fact that a dagger was found on the person of the accused.
"Yes, monseigneur," she replied; "I found it again. Here it is."
A counsellor took up the word. "Witness, two men went upstairs together in your house: the black man, whom you first saw disappear and afterwards swimming in the Seine, with his priestly garments, and the officer.
Which of the two handed you the crown?" The old woman pondered for a moment and then said, "The officer."
But Master Philippe Lheulier, advocate extraordinary to the king, interposed once more. "I will recall to these gentlemen, that in the deposition taken at his bedside, the assassinated officer, while declaring that he had a vague idea when the black man accosted him that the latter might be the surly monk, added that the phantom had pressed him eagerly to go and make acquaintance with the accused; and upon his, the captain's, remarking that he had no money, he had given him the crown which the said officer paid to la Falourdel.
"You have the documents, gentlemen," added the king's advocate, as he took his seat; "you can consult the testimony of Phoebus de Chteaupers."
At that name, the accused sprang up, her head rose above the throng. Gringoire with horror recognized la Esmeralda.
She was pale; her tresses, formerly so gracefully braided and spangled with sequins, hung in disorder; her lips were blue, her hollow eyes were terrible.
"Phoebus!" she said, in bewilderment; "where is he?
O messeigneurs! before you kill me, tell me, for pity sake, whether he still lives?"
"Hold your tongue, woman," replied the president, "that is no affair of ours."
"Oh! for mercy's sake, tell me if he is alive!" she repeated, clasping her beautiful emaciated hands; and the sound of her chains in contact with her dress, was heard.
The unhappy girl fell back on her criminal's seat, speechless, tearless, white as a wax figure.
The president bent down to a man at his feet, who wore a gold cap and a black gown, a chain on his neck and a wand in his hand.
Suddenly it caught sight of the gypsy girl, and leaping over the table and the head of a clerk, in two bounds it was at her knees; then it rolled gracefully on its mistress's feet, soliciting a word or a caress; but the accused remained motionless, and poor Djali himself obtained not a glance.
We find, among others in the accounts of the provost's office for 1466, a curious detail concerning the expenses of the trial of GilletSoulart and his sow, "executed for their demerits," at Corbeil.
"He is destroying himself!" he cried aloud; "You see well that he does not know what he is doing."
It was far worse when the procurator of the king, having emptied upon a floor a certain bag filled with movable letters, which Djali wore round his neck, they beheld the goat extract with his hoof from the scattered alphabet the fatal name of Phoebus.
The witchcraft of which the captain had been the victim appeared irresistibly demonstrated, and in the eyes of all, the gypsy, that ravishing dancer, who had so often dazzled the passersby with her grace, was no longer anything but a frightful vampire.
However, she betrayed no sign of life; neither Djali's graceful evolutions, nor the menaces of the court, nor the suppressed imprecations of the spectators any longer reached her mind.
In order to arouse her, a police officer was obliged to shake her unmercifully, and the president had to raise his voice,"Girl, you are of the Bohemian race, addicted to deeds of witchcraft.
"Horror!" exclaimed the young girl, hiding her face in her hands. "My Phoebus!
"Do I deny it?" she said with terrible accents; and she rose with flashing eyes.
"Oh, gentlemen! have mercy! I am but a poor girl"
The unhappy girl quivered in every limb.
But she rose at the command of the men with partisans, and walked with a tolerably firm step, preceded by Charmolue and the priests of the officiality, between two rows of halberds, towards a mediumsized door which suddenly opened and closed again behind her, and which produced upon the griefstricken Gringoire the effect of a horrible mouth which had just devoured her.
When she disappeared, they heard a plaintive bleating; it was the little goat mourning.
A counsellor having remarked that the gentlemen were fatigued, and that it would be a long time to wait until the torture was at an end, the president replied that a magistrate mustknow how to sacrifice himself to his duty.
After ascending and descending several steps in the corridors, which were so dark that they were lighted by lamps at midday, La Esmeralda, still surrounded by her lugubrious escort, was thrust by the police into a gloomy chamber.
By the light which escaped from it, the prisoner beheld, all about the room, frightful instruments whose use she did not understand.
In vain did the poor girl summon up her courage; on entering this chamber she was stricken with horror.
"My dear child," said he, "do you still persist in your denial?"
"Yes," she replied, in a dying voice.
"If I shut the door," he muttered, "my fire will go out."
That leather bed on which so many unhappy wretches had writhed, frightened her.
Terror chilled the very marrow of her bones; she stood there bewildered and stupefied.
At a sign from Charmolue, the two assistants took her and placed her in a sitting posture on the bed.
They did her no harm; but when these men touched her, when that leather touched her, she felt all her blood retreat to her heart.
It seemed to her as though she beheld advancing from all quarters towards her, with the intention of crawling up her body and biting and pinching her, all those hideous implements of torture, which as compared to the instruments of all sorts she had hitherto seen, were like what bats, centipedes, and spiders are among insects and birds.
"Here," replied a black gown whom she had not before noticed.
This time she could only make a sign with her head.
"With the boot," he said at last.
The unfortunate girl felt herself so utterly abandoned by God and men, that her head fell upon her breast like an inert thing which has no power in itself.
The tormentor and the physician approached her simultaneously.
At the clanking of their frightful irons, the unhappy child quivered like a dead frog which is being galvanized. "Oh!" she murmured, so low that no one heard her; "Oh, my Phoebus!"
Then she fell back once more into her immobility and her marble silence.
This spectacle would have rent any other heart than those of her judges. One would have pronounced her a poor sinful soul, being tortured by Satan beneath the scarlet wicket of hell.
Had the archdeacon been present, he certainly would have recalled at that moment his symbol of the spider and the fly.
Soon the unfortunate girl, through a mist which spread before her eyes, beheld the boot approach; she soon beheld her foot encased between iron plates disappear in the frightful apparatus.
Then terror restored her strength.
"Take that off!" she cried angrily; and drawing herself up, with her hair all dishevelled: "Mercy!" She darted from the bed to fling herself at the feet of the king's procurator, but her leg was fast in the heavy block of oak and iron, and she sank down upon the boot, more crushed than a bee with a lump of lead on its wing.
At a sign from Charmolue, she was replaced on the bed, and two coarse hands adjusted to her delicate waist the strap which hung from the ceiling.
"For the last time, do you confess the facts in the case?" demanded Charmolue, with his imperturbable benignity.
Pierrat turned the handle of the screwjack, the boot was contracted, and the unhappy girl uttered one of those horrible cries which have no orthography in any human language.
"Stop!" said Charmolue to Pierrat. "Do you confess?" he said to the gypsy.
"All!" cried the wretched girl. "I confess!
She had not calculated her strength when she faced the torture. Poor child, whose life up to that time had been so joyous, so pleasant, so sweet, the first pain had conquered her!
"I certainly hope so!" said she.
And she fell back upon the leather bed, dying, doubled up, allowing herself to hang suspended from the strap buckled round her waist.
"Come, fair one, hold up a little," said Master Pierrat, raising her. "You have the air of the lamb of the Golden Fleece which hangs from Monsieur de Bourgogne's neck."
"Yes," she said, so low that her words were lost in her breathing.
"Yes." It was evident that everything within her was broken.
And, addressing the torturers, "Release the prisoner, and take her back to the court."
When the prisoner had been "unbooted," the procurator of the ecclesiastical court examined her foot, which was still swollen with pain.
"Come," said he, "there's no great harm done.
Then he turned to his acolytes of the officiality, "Behold justice enlightened at last!
When she reentered the audience hall, pale and limping, she was received with a general murmur of pleasure.
The little goat also bleated with joy. He tried to run towards his mistress, but they had tied him to the bench.
She had dragged herself to her place.
When Charmolue had installed himself in a magisterial manner in his own, he seated himself, then rose and said, without exhibiting too much selfcomplacency at his success,"The accused has confessed all."
"Bohemian girl," the president continued, "have you avowed all your deeds of magic, prostitution, and assassination on Phoebus de Chteaupers."
"Anything you like," she replied feebly, "but kill me quickly!"
Before he had finished the exordium, the perspiration was starting from his brow, and his eyes from his bead.
All at once, in the middle of a fine period, he interrupted himself, and his glance, ordinarily so gentle and even stupid, became menacing.
"Gentlemen," he exclaimed (this time in French, for it was not in his copy book), "Satan is so mixed up in this affair, that here he is present at our debates, and making sport of their majesty.
So saying, he pointed to the little goat, who, on seeing Charmolue gesticulating, had, in point of fact, thought it appropriate to do the same, and had seated himself on his haunches, reproducing to the best of his ability, with his forepaws and his bearded head the pathetic pantomine of the king's procurator in the ecclesiastical court.
This was, if the reader remembers, one of his prettiest accomplishments.
The goat's hoofs were tied, and the king's procurator resumed the thread of his eloquence.
He put on his cap again and seated himself.
Another man in a black gown rose near the accused; he was her lawyer.The judges, who were fasting, began to grumble.
"Monsieur the President," replied the advocate, "since the defendant has confessed the crime, I have only one word to say to these gentlemen. Here is a text from the Salic law; 'If a witch hath eaten a man, and if she be convicted of it, she shall pay a fine of eight thousand deniers, which amount to two hundred sous of gold.'
The poor accused had the appearance of looking at them, but her troubled eye no longer saw.
Then the clerk began to write; then he handed a long parch ment to the president.
Then the unhappy girl heard the people moving, the pikes clashing, and a freezing voice saying to her,"Bohemian wench, on the day when it shall seem good to our lord the king, at the hour of noon, you will be taken in a tumbrel, in your shift, with bare feet, and a rope about your neck, before the grand portal of NotreDame, and you will there make an apology with a wax torch of the weight of two pounds in your hand, and thence you will be conducted to the Place de Grve, where you will be hanged and strangled on the town gibbet; and likewise your goat; and you will pay to the official three lions of gold, in reparation of the crimes by you committed and by you confessed, of sorcery and magic, debauchery and murder, upon the person of the Sieur Phoebus de Chteaupers.
"Oh! 'tis a dream!" she murmured; and she felt rough hands bearing her away.
Dante could never imagine anything better for his hell.
Between men and himself, the condemned man felt a pile of stones and jailers weighing down upon his head; and the entire prison, the massive bastille was nothing more than an enormous, complicated lock, which barred him off from the rest of the world.
It was in a sloping cavity of this description, in the ~oubliettes~ excavated by SaintLouis, in the ~inpace~ of the Tournelle, that la Esmeralda had been placed on being condemned to death, through fear of her escape, no doubt, with the colossal courthouse over her head.
There she lay, lost in the shadows, buried, hidden, immured.
Any one who could have beheld her in this state, after having seen her laugh and dance in the sun, would have shuddered.
Cold as night, cold as death, not a breath of air in her tresses, not a human sound in her ear, no longer a ray of light in her eyes; snapped in twain, crushed with chains, crouching beside a jug and a loaf, on a little straw, in a pool of water, which was formed under her by the sweating of the prison walls; without motion, almost without breath, she had no longer the power to suffer; Phoebus, the sun, midday, the open air, the streets of Paris, the dances with applause, the sweet babblings of love with the officer; then the priest, the old crone, the poignard, the blood, the torture, the gibbet; all this did, indeed, pass before her mind, sometimes as a charming and golden vision, sometimes as a hideous nightmare; but it was no longer anything but a vague and horrible struggle, lost in the gloom, or distant music played up above ground, and which was no longer audible at the depth where the unhappy girl had fallen.
Since she had been there, she had neither waked nor slept.
In that misfortune, in that cell, she could no longer distinguish her waking hours from slumber, dreams from reality, any more than day from night.
All this was mixed, broken, floating, disseminated confusedly in her thought.
She no longer felt, she no longer knew, she no longer thought; at the most, she only dreamed.
Thus benumbed, frozen, petrified, she had barely noticed on two or three occasions, the sound of a trap door opening somewhere above her, without even permitting the passage of a little light, and through which a hand had tossed her a bit of black bread.
Nevertheless, this periodical visit of the jailer was the sole communication which was left her with mankind.
A single thing still mechanically occupied her ear; above her head, the dampness was filtering through the mouldy stones of the vault, and a drop of water dropped from them at regular intervals.
She listened stupidly to the noise made by this drop of water as it fell into the pool beside her.
This drop of water falling from time to time into that pool, was the only movement which still went on around her, the only clock which marked the time, the only noise which reached her of all the noise made on the surface of the earth.
To tell the whole, however, she also felt, from time to time, in that cesspool of mire and darkness, something cold passing over her foot or her arm, and she shuddered.
How long had she been there?
She had dragged herself along on her hands. Then iron rings that cut her ankles, and chains had rattled.
She had recognized the fact that all around her was wall, that below her there was a pavement covered with moisture and a truss of straw; but neither lamp nor airhole.
Then she had seated herself on that straw and, sometimes, for the sake of changing her attitude, on the last stone step in her dungeon.
For a while she had tried to count the black minutes measured off for her by the drop of water; but that melancholy labor of an ailing brain had broken off of itself in her head, and had left her in stupor.
At length, one day, or one night, (for midnight and midday were of the same color in that sepulchre), she heard above her a louder noise than was usually made by the turnkey when he brought her bread and jug of water.
She raised her head, and beheld a ray of reddish light passing through the crevices in the sort of trapdoor contrived in the roof of the ~inpace~.
At the same time, the heavy lock creaked, the trap grated on its rusty hinges, turned, and she beheld a lantern, a hand, and the lower portions of the bodies of two men, the door being too low to admit of her seeing their heads. The light pained her so acutely that she shut her eyes.
When she opened them again the door was closed, the lantern was deposited on one of the steps of the staircase; a man alone stood before her.
A monk's black cloak fell to his feet, a cowl of the same color concealed his face.
Nothing was visible of his person, neither face nor hands.
But neither he nor she spoke.
The words, the accent, the sound of his voice made her tremble.
"Oh!" said she, "will it be soon?"
Her head, which had been raised with joy, fell back upon her breast. "'Tis very far away yet!" she murmured; "why could they not have done it today?"
"I am very cold," she replied.
She took her feet in her hands, a gesture habitual with unhappy wretches who are cold, as we have already seen in the case of the recluse of the TourRoland, and her teeth chattered.
The priest appeared to cast his eyes around the dungeon from beneath his cowl.
"Yes," she replied, with the bewildered air which unhappiness had given her. "The day belongs to every one, why do they give me only night?"
"I thought I knew once," she said, passing her thin fingers over her eyelids, as though to aid her memory, "but I know no longer." All at once she began to weep like a child.
"Well, follow me." So saying, the priest took her arm.
The unhappy girl was frozen to her very soul.
Yet that hand produced an impression of cold upon her.
"Oh!" she murmured, "'tis the icy hand of death.
The priest threw back his cowl; she looked.
It was the sinister visage which had so long pursued her; that demon's head which had appeared at la Falourdel's, above the head of her adored Phoebus; that eye which she last had seen glittering beside a dagger.
This apparition, always so fatal for her, and which had thus driven her on from misfortune to misfortune, even to torture, roused her from her stupor.
It seemed to her that the sort of veil which had lain thick upon her memory was rent away.
All the details of her melancholy adventure, from the nocturnal scene at la Falourdel's to her condemnation to the Tournelle, recurred to her memory, no longer vague and confused as heretofore, but distinct, harsh, clear, palpitating, terrible.
These souvenirs, half effaced and almost obliterated by excess of suffering, were revived by the sombre figure which stood before her, as the approach of fire causes letters traced upon white paper with invisible ink, to start out perfectly fresh.
It seemed to her that all the wounds of her heart opened and bled simultaneously.
"Hah!" she cried, with her hands on her eyes, and a convulsive trembling, "'tis the priest!"
Then she dropped her arms in discouragement, and remained seated, with lowered head, eyes fixed on the ground, mute and still trembling.
The priest gazed at her with the eye of a hawk which has long been soaring in a circle from the heights of heaven over a poor lark cowering in the wheat, and has long been silently contracting the formidable circles of his flight, and has suddenly swooped down upon his prey like a flash of lightning, and holds it panting in his talons.
"Finish! finish! the last blow!" and she drew her head down in terror between her shoulders, like the lamb awaiting the blow of the butcher's axe.
"So I inspire you with horror?" he said at length.
"Do I inspire you with horror?" he repeated.
"Yes," said she, "the headsman scoffs at the condemned.
Here he has been pursuing me, threatening me, terrifying me for months!
It was he who cast me into this abyss!
Oh heavens! it was he who killed him! my Phoebus!"
Here, bursting into sobs, and raising her eyes to the priest, "Oh! wretch, who are you?
Her tears suddenly ceased, she gazed at him with the look of an idiot.
He had fallen on his knees and was devouring her with eyes of flame.
I love thee!" he cried again.
"What love!" said the unhappy girl with a shudder.
Both remained silent for several minutes, crushed beneath the weight of their emotions; he maddened, she stupefied.
Before I knew you, young girl, I was happy."
"So was I!" she sighed feebly.
More than once my flesh had been moved as a woman's form passed by.
Alas! if the victory has not remained with me, it is the fault of God, who has not created man and the demon of equal force.
Here the priest paused, and the prisoner heard sighs of anguish break from his breast with a sound of the death rattle.
A creature so beautiful that God would have preferred her to the Virgin and have chosen her for his mother and have wished to be born of her if she had been in existence when he was made man!
Her eyes were black and splendid; in the midst of her black locks, some hairs through which the sun shone glistened like threads of gold.
Around her head, in her black tresses, there were disks of metal, which glittered in the sun, and formed a coronet of stars on her brow.
Her brown, supple arms twined and untwined around her waist, like two scarfs.
The form of her body was surprisingly beautiful. Oh! what a resplendent figure stood out, like something luminous even in the sunlight!
Alas, young girl, it was thou!
Then he continued,
It was no simple girl made with a little of our earth, and dimly lighted within by the vacillating ray of a woman's soul. It was an angel! but of shadows and flame, and not of light.
"Yes, dating from that day, there was within me a man whom I did not know.
Do you know, young girl, what I saw thenceforth between my book and me?
But this image had no longer the same color; it was sombre, funereal, gloomy as the black circle which long pursues the vision of the imprudent man who has gazed intently at the sun.
The other end of the thread which the demon had attached to my wings he had fastened to his foot.
A witch enchanted Bruno d'Ast; he had her burned, and was cured.
Thus did he begin your unhappiness, mine, and his own.
"One day,again the sun was shining brilliantlyI behold man pass me uttering your name and laughing, who carries sensuality in his eyes.
The young girl could find but one word:
"Not that name!" said the priest, grasping her arm violently.
He opened his cassock.
His breast was in fact, mangled as by the claw of a tiger, and on his side he had a large and badly healed wound.
"Oh!" said the priest, "young girl, have pity upon me!
Oh! to love a woman! to be a priest! to be hated! to love with all the fury of one's soul; to feel that one would give for the least of her smiles, one's blood, one's vitals, one's fame, one's salvation, one's immortality and eternity, this life and the other; to regret that one is not a king, emperor, archangel, God, in order that one might place a greater slave beneath her feet; to clasp her night and day in one's dreams and one's thoughts, and to behold her in love with the trappings of a soldier and to have nothing to offer her but a priest's dirty cassock, which will inspire her with fear and disgust!
To be present with one's jealousy and one's rage, while she lavishes on a miserable, blustering imbecile, treasures of love and beauty!
Oh heaven! to love her foot, her arm, her shoulder, to think of her blue veins, of her brown skin, until one writhes for whole nights together on the pavement of one's cell, and to behold all those caresses which one has dreamed of, end in torture!
To have succeeded only in stretching her upon the leather bed!
Oh! blessed is he who is sawn between two planks, or torn in pieces by four horses!
Young girl, mercy! a truce for a moment! a few ashes on these live coals!
Have pity, young girl! Have pity upon me!"
The priest writhed on the wet pavement, beating his head against the corners of the stone steps.
The young girl gazed at him, and listened to him.
When he ceased, exhausted and panting, she repeated in a low voice,
The priest dragged himself towards her on his knees.
"I beseech you," he cried, "if you have any heart, do not repulse me! Oh!
When you utter that name, unhappy girl, it is as though you crushed all the fibres of my heart between your teeth.
The hell where you are, shall he paradise; the sight of you is more charming than that of God!
I should have thought the mountains would be shaken in their foundations on the day when a woman would repulse such a love.
"Look, father, you have blood on your fingers!"
The priest remained for several moments as though petrified, with his eyes fixed upon his hand.
"Well, yes!" he resumed at last, with strange gentleness, "insult me, scoff at me, overwhelm me with scorn! but come, come.
He seized her arm, he was beside himself, he tried to drag her away.
She fixed her eye intently on him.
"Ah!" said the priest, releasing her arm, "you are pitiless."
"What has become of Phoebus?" she repeated coldly.
"Dead!" said she, still icy and motionless "then why do you talk to me of living?"
He was not listening to her.
"Oh! yes," said he, as though speaking to himself, "he certainly must be dead.
I believe I touched his heart with the point.
The young girl flung herself upon him like a raging tigress, and pushed him upon the steps of the staircase with supernatural force.
Go, accursed man!
He silently disentangled his feet from the folds of his robe, picked up his lantern again, and slowly began the ascent of the steps which led to the door; he opened the door and passed through it.
All at once, the young girl beheld his head reappear; it wore a frightful expression, and he cried, hoarse with rage and despair,
"I tell you he is dead!"
I do not believe that there is anything sweeter in the world than the ideas which awake in a mother's heart at the sight of her child's tiny shoe; especially if it is a shoe for festivals, for Sunday, for baptism, the shoe embroidered to the very sole, a shoe in which the infant has not yet taken a step.
That shoe has so much grace and daintiness, it is so impossible for it to walk, that it seems to the mother as though she saw her child.
She smiles upon it, she kisses it, she talks to it; she asks herself whether there can actually be a foot so tiny; and if the child be absent, the pretty shoe suffices to place the sweet and fragile creature before her eyes.
She thinks she sees it, she does see it, complete, living, joyous, with its delicate hands, its round head, its pure lips, its serene eyes whose white is blue.
If it is in winter, it is yonder, crawling on the carpet, it is laboriously climbing upon an ottoman, and the mother trembles lest it should approach the fire.
The shoe shows all this to the mother, and makes her heart melt as fire melts wax.
The pretty broidered shoe is no longer anything but an instrument of torture which eternally crushes the heart of the mother.
One May morning, when the sun was rising on one of those dark blue skies against which Garofolo loves to place his Descents from the Cross, the recluse of the TourRoland heard a sound of wheels, of horses and irons in the Place de Grve.
She was somewhat aroused by it, knotted her hair upon her ears in order to deafen herself, and resumed her contemplation, on her knees, of the inanimate object which she had adored for fifteen years.
This little shoe was the universe to her, as we have already said.
The sombre cave of the TourRoland alone knew how many bitter imprecations, touching complaints, prayers and sobs she had wafted to heaven in connection with that charming bauble of rosecolored satin.
It seemed as though her grief were breaking forth more violently than usual; and she could be heard outside lamenting in a loud and monotonous voice which rent the heart.
"Oh my daughter!" she said, "my daughter, my poor, dear little child, so I shall never see thee more!
My God! my God! it would have been better not to give her to me than to take her away so soon.
Did you not know that our children are part of ourselves, and that a mother who has lost her child no longer believes in God?
Lord! to have taken her from me thus; you could never have looked at me with her, when I was joyously warming her at my fire, when she laughed as she suckled, when I made her tiny feet creep up my breast to my lips?
My daughter! my daughter! what did they do with thee?
Lord, give her back to me.
Give her back to me one day, one hour, one minute; one minute, Lord! and then cast me to the demon for all eternity!
Have you no pity on her pretty little shoe?
Could you condemn a poor mother to this torture for fifteen years?
Good Virgin! good Virgin of heaven! my infant Jesus has been taken from me, has been stolen from me; they devoured her on a heath, they drank her blood, they cracked her bones!
My daughter, I want my daughter!
What is it to me that she is in paradise?
Has the good God no mercy?Oh! give me only salt and black bread, only let me have my daughter to warm me like a sun! Alas!
Alas! Lord my God, I am only a vile sinner; but my daughter made me pious.
I was full of religion for the love of her, and I beheld you through her smile as through an opening into heaven.
Oh! if I could only once, just once more, a single time, put this shoe on her pretty little pink foot, I would die blessing you, good Virgin.
Ah! fifteen years! she will be grown up now! Unhappy child! what! it is really true then I shall never see her more, not even in heaven, for I shall not go there myself.
Oh! what misery to think that here is her shoe, and that that is all!"
The unhappy woman flung herself upon that shoe; her consolation and her despair for so many years, and her vitals were rent with sobs as on the first day; because, for a mother who has lost her child, it is always the first day.
Every time that children crossed her vision or struck her ear, the poor mother flung herself into the darkest corner of her sepulchre, and one would have said, that she sought to plunge her head into the stone in order not to hear them.
Thistime, on the contrary, she drew herself upright with a start, and listened eagerly.
"They are going to hang a gypsy today." With the abrupt leap of that spider which we have seen fling itself upon a fly at the trembling of its web, she rushed to her airhole, which opened as the reader knows, on the Place de Grve.
The sacked nun sought with her eyes some passerby whom she might question. All at once, beside her cell, she perceived a priest making a pretext of reading the public breviary, but who was much less occupied with the "lectern of latticed iron," than with the gallows, toward which he cast a fierce and gloomy glance from time to time.
She recognized monsieur the archdeacon of Josas, a holy man.
"Father," she inquired, "whom are they about to hang yonder?" The priest looked at her and made no reply; she repeated her question.
Then he said, "I know not."
They devoured my little daughter, my child, my only child!
The priest looked at her coldly.
"There is one in particular whom I hate, and whom I have cursed," she resumed; "it is a young one, of the age which my daughter would be if her mother had not eaten my daughter.
Every time that that young viper passes in front of my cell, she sets my blood in a ferment."
His head fell upon his bosom and he moved slowly away.
The recluse writhed her arms with joy.
"I predicted it for her, that she would ascend thither!
Thanks, priest!" she cried.
And she began to pace up and down with long strides before the grating of her window, her hair dishevelled, her eyes flashing, with her shoulder striking against the wall, with the wild air of a female wolf in a cage, who has long been famished, and who feels the hour for her repast drawing near.
When the archdeacon had repeated to the condemned girl; "He is dead," the fact is that he knew nothing about it, but that he believed it, that he counted on it, that he did not doubt it, that he devoutly hoped it.
It would have been too hard for him to give favorable news of his rival to the woman whom he loved.
Any man would have done the same in his place.
The physician, to whom the soldiers of the watch had carried him at the first moment, had feared for his life during the space of a week, and had even told him so in Latin.
But youth had gained the upper hand; and, as frequently happens, in spite of prognostications and diagnoses, nature had amused herself by saving the sick man under the physician's very nose.
It was while he was still lying on the leech's pallet that he had submitted to the interrogations of Philippe Lheulier and the official inquisitors, which had annoyed him greatly.
Hence, one fine morning, feeling himself better, he had left his golden spurs with the leech as payment, and had slipped away.
Phoebus, on his side, had not fled far.
He had simply rejoined his company in garrison at QueueenBrie, in the IsledeFrance, a few stages from Paris.
On the whole, he did not know what to think of the whole affair.
Superstitious, and not given to devoutness, like every soldier who is only a soldier, when he came to question himself about this adventure, he did not feel assured as to the goat, as to the singular fashion in which he had met La Esmeralda, as to the no less strange manner in which she had allowed him to divine her love, as to her character as a gypsy, and lastly, as to the surly monk.
He perceived in all these incidents much more magic than love, probably a sorceress, perhaps the devil; a comedy, in short, or to speak in the language of that day, a very disagreeable mystery, in which he played a very awkward part, the role of blows and derision.
The captain was quite put out of countenance about it; he experienced that sort of shame which our La Fontaine has so admirably defined,
Moreover, he hoped that the affair would not get noised abroad, that his name would hardly be pronounced in it, and that in any case it would not go beyond the courts of the Tournelle.
In this he was not mistaken, there was then no "Gazette des Tribunaux;" and as not a week passed which had not its counterfeiter to boil, or its witch to hang, or its heretic to burn, at some one of the innumerable justices of Paris, people were so accustomed to seeing in all the squares the ancient feudal Themis, bare armed, with sleeves stripped up, performing her duty at the gibbets, the ladders, and the pillories, that they hardly paid any heed to it.
Hence Phoebus's mind was soon at ease on the score of the enchantress Esmeralda, or Similar, as he called her, concerning the blow from the dagger of the Bohemian or of the surly monk (it mattered little which tohim), and as to the issue of the trial.
But as soon as his heart was vacant in that direction, FleurdeLys returned to it.
FleurdeLys was his last passion but one, a pretty girl, a charming dowry; accordingly, one fine morning, quite cured, and assuming that, after the lapse of two months, the Bohemian affair must be completely finished and forgotten, the amorous cavalier arrived on a prancing horse at the door of the Gondelaurier mansion.
He paid no attention to a tolerably numerous rabble which had assembled in the Place du Parvis, before the portal of NotreDame; he remembered that it was the month of May; he supposed that it was some procession, some Pentecost, some festival, hitched his horse to the ring at the door, and gayly ascended the stairs to his beautiful betrothed.
She was alone with her mother.
The scene of the witch, her goat, her cursed alphabet, and Phoebus's long absences, still weighed on FleurdeLys's heart.
Nevertheless, when she beheld her captain enter, she thought him so handsome, his doublet so new, his baldrick so shining, and his air so impassioned, that she blushed with pleasure.
Her magnificent blond hair was plaited in a ravishing manner, she was dressed entirely in that sky blue which becomes fair people so well, a bit of coquetry which she had learned from Colombe, and her eyes were swimming in that languor of love which becomes them still better.
Phoebus, who had seen nothing in the line of beauty, since he left the village maids of QueueenBrie, was intoxicated with FleurdeLys, which imparted to our officer so eager and gallant an air, that his peace was immediately made.
Madame de Gondelaurier herself, still maternally seated in her big arm chair, had not the heart to scold him.
The young girl was seated near the window still embroidering her grotto of Neptune.
The captain was leaning over the back of her chair, and she was addressing her caressing reproaches to him in a low voice.
"What has become of you these two long months, wicked man?"
"Ill!" she repeated in alarm.
"What is that to me?" exclaimed FleurdeLys, raising her beautiful eyes filled with tears.
That is all." The mendacious captain was perfectly well aware that an affair of honor always makes a man stand well in the eyes of a woman.
Still, she was not completely reassured.
"Provided that you are wholly cured, my Phoebus!" said she. "I do not know your Mah Fdy, but he is a villanous man.
Here Phoebus, whose imagination was endowed with but mediocre power of creation, began to find himself in a quandary as to a means of extricating himself for his prowess.
"Oh! how do I know?a mere nothing, a horse, a remark! Fair cousin," he exclaimed, for the sake of changing the conversation, "what noise is this in the Cathedral Square?"
The captain was so thoroughly persuaded that la Esmeralda's affair was concluded, that he was but little disturbed by Fleur deLys's words.
Still, he asked her one or two questions.
"What is the name of this witch?" "I do not know," she replied.
"And what is she said to have done?" She shrugged her white shoulders.
"Oh, ~mon Dieu~ Jesus!" said her mother; "there are so many witches nowadays that I dare say they burn them without knowing their names.
The good God keeps his register."
"Good Lord! you are right, Phoebus," said she.
Phoebus had returned and was leaning on the back of his betrothed's chair, a charming post whence his libertine glance plunged into all the openings of FleurdeLys's gorget.
The young girl raised sweet, enraptured eyes to him from time to time, and their hair mingled in a ray of spring sunshine.
"Phoebus," said FleurdeLys suddenly, in a low voice, "we are to be married three months hence; swear to me that you have never loved any other woman than myself."
"I swear it, fair angel!" replied Phoebus, and his passionate glances aided the sincere tone of his voice in convincing FleurdeLys.
Meanwhile, the good mother, charmed to see the betrothed pair on terms of such perfect understanding, had just quitted the apartment to attend to some domestic matter; Phoebus observed it, and this so emboldened the adventurous captain that very strange ideas mounted to his brain.
FleurdeLys loved him, he was her betrothed; she was alone with him; his former taste for her had reawakened, not with all its fresh ness but with all its ardor; after all, there is no great harm in tasting one's wheat while it is still in the blade; I do not know whether these ideas passed through his mind, but one thing is certain, that FleurdeLys was suddenly alarmed by the expression of his glance.
She looked round and saw that her mother was no longer there.
"Good heavens!" said she, blushing and uneasy, "how very warm I am?"
And like a fawn who feels the breath of the pack of hounds, she rose, ran to the window, opened it, and rushed upon the balcony.
Phoebus, much discomfited, followed her.
Is she to be hung yonder?"
"Fool! t'is here that she is to make her apology in her shift! the good God is going to cough Latin in her face!
"Tell me, la Boucanbry? Is it true that she has refused a confessor?"
"You see what a pagan she is!"
The bailiff of the courts is bound to deliver the malefactor ready judged for execution if he be a layman, to the provost of Paris; if a clerk, to the official of the bishopric."
This thought filled with sadness the glance which she cast upon the populace.
The captain, much more occupied with her than with that pack of the rabble, was amorously rumpling her girdle behind.
If my mother were to return, she would see your hand!"
"There she is!"
FleurdeLys pressed her hands to her eyes, that she might not see.
"Charming girl," said Phoebus, "do you wish to withdraw?"
"No," she replied; and she opened through curiosity, the eyes which she had closed through fear.
In the fatal cart sat a young girl with her arms tied behind her back, and with no priest beside her.
She was in her shift; her long black hair (the fashion then was to cut it off only at the foot of the gallows) fell in disorder upon her halfbared throat and shoulders.
Athwart that waving hair, more glossy than the plumage of a raven, a thick, rough, gray rope was visible, twisted and knotted, chafing her delicate collarbones and twining round the charming neck of the poor girl, like an earthworm round a flower.
Beneath that rope glittered a tiny amulet ornamented with bits of green glass, which had been left to her no doubt, because nothing is refused to those who are about to die.
The spectators in the windows could see in the bottom of the cart her naked legs which she strove to hide beneath her, as by a final feminine instinct.
At her feet lay a little goat, bound.
The condemned girl held together with her teeth her imperfectly fastened shift.
One would have said that she suffered still more in her misery from being thus exposed almost naked to the eyes of all.
So saying, she turned to Phoebus.
"What Bohemian with the goat?" he stammered.
Phoebus interrupted her.
"What is the matter with you?" she said to Phoebus, "one would say, that this woman had disturbed you."
"Remain, then!" she continued imperiously, "and let us see the end."
He was somewhat reassured by the fact that the condemned girl never removed her eyes from the bottom of the cart.
In this last stage of opprobrium and misfortune, she was still beautiful; her great black eyes appeared still larger, because of the emaciation of her cheeks; her pale profile was pure and sublime.
She resembled what she had been, in the same degree that a virgin by Masaccio, resembles a virgin of Raphael,weaker, thinner, more delicate.
Moreover, there was nothing in her which was not shaken in some sort, and which with the exception of her modesty, she did not let go at will, so profoundly had she been broken by stupor and despair.
Her body bounded at every jolt of the tumbrel like a dead or broken thing; her gaze was dull and imbecile.
A tear was still visible in her eyes, but motionless and frozen, so to speak.
But as a faithful historian, we must state that on beholding her so beautiful, so depressed, many were moved with pity, even among the hardest of them.
But a few heads of priests could be seen moving confusedly in the distant choir stalls, and, at the moment when the great door opened, there escaped from the church a loud, solemn, and monotonous chanting, which cast over the head of the condemned girl, in gusts, fragments of melancholy psalms,
"He that heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me, hath eternal life, and hath not come into condemnation; but is passed from death to life."
The unhappy girl seemed to lose her sight and her consciousness in the obscure interior of the church.
Her white lips moved as though in prayer, and the headsman's assistant who approached to assist her to alight from the cart, heard her repeating this word in a low tone,"Phoebus."
They untied her hands, made her alight, accompanied by her goat, which had also been unbound, and which bleated with joy at finding itself free: and they made her walk barefoot on the hard pavement to the foot of the steps leading to the door.
The rope about her neck trailed behind her.
One would have said it was a serpent following her.
The halberds of the motley beadles clanked; and, a few moments later, a long procession of priests in chasubles, and deacons in dalmatics, marched gravely towards the condemned girl, as they drawled their song, spread out before her view and that of the crowd.
But her glance rested on the one who marched at the head, immediately after the crossbearer.
"Oh!" she said in a low voice, and with a shudder, "'tis he again! the priest!"
On his left he had the sub chanter, on his right, the chanter, armed with his official wand.
He advanced with head thrown back, his eyes fixed and wide open, intoning in a strong voice,
At the moment when he made his appearance in the full daylight beneath the lofty arched portal, enveloped in an ample cope of silver barred with a black cross, he was so pale that more than one person in the crowd thought that one of the marble bishops who knelt on the sepulchral stones of the choir had risen and was come to receive upon the brink of the tomb, the woman who was about to die.
She, no less pale, no less like a statue, had hardly noticed that they had placed in her hand a heavy, lighted candle of yellow wax; she had not heard the yelping voice of the clerk reading the fatal contents of the apology; when they told her to respond with Amen, she responded Amen.
She only recovered life and force when she beheld the priest make a sign to her guards to withdraw, and himself advance alone towards her.
Then she felt her blood boil in her head, and a remnant of indignation flashed up in that soul already benumbed and cold.
The archdeacon approached her slowly; even in that extremity, she beheld him cast an eye sparkling with sensuality, jealousy, and desire, over her exposed form.
Then he said aloud,
"Young girl, have you asked God's pardon for your faults and shortcomings?"
He bent down to her ear, and added (the spectators supposed that he was receiving her last confession): "Will you have me?
At that moment the wretched archdeacon raised his head mechanically and beheld at the other end of the Place, in the balcony of the Gondelaurier mansion, the captain standing beside FleurdeLys.
He staggered, passed his hand across his eyes, looked again, muttered a curse, and all his features were violently contorted.
"No one shall have you." Then, raising his hand over the gypsy, he exclaimed in a funereal voice:"Go now, soul, trembling in the balance, and God have mercy upon thee."
He turned his back on the condemned girl, his head sank upon his breast once more, he crossed his hands and rejoined his escort of priests, and a moment later he was seen to disappear, with the cross, the candles, and the copes, beneath the misty arches of the cathedral, and his sonorous voice was extinguished by degrees in the choir, as he chanted this verse of despair,
The condemned girl remained motionless in her place, waiting to be disposed of.
There was considerable difficulty in drawing him away from that contemplation, but at length he turned round; and, at a signal which he gave, two men clad in yellow, the executioner's assistants, approached the gypsy to bind her hands once more.
The unhappy creature, at the moment of mounting once again the fatal cart, and proceeding to her last haltingplace, was seized, possibly, with some poignant clinging to life.
She raised her dry, red eyes to heaven, to the sun, to the silvery clouds, cut here and there by a blue trapezium or triangle; then she lowered them to objects around her, to the earth, the throng, the houses; all at once, while the yellow man was binding her elbows, she uttered a terrible cry, a cry of joy.
Yonder, on that balcony, at the corner of the Place, she had just caught sight of him, of her friend, her lord, Phoebus, the other apparition of her life!
The judge had lied! the priest had lied! it was certainly he, she could not doubt it; he was there, handsome, alive, dressed in his brilliant uniform, his plume on his head, his sword by his side!
"Phoebus!" she cried, "my Phoebus!"
And she tried to stretch towards him arms trembling with love and rapture, but they were bound.
Then she saw the captain frown, a beautiful young girl who was leaning against him gazed at him with disdainful lips and irritated eyes; then Phoebus uttered some words which did not reach her, and both disappeared precipitately behind the window opening upon the balcony, which closed after them.
"Phoebus!" she cried wildly, "can it be you believe it?" A monstrous thought had just presented itself to her.
She remembered that she had been condemned to death for murder committed on the person of Phoebus de Chteaupers.
"Come," said Charmolue, "carry her to the cart, and make an end of it."
And at the very beginning he had securely fastened to one of the small columns a large knotted rope, one end of which trailed on the flight of steps below.
This being done, he began to look on tranquilly, whistling from time to time when a blackbird flitted past.
Suddenly, at the moment when the superintendent's assistants were preparing to execute Charmolue's phlegmatic order, he threw his leg over the balustrade of the gallery, seized the rope with his feet, his knees and his hands; then he was seen to glide down the faade, as a drop of rain slips down a window pane, rush to the two executioners with the swiftness of a cat which has fallen from a roof, knock them down with two enormous fists, pick up the gypsy with one hand, as a child would her doll, and dash back into the church with a single bound, lifting the young girl above his head and crying in a formidable voice,
This shock restored the condemned girl to her senses.
She raised her eyelids, looked at Quasimodo, then closed them again suddenly, as though terrified by her deliverer.
In fact, within the bounds of NotreDame, the condemned girl could not be touched.
Quasimodo had halted beneath the great portal, his huge feet seemed as solid on the pavement of the church as the heavy Roman pillars.
His great, bushy head sat low between his shoulders, like the heads of lions, who also have a mane and no neck.
He held the young girl, who was quivering all over, suspended from his horny hands like a white drapery; but he carried her with as much care as though he feared to break her or blight her.
One would have said that he felt that she was a delicate, exquisite, precious thing, made for other hands than his.
There were moments when he looked as if not daring to touch her, even with his breath.
Then, all at once, he would press her forcibly in his arms, against his angular bosom, like his own possession, his treasure, as the mother of that child would have done.
His gnome's eye, fastened upon her, inundated her with tenderness, sadness, and pity, and was suddenly raised filled with lightnings.
Then the women laughed and wept, the crowd stamped with enthusiasm, for, at that moment Quasimodo had a beauty of his own.
He was handsome; he, that orphan, that foundling, that outcast, he felt himself august and strong, he gazed in the face of that society from which he was banished, and in which he had so powerfully intervened, of that human justice from which he had wrenched its prey, of all those tigers whose jaws were forced to remain empty, of those policemen, those judges, those executioners, of all that force of the king which he, the meanest of creatures, had just broken, with the force of God.
Meanwhile, after several moments of triumph, Quasimodo had plunged abruptly into the church with his burden.
The populace, fond of all prowess, sought him with their eyes, beneath the gloomy nave, regretting that he had so speedily disappeared from their acclamations.
All at once, he was seen to reappear at one of the extremities of the gallery of the kings of France; he traversed it, running like a madman, raising his conquest high in his arms and shouting: "Sanctuary!" The crowd broke forth into fresh applause.
The gallery passed, he plunged once more into the interior of the church.
A moment later, he reappeared upon the upper platform, with the gypsy still in his arms, still running madly, still crying, "Sanctuary!" and the throng applauded.
Finally, he made his appearance for the third time upon the summit of the tower where hung the great bell; from that point he seemed to be showing to the entire city the girl whom he had saved, and his voice of thunder, that voice which was so rarely heard, and which he never heard himself, repeated thrice with frenzy, even to the clouds: "Sanctuary!
Noel!" shouted the populace in its turn; and that immense acclamation flew to astonish the crowd assembled at the Grve on the other bank, and the recluse who was still waiting with her eyes riveted on the gibbet.
Claude Frollo was no longer in NotreDame when his adopted son so abruptly cut the fatal web in which the archdeacon and the gypsy were entangled.
On returning to the sacristy he had torn off his alb, cope, and stole, had flung all into the hands of the stupefied beadle, had made his escape through the private door of the cloister, had ordered a boatman of the Terrain to transport him to the left bank of the Seine, and had plunged into the hilly streets of the University, not knowing whither he was going, encountering at every step groups of men and women who were hurrying joyously towards the Pont SaintMichel, in the hope of still arriving in time to see the witch hung there,pale, wild, more troubled, more blind and more fierce than a night bird let loose and pursued by a troop of children in broad daylight.
He no longer knew where he was, what he thought, or whether he were dreaming.
He went forward, walking, running, taking any street at haphazard, making no choice, only urged ever onward away from the Grve, the horrible Grve, which he felt confusedly, to be behind him.
In this manner he skirted Mount SainteGenevive, and finally emerged from the town by the Porte SaintVictor.
He continued his flight as long as he could see, when he turned round, the turreted enclosure of the University, and the rare houses of the suburb; but, when, at length, a rise of ground had completely concealed from him that odious Paris, when he could believe himself to be a hundred leagues distant from it, in the fields, in the desert, he halted, and it seemed to him that he breathed more freely.
Then frightful ideas thronged his mind.
Once more he could see clearly into his soul, and he shuddered.
He thought of that unhappy girl who had destroyed him, and whom he had destroyed.
He plunged to his heart's content in evil thoughts, and in proportion as he sank deeper, he felt a Satanic laugh burst forth within him.
And as he thus sifted his soul to the bottom, when he perceived how large a space nature had prepared there for the passions, he sneered still more bitterly.
He stirred up in the depths of his heart all his hatred, all his malevolence; and, with the cold glance of a physician who examines a patient, he recognized the fact that this malevolence was nothing but vitiated love; that love, that source of every virtue in man, turned to horrible things in the heart of a priest, and that a man constituted like himself, in making himself a priest, made himself a demon.
Then he laughed frightfully, and suddenly became pale again, when he considered the most sinister side of his fatal passion, of that corrosive, venomous malignant, implacable love, which had ended only in the gibbet for one of them and in hell for the other; condemnation for her, damnation for him.
And then his laughter came again, when he reflected that Phoebus was alive; that after all, the captain lived, was gay and happy, had handsomer doublets than ever, and a new mistress whom he was conducting to see the old one hanged.
His sneer redoubled its bitterness when he reflected that out of the living beings whose death he had desired, the gypsy, the only creature whom he did not hate, was the only one who had not escaped him.
Then from the captain, his thought passed to the people, and there came to him a jealousy of an unprecedented sort. He reflected that the people also, the entire populace, had had before their eyes the woman whom he loved exposed almost naked.
He writhed his arms with agony as he thought that the woman whose form, caught by him alone in the darkness would have been supreme happiness, had been delivered up in broad daylight at full noonday, to a whole people, clad as for a night of voluptuousness.
He wept with rage as he pictured to himself how many impure looks had been gratified at the sight of that badly fastened shift, and that this beautiful girl, this virgin lily, this cup of modesty and delight, to which he would have dared to place his lips only trembling, had just been transformed into a sort of public bowl, whereat the vilest populace ofParis, thieves, beggars, lackeys, had come to quaff in common an audacious, impure, and depraved pleasure.
And when he sought to picture to himself the happiness which he might have found upon earth, if she had not been a gypsy, and if he had not been a priest, if Phoebus had not existed and if she had loved him; when he pictured to himself that a life of serenity and love would have been possible to him also, even to him; that there were at that very moment, here and there upon the earth, happy couples spending the hours in sweet converse beneath orange trees, on the banks of brooks, in the presence of a setting sun, of a starry night; and that if God had so willed, he might have formed with her one of those blessed couples,his heart melted in tenderness and despair.
Oh! she! still she! It was this fixed idea which returned incessantly, which tortured him, which ate into his brain, and rent his vitals.
He did not regret, he did not repent; all that he had done he was ready to do again; he preferred to behold her in the hands of the executioner rather than in the arms of the captain.
But he suffered; he suffered so that at intervals he tore out handfuls of his hair to see whether it were not turning white.
Among other moments there came one, when it occurred to him that it was perhaps the very minute when the hideous chain which he had seen that morning, was pressing its iron noose closer about that frail and graceful neck.
There was another moment when, while laughing diabolically at himself, he represented to himself la Esmeralda as he had seen her on that first day, lively, careless, joyous, gayly attired, dancing, winged, harmonious, and la Esmeralda of the last day, in her scanty shift, with a rope about her neck, mounting slowly with her bare feet, the angular ladder of the gallows; he figured to himself this double picture in such a manner .that he gave vent to a terrible cry.
While this hurricane of despair overturned, broke, tore up, bent, uprooted everything in his soul, he gazed at nature around him.
At his feet, some chickens were searching the thickets and pecking, enamelled beetles ran about in the sun; overhead, some groups of dappled gray clouds were floating across the blue sky; on the horizon, the spire of the Abbey SaintVictor pierced the ridge of the hill with its slate obelisk; and the miller of the Copeaue hillock was whistling as he watched the laborious wings of his mill turning.
He resumed his flight.
This flight from nature, life, himself, man, God, everything, lasted all day long.
Sometimes he flung himself face downward on the, earth, and tore up the young blades of wheat with his nails.
Sometimes he halted in the deserted street of a village, and his thoughts were so intolerable that he grasped his head in both hands and tried to tear it from his shoulders in order to dash it upon the pavement.
Towards the hour of sunset, he examined himself again, and found himself nearly mad.
The tempest which had raged within him ever since the instant when he had lost the hope and the will to save the gypsy,that tempest had not left in his conscience a single healthy idea, a single thought which maintained its upright position.
There remained but two distinct images in his mind, la Esmeralda and the gallows; all the rest was blank.
Those two images united, presented to him a frightful group; and the more he concentrated what attention and thought was left to him, the more he beheld them grow, in accordance with a fantastic progression, the one in grace, in charm, in beauty, in light, the other in deformity and horror; so that at last la Esmeralda appeared to him like a star, the gibbet like an enormous, fleshless arm.
Perhaps he really saw hell beyond it.
He believed himself to be far away from Paris; on taking his bearings, he perceived that he had only circled the enclosure of the University.
The spire of SaintSulpice, and the three lofty needles of Saint GermaindesPrs, rose above the horizon on his right.
He turned his steps in that direction.
When he heard the brisk challenge of the menatarms of the abbey, around the crenelated, circumscribing wall of SaintGermain, he turned aside, took a path which presented itself between the abbey and the lazarhouse of the bourg, and at the expiration of a few minutes found himself on the verge of the PrauxClercs.
The archdeacon was afraid of meeting some one there; he feared every human countenance; he had just avoided the University and the Bourg SaintGermain; he wished to reenter the streets as late as possible.
When the boatman had taken his departure, he remained standing stupidly on the strand, staring straight before him and perceiving objects only through magnifying oscillations which rendered everything a sort of phantasmagoria to him.
Between these two white expanses, the left bank of the Seine, on which his eyes were fixed, projected its gloomy mass and, rendered ever thinner and thinner by perspective, it plunged into the gloom of the horizon like a black spire.
That immense black obelisk thus isolated between the two white expanses of the sky and the river, which was very broad at this point, produced upon Dom Claude a singular effect, comparable to that which would be experienced by a man who, reclining on his back at the foot of the tower of Strasburg, should gaze at the enormous spire plunging into the shadows of the twilight above his head.
Claude, in the state of hallucination in which he found himself, believed that he saw, that he saw with his actual eyes, the bell tower of hell; the thousand lights scattered over the whole height of the terrible tower seemed to him so many porches of the immense interior furnace; the voices and noises which escaped from it seemed so many shrieks, so many death groans.
Then he became alarmed, he put his hands on his ears that he might no longer hear, turned his back that he might no longer see, and fled from the frightful vision with hasty strides.
When he reentered the streets, the passersby elbowing each other by the light of the shopfronts, produced upon him the effect of a constant going and coming of spectres about him.
There were strange noises in his ears; extraordinary fancies disturbed his brain.
He saw neither houses, nor pavements, nor chariots, nor men and women, but a chaos of indeterminate objects whose edges melted into each other.
He thought he heard a cluster of skeletons at Montfauon clashing together in the gloom.
"Oh!" he muttered, "the night breeze dashes them against each other, and mingles the noise of their chains with the rattle of their bones!
Perhaps she is there among them!"
In his state of frenzy, he knew not whither he was going.
After a few strides he found himself on the Pont Saint Michel.
There was a light in the window of a groundfloor room; he approached.
Through a cracked window he beheld a mean chamber which recalled some confused memory to his mind.
In that room, badly lighted by a meagre lamp, there was a fresh, lighthaired young man, with a merry face, who amid loud bursts of laughter was embracing a very audaciously attired young girl; and near the lamp sat an old crone spinning and singing in a quavering voice.
As the young man did not laugh constantly, fragments of the old woman's ditty reached the priest; it was something unintelligible yet frightful,
Bark, Grve, grumble, Grve! Spin, spin, my distaff, spin her rope for the hangman, who is whistling in the meadow.
Thereupon the young man laughed and caressed the wench.
The crone was la Falourdel; the girl was a courtesan; the young man was his brother Jehan.
He saw Jehan go to a window at the end of the room, open it, cast a glance on the quay, where in the distance blazed a thousand lighted casements, and he heard him say as he closed the sash,
How dark it is; the people are lighting their candles, and the good God his stars."
Isabeau, my dear, I shall not be satisfied with Jupiter until he has changed your two white nipples into two black bottles, where I may suck wine of Beaune day and night."
Dom Claude had barely time to fling himself on the ground in order that he might not be met, stared in the face and recognized by his brother.
Nevertheless, he caught sight of the archdeacon prone upon the earth in the mud.
"Oh! oh!" said he; "here's a fellow who has been leading a jolly life, today." He stirred up Dom Claude with his foot, and the latter held his breath.
"Dead drunk," resumed Jehan. "Come, he's full.
He's bald," he added, bending down, "'tis an old man! ~Fortunate senex~!"
"'Tis all the same, reason is a fine thing, and my brother the archdeacon is very happy in that he is wise and has money."
Then the archdeacon rose to his feet, and ran without halting, towards NotreDame, whose enormous towers he beheld rising above the houses through the gloom.
At the instant when he arrived, panting, on the Place du Parvis, he shrank back and dared not raise his eyes to the fatal edifice.
"Oh!" he said, in a low voice, "is it really true that such a thing took place here, today, this very morning?"
Still, he ventured to glance at the church.
The crescent of the moon, in her flight upward from the horizon, had paused at the moment, on the summit of the light hand tower, and seemed to have perched itself, like a luminous bird, on the edge of the balustrade, cut out in black trefoils.
The cloister door was shut; but the archdeacon always carried with him the key of the tower in which his laboratory was situated.
In the church he found the gloom and silence of a cavern.
By the deep shadows which fell in broad sheets from all directions, he recognized the fact that the hangings for the ceremony of the morning had not yet been removed.
The archdeacon, on perceiving these wan spots all around the choir, thought he beheld the mitres of damned bishops.
He shut his eyes, and when he opened them again, he thought they were a circle of pale visages gazing at him.
This fever or madness had reached such a degree of intensity that the external world was no longer anything more for the unhappy man than a sort of Apocalypse, visible, palpable, terrible.
For one moment, he was relieved.
As he plunged into the side aisles, he perceived a reddish light behind a cluster of pillars.
The hook lay open at this passage of Job, over which his staring eye glanced,
On reading these gloomy words, he felt that which a blind man feels when he feels himself pricked by the staff which he has picked up.
His knees gave way beneath him, and he sank upon the pavement, thinking of her who had died that day.
He felt so many monstrous vapors pass and discharge themselves in his brain, that it seemed to him that his head had become one of the chimneys of hell.
It would appear that he remained a long time in this attitude, no longer thinking, overwhelmed and passive beneath the hand of the demon.
At length some strength returned to him; it occurred to him to take refuge in his tower beside his faithful Quasimodo.
He rose; and, as he was afraid, he took the lamp from the breviary to light his way.
It was a sacrilege; but he had got beyond heeding such a trifle now.
He slowly climbed the stairs of the towers, filled with a secret fright which must have been communicated to the rare passersby in the Place du Parvis by the mysterious light of his lamp, mounting so late from loophole to loophole of the bell tower.
All at once, he felt a freshness on his face, and found himself at the door of the highest gallery.
He lowered his gaze, and contemplated for a moment, through the railing of slender columns which unites the two towers, far away, through a gauze of mists and smoke, the silent throng of the roofs of Paris, pointed, innumerable, crowded and small like the waves of a tranquil sea on a sum mer night.
"Oh!" he said in a very low tone, "she must be cold now."
All at once, a gust of wind extinguished his lamp, and almost at the same instant, he beheld a shade, a whiteness, a form, a woman, appear from the opposite angle of the tower.
Beside this woman was a little goat, which mingled its bleat with the last bleat of the clock.
It was she.
She was pale, she was gloomy.
Her hair fell over her shoulders as in the morning; but there was no longer a rope on her neck, her hands were no longer bound; she was free, she was dead.
She was dressed in white and had a white veil on her head.
She came towards him, slowly, with her gaze fixed on the sky.
The supernatural goat followed her.
At every step which she took in advance, he took one backwards, and that was all.
In this way he retreated once more beneath the gloomy arch of the stairway.
He was chilled by the thought that she might enter there also; had she done so, he would have died of terror.
She seemed taller to him than when she had been alive; he saw the moon through her white robe; he heard her breath.
When she had passed on, he began to descend the staircase again, with the slowness which he had observed in the spectre, believing himself to be a spectre too, haggard, with hair on end, his extinguished lamp still in his hand; and as he descended the spiral steps, he distinctly heard in his ear a voice laughing and repeating,
His foot once within the asylum, the criminal was sacred; but he must beware of leaving it; one step outside the sanctuary, and he fell back into the flood.
It sometimes happened that a solemn decree of parliament violated the asylum and restored the condemned man to the executioner; but this was of rare occurrence.
It was here that Quasimodo had deposited la Esmeralda, after his wild and triumphant course.
As long as that course lasted, the young girl had been unable to recover her senses, half unconscious, half awake, no longer feeling anything, except that she was mounting through the air, floating in it, flying in it, that something was raising her above the earth.
From time to time she heard the loud laughter, the noisy voice of Quasimodo in her ear; she half opened her eyes; then below her she confusedly beheld Paris checkered with its thousand roofs of slate and tiles, like a red and blue mosaic, above her head the frightful and joyous face of Quasimodo.
Then her eyelids drooped again; she thought that all was over, that they had executed her during her swoon, and that the misshapen spirit which had presided over her destiny, had laid hold of her and was bearing her away.
She dared not look at him, and she surrendered herself to her fate.
But when the bellringer, dishevelled and panting, had deposited her in the cell of refuge, when she felt his huge hands gently detaching the cord which bruised her arms, she felt that sort of shock which awakens with a start the passengers of a vessel which runs aground in the middle of a dark night.
Her thoughts awoke also, and returned to her one by one.
She saw that she was in NotreDame; she remembered having been torn from the hands of the executioner; that Phoebus was alive, that Phoebus loved her no longer; and as these two ideas, one of which shed so much bitterness over the other, presented themselves simultaneously to the poor condemned girl; she turned to Quasimodo, who was standing in front of her, and who terrified her; she said to him,"Why have you saved me?"
He gazed at her with anxiety, as though seeking to divine what she was saying to him.
She repeated her question.
Then he gave her a profoundly sorrowful glance and fled.
A few moments later he returned, bearing a package which he cast at her feet.
It was clothing which some charitable women had left on the threshold of the church for her.
Then she dropped her eyes upon herself and saw that she was almost naked, and blushed.
He covered his eyes with his large hand and retired once more, but slowly.
She had barely finished when she beheld Quasimodo returning.
It was his own repast, it was his own bed, which the bellringer had gone in search of.
The gypsy raised her eyes to thank him, but she could not articulate a word.
She dropped her head with a quiver of terror.
Then he said to her. 
She was touched and raised her head to answer him.
She found herself alone once more, meditating upon the singular words of this almost monstrous being, and struck by the sound of his voice, which was so hoarse yet so gentle.
Then she examined her cell.
Many gutters with the figures of animals seemed to be bending down around her, and stretching their necks in order to stare at her through the window.
Over the edge of her roof she perceived the tops of thousands of chimneys which caused the smoke of all the fires in Paris to rise beneath her eyes. A sad sight for the poor gypsy, a foundling, condemned to death, an unhappy creature, without country, without family, without a hearthstone.
At the moment when the thought of her isolation thus appeared to her more poignant than ever, she felt a bearded and hairy head glide between her hands, upon her knees.
She started (everything alarmed her now) and looked.
It was the poor goat, the agile Djali, which had made its escape after her, at the moment when Quasimodo had put to flight Charmolue's brigade, and which had been lavishing caresses on her feet for nearly an hour past, without being able to win a glance.
"Oh! Djali!" she said, "how I have forgotten thee!
At the same time, as though an invisible hand had lifted the weight which had repressed her tears in her heart for so long, she began to weep, and, in proportion as her tears flowed, she felt all that was most acrid and bitter in her grief depart with them.
Evening came, she thought the night so beautiful that she made the circuit of the elevated gallery which surrounds the church.
It afforded her some relief, so calm did the earth appear when viewed from that height.
On the following morning, she perceived on awaking, that she had been asleep.
This singular thing astonished her. She had been so long unaccustomed to sleep!
A joyous ray of the rising sun entered through her window and touched her face.
At the same time with the sun, she beheld at that window an object which frightened her, the unfortunate face of Quasimodo. She involuntarily closed her eyes again, but in vain; she fancied that she still saw through the rosy lids that gnome's mask, oneeyed and gaptoothed.
Then, while she still kept her eyes closed, she heard a rough voice saying, very gently,
The gypsy, much touched, opened her eyes.
She made an effort to surmount the repugnance with which he inspired her.
"Come," she said to him gently.
From the movement of the gypsy's lips, Quasimodo thought that she was driving him away; then he rose and retiredlimping, slowly, with drooping head, without even daring to raise to the young girl his gaze full of despair.
"Do come," she cried, but he continued to retreat.
Then she darted from her cell, ran to him, and grasped his arm.
On feeling her touch him, Quasimodo trembled in every limb.
He raised his suppliant eye, and seeing that she was leading him back to her quarters, his whole face beamed with joy and tenderness.
She tried to make him enter the cell; but he persisted in remaining on the threshold. "No, no," said he; "the owl enters not the nest of the lark."
Then she crouched down gracefully on her couch, with her goat asleep at her feet.
Both remained motionless for several moments, considering in silence, she so much grace, he so much ugliness.
Every moment she discovered some fresh deformity in Quasimodo.
Her glance travelled from his knock knees to his humped back, from his humped back to his only eye.
Yet there was so much sadness and so much gentleness spread over all this, that she began to become reconciled to it.
He understood the motion of the head. "Alas!" he said, as though hesitating whether to finish, "I amI am deaf."
"Poor man!" exclaimed the Bohemian, with an expression of kindly pity.
There lay in the accents of the wretched man so profound a consciousness of his misery, that she had not the strength to say a word.
Besides, he would not have heard her.
I am something frightful, neither man nor animal, I know not what, harder, more trampled under foot, and more unshapely than a pebble stone!"
Then he began to laugh, and that laugh was the most heartbreaking thing in the world.
"Well!" she interposed with a smile, "tell me why you saved me."
He watched her attentively while she was speaking.
"I understand," he replied. "You ask me why I saved you.
You have forgotten that wretch; but he remembers it."
"Listen," he resumed, when he was no longer afraid that the tear would escape; "our towers here are very high, a man who should fall from them would be dead before touching the pavement; when it shall please you to have me fall, you will not have to utter even a word, a glance will suffice."
Then he rose.
Unhappy as was the Bohemian, this eccentric being still aroused some compassion in her.
"No, no," said he; "I must not remain too long.
He drew from his pocket a little metal whistle.
"Here," said he, "when you have need of me, when you wish me to come, when you will not feel too ranch horror at the sight of me, use this whistle.
The heart of man cannot remain long in one extremity.
The gypsy had suffered so much, that nothing was left her but astonishment.
With security, hope had returned to her.
She was outside the pale of society, outside the pale of life, but she had a vague feeling that it might not be impossible to return to it.
She was like a dead person, who should hold in reserve the key to her tomb.
She felt the terrible images which had so long persecuted her, gradually departing.
All the hideous phantoms, Pierrat Torterue, Jacques Charmolue, were effaced from her mind, all, even the priest.
And then, Phoebus was alive; she was sure of it, she had seen him.
To her the fact of Phoebus being alive was everything.
After the series of fatal shocks which had overturned everything within her, she had found but one thing intact in her soul, one sentiment,her love for the captain.
No doubt it was terrible that he also should have been deceived; that he should have believed that impossible thing, that he could have conceived of a stab dealt by her who would have given a thousand lives for him.
But, after all, she must not be too angry with him for it; had she not confessed her crime? had she not yielded, weak woman that she was, to torture?
She should have allowed her finger nails to be torn out rather than such a word to be wrenched from her.
In short, if she could but see Phoebus once more, for a single minute, only one word would be required, one look, in order to undeceive him, to bring him back.
She was astonished also at many singular things, at the accident of Phoebus's presence on the day of the penance, at the young girl with whom he had been.
She was his sister, no doubt.
An unreasonable explanation, but she contented herself with it, because she needed to believe that Phoebus still loved her, and loved her alone.
Had he not sworn it to her?
What more was needed, simple and credulous as she was?
And then, in this matter,were not appearances much more against her than against him?
Accordingly, she waited. She hoped.
Let us add that the church, that vast church, which surrounded her on every side, which guarded her, which saved her, was itself a sovereign tranquillizer.
The solemn lines of that architecture, the religious attitude of all the objects which surrounded the young girl, the serene and pious thoughts which emanated, so to speak, from all the pores of that stone, acted upon her without her being aware of it.
The bells, in particular, lulled her.
It was something like a powerful magnetism which those vast instruments shed over her in great waves.
Thus every sunrise found her more calm, breathing better, less pale.
In proportion as her inward wounds closed, her grace and beauty blossomed once more on her countenance, but more thoughtful, more reposeful.
Her former character also returned to her, somewhat even of her gayety, her pretty pout, her love for her goat, her love for singing, her modesty.
She took care to dress herself in the morning in the corner of her cell for fear some inhabitants of the neighboring attics might see her through the window.
When the thought of Phoebus left her time, the gypsy sometimes thought of Quasimodo.
He was the sole bond, the sole connection, the sole communication which remained to her with men, with the living.
Unfortunate girl! she was more outside the world than Quasimodo.
She understood not in the least the strange friend whom chance had given her.
She often reproached herself for not feeling a gratitude which should close her eyes, but decidedly, she could not accustom herself to the poor bellringer.
She had left the whistle which he had given her lying on the ground.
This did not prevent Quasimodo from making his appearance from time to time during the first few days.
She did her best not to turn aside with too much repugnance when he came to bring her her basket of provisions or her jug of water, but he always perceived the slightest movement of this sort, and then he withdrew sadly.
Once he came at the moment when she was caressing Djali.
He stood pensively for several minutes before this graceful group of the goat and the gypsy; at last he said, shaking his heavy and illformed head,
"My misfortune is that I still resemble a man too much.
He replied to the glance, "Oh! I well know why," and he went away.
On another occasion he presented himself at the door of the cell (which he never entered) at the moment when la Esmeralda was singing an old Spanish ballad, the words of which she did not understand, but which had lingered in her ear because the gypsy women had lulled her to sleep with it when she was a little child.
At the sight of that villanous form which made its appearance so abruptly in the middle of her song, the young girl paused with an involuntary gesture of alarm.
The unhappy bellringer fell upon his knees on the threshold, and clasped his large, misshapen hands with a suppliant air. "Oh!" he said, sorrowfully, "continue, I implore you, and do not drive me away."
She did not wish to pain him, and resumed her lay, trembling all over.
By degrees, however, her terror disappeared, and she yielded herself wholly to the slow and melancholy air which she was singing. He remained on his knees with hands clasped, as in prayer, attentive, hardly breathing, his gaze riveted upon the gypsy's brilliant eyes.
On another occasion, he came to her with an awkward and timid air. "Listen," he said, with an effort; "I have something to say to you."
She made him a sign that she was listening. Then he began to sigh, half opened his lips, appeared for a moment to be on the point of speaking, then he looked at her again, shook his head, and withdrew slowly, with his brow in his hand, leaving the gypsy stupefied.
Among the grotesque personages sculptured on the wall, there was one to whom he was particularly attached, and with which he often seemed to exchange fraternal glances.
Quasimodo was standing behind her.
He had placed himself in that position in order to spare the young girl, as far as possible, the displeasure of seeing him.
All at once the gypsy started, a tear and a flash of joy gleamed simultaneously in her eyes, she knelt on the brink of the roof and extended her arms towards the Place with anguish, exclaiming: "Phoebus! come! come! a word, a single word in the name of heaven!
Phoebus!" Her voice, her face, her gesture, her whole person bore the heartrending expression of a shipwrecked man who is making a signal of distress to the joyous vessel which is passing afar off in a ray of sunlight on the horizon.
Quasimodo leaned over the Place, and saw that the object of this tender and agonizing prayer was a young man, a captain, a handsome cavalier all glittering with arms and decorations, prancing across the end of the Place, and saluting with his plume a beautiful lady who was smiling at him from her balcony.
However, the officer did not hear the unhappy girl calling him; he was too far away.
But the poor deaf man heard.
A profound sigh heaved his breast; he turned round; his heart was swollen with all the tears which he was swallowing; his convulsivelyclenched fists struck against his head, and when he withdrew them there was a bunch of red hair in each hand.
He said in a low voice as he gnashed his teeth,
Meanwhile, she remained kneeling, and cried with extraor dinary agitation,
"Oh! there he is alighting from his horse!
Phoebus!How wicked that woman is to speak to him at the same time with me!
The deaf man gazed at her.
The poor bellringer's eye filled with tears, but he let none fall.
All at once he pulled her gently by the border of her sleeve.
He had assumed a tranquil air; he said to her,
She clasped his knees.
He could not refrain from shaking his head sadly.
"I will bring him to you," he said, in a weak voice.
Then he turned his head and plunged down the staircase with great strides, stifling with sobs.
When he reached the Place, he no longer saw anything except the handsome horse hitched at the door of the Gondelaurier house; the captain had just entered there.
He raised his eyes to the roof of the church.
He made her a sad sign with his head; then he planted his back against one of the stone posts of the Gondelaurier porch, determined to wait until the captain should come forth.
The entire day passed thus, Quasimodo at his post, la Esmeralda on the roof, Phoebus, no doubt, at the feet of FleurdeLys.
Quasimodo fixed his gaze in vain upon la Esmeralda; soon she was no more than a whiteness amid the twilight; then nothing.
Quasimodo beheld the front windows from top to bottom of the Gondelaurier mansion illuminated; he saw the other casements in the Place lighted one by one, he also saw them extinguished to the very last, for he remained the whole evening at his post.
Had he not been deaf, he would have heard more and more distinctly, in proportion as the noise of sleeping Paris died away, a sound of feasting, laughter, and music in the Gondelaurier mansion.
He was filled with sad thoughts; at times he looked upwards into the air, like a person who is weary of waiting.
In one of these moments he suddenly beheld the long window on the balcony, whose stone balustrade projected above his head, open mysteriously.
The frail glass door gave passage to two persons, and closed noiselessly behind them; it was a man and a woman.
It was not without difficulty that Quasimodo succeeded in recognizing in the man the handsome captain, in the woman the young lady whom he had seen welcome the officer in the morning from that very balcony.
The young man and the young girl, so far as our deaf man could judge, without hearing a single one of their words, appeared to abandon themselves to a very tender tteatte.
The young girl seemed to have allowed the officer to make a girdle for her of his arm, and gently repulsed a kiss.
After all, nature was not dumb in the poor fellow, and his human sensibility, all maliciously contorted as it was, quivered no less than anyother.
He thought of the miserable portion which Providence had allotted to him; that woman and the pleasure of love, would pass forever before his eyes, and that he should never do anything but behold the felicity of others.
But that which rent his heart most in this sight, that which mingled indignation with his anger, was the thought of what the gypsy would suffer could she behold it.
It is true that the night was very dark, that la Esmeralda, if she had remained at her post (and he had no doubt of this), was very far away, and that it was all that he himself could do to distinguish the lovers on the balcony.
The young lady appeared to be entreating the officer to ask nothing more of her.
Of all this Quasimodo could distinguish only the beautiful clasped hands, the smiles mingled with tears, the young girl's glances directed to the stars, the eyes of the captain lowered ardently upon her.
Fortunately, for the young girl was beginning to resist but feebly, the door of the balcony suddenly opened once more and an old dame appeared; the beauty seemed confused, the officer assumed an air of displeasure, and all three withdrew.
A moment later, a horse was champing his bit under the porch, and the brilliant officer, enveloped in his night cloak, passed rapidly before Quasimodo.
The bellringer allowed him to turn the corner of the street, then he ran after him with his apelike agility, shouting: "Hey there! captain!"
"What wants this knave with me?" he said, catching sight through the gloom of that hipshot form which ran limping after him.
Meanwhile, Quasimodo had caught up with him, and had boldly grasped his horse's bridle: "Follow me, captain; there is one here who desires to speak with you!
"Captain," replied the deaf man, "do you not ask me who it is?"
Quasimodo, far from releasing the bridle, prepared to force him to retrace his steps.
Unable to comprehend the captain's resistance, he hastened to say to him,
"Come, captain, 'tis a woman who is waiting for you." He added with an effort: "A woman who loves you."
And what if, by chance, she should resemble you, you face of a screechowl?
Tell the woman who has sent you that I am about to marry, and that she may go to the devil!"
"Listen," exclaimed Quasimodo, thinking to overcome his hesitation with a word, "come, monseigneur! 'tis the gypsy whom you know!"
This word did, indeed, produce a great effect on Phoebus, but not of the kind which the deaf man expected.
It will be remembered that our gallant officer had retired with Fleur deLys several moments before Quasimodo had rescued the condemned girl from the hands of Charmolue.
Afterwards, in all his visits to the Gondelaurier mansion he had taken care not to mention that woman, the memory of whom was, after all, painful to him; and on her side, FleurdeLys had not deemed it politic to tell him that the gypsy was alive.
Hence Phoebus believed poor "Similar" to be dead, and that a month or two had elapsed since her death.
"Look here, do you come from the other world?" And he laid his hand on the hilt of his dagger.
"Quick, quick," said the deaf man, endeavoring to drag the horse along; "this way!" Phoebus dealt him a vigorous kick in the breast.
Then he drew himself up stiffly and said, "Oh! how happy you are to have some one who loves you!"
"Oh!" said the poor deaf man, in a very low voice; "to refuse that!" He reentered NotreDame, lighted his lamp and climbed to the tower again.
The gypsy was still in the same place, as he had supposed.
She flew to meet him as far off as she could see him.
"Alone!" she cried, clasping her beautiful hands sorrowfully.
"You should have waited all night," she said angrily.
He saw her gesture of wrath, and understood the reproach.
"I will lie in wait for him better another time," he said, dropping his head.
"Begone!" she said to him.
He left her.
He preferred to have her abuse him rather than to have afflicted her.
He ceased to come to her cell.
At the most she occasionally caught a glimpse at the summit of the towers, of the bellringer's face turned sadly to her. But as soon as she perceived him, he disappeared.
We must admit that she was not much grieved by this voluntary absence on the part of the poor hunchback.
At the bottom of her heart she was grateful to him for it.
She no longer saw him, but she felt the presence of a good genius about her.
Her provisions were replenished by an invisible hand during her slumbers.
One morning she found a cage of birds on her window.
There was a piece of sculpture above her window which frightened her.
One morning, for all these things happened at night, she no longer saw it, it had been broken.
The person who had climbed up to that carving must have risked his life.
Sometimes, in the evening, she heard a voice, concealed beneath the wind screen of the bell tower, singing a sad, strange song, as though to lull her to sleep.
Look not at the face, young girl, look at the heart.
The heart of a handsome young man is often deformed.
Young girl, the pine is not beautiful; it is not beautiful like the poplar, but it keeps its foliage in winter.
That which is not beautiful has no right to exist; beauty loves only beauty; April turns her back on January.
One morning, on awaking, she saw on her window two vases filled with flowers.
I know not whether it was done intentionally, but La Esmeralda took the faded nosegay and wore it all day long upon her breast.
That day she did not hear the voice singing in the tower.
She passed her days in caressing Djali, in watching the door of the Gondelaurier house, in talking to herself about Phoebus, and in crumbling up her bread for the swallows.
One night, nevertheless, when she was not asleep, but was thinking of her handsome captain, she heard something breathing near her cell.
She rose in alarm, and saw by the light of the moon, a shapeless mass lying across her door on the outside.
When he learned it, he knew not what his sensations were.
In that matter he was tranquil; he had reached the bottom of personal suffering.
But to feel that she was alive, and Phoebus also, meant that tortures, shocks, alternatives, life, were beginning again.
When he heard this news, he shut himself in his cell in the cloister.
He closed his door against all, even against the bishop.
And so he was, in fact.
What did he do while thus shut up?
With what thoughts was the unfortunate man contending?
Was he giving final battle to his formidable passion?
Was he concocting a final plan of death for her and of perdition for himself?
His Jehan, his cherished brother, his spoiled child, came once to his door, knocked, swore, entreated, gave his name half a score of times. Claude did not open.
He passed whole days with his face close to the panes of his window.
From that window, situated in the cloister, he could see la Esmeralda's chamber. He often saw herself with her goat, sometimes with Quasimodo.
He remarked the little attentions of the ugly deaf man, his obedience, his delicate and submissive ways with the gypsy.
He recalled, for he had a good memory, and memory is the tormentor of the jealous, he recalled the singular look of the bellringer, bent on the dancer upon a certain evening.
He asked himself what motive could have impelled Quasimodo to save her.
He was the witness of a thousand little scenes between the gypsy and the deaf man, the pantomime of which, viewed from afar and commented on by his passion, appeared very tender to him.
Then he felt a jealousy which be could never have believed possible awakening within him, a jealousy which made him redden with shame and indignation: "One might condone the captain, but this one!" This thought upset him.
As soon as he learned that the gypsy was alive, the cold ideas of spectre and tomb which had persecuted him for a whole day vanished, and the flesh returned to goad him.
He turned and twisted on his couch at the thought that the darkskinned maiden was so near him.
Every night his delirious imagination represented la Esmeralda to him in all the attitudes which had caused his blood to boil most.
He beheld her outstretched upon the poniarded captain, her eyes closed, her beautiful bare throat covered with Phoebus's blood, at that moment of bliss when the archdeacon had imprinted on her pale lips that kiss whose burn the unhappy girl, though half dead, had felt.
He beheld her, again, stripped by the savage hands of the torturers, allowing them to bare and to enclose in the boot with its iron screw, her tiny foot, her delicate rounded leg, her white and supple knee.
Again he beheld that ivory knee which alone remained outside of Torterue's horrible apparatus.
Lastly, he pictured the young girl in her shift, with the rope about her neck, shoulders bare, feet bare, almost nude, as he had seen her on that last day.
These images of voluptuousness made him clench his fists, and a shiver run along his spine.
One night, among others, they heated so cruelly his virgin and priestly blood, that he bit his pillow, leaped from his bed, flung on a surplice over his shirt, and left his cell, lamp in hand, half naked, wild, his eyes aflame.
He knew where to find the key to the red door, which connected the cloister with the church, and he always had about him, as the reader knows, the key of the staircase leading to the towers.
That night, la Esmeralda had fallen asleep in her cell, full of oblivion, of hope, and of sweet thoughts.
She had already been asleep for some time, dreaming as always, of Phoebus, when it seemed to her that she heard a noise near her.
She slept lightly and uneasily, the sleep of a bird; a mere nothing waked her.
She opened her eyes.
Nevertheless, she saw a figure gazing at her through the window; a lamp lighted up this apparition.
But the young girl had had time to catch a glimpse of it; her eyes closed again with terror.
"Oh!" she said in a faint voice, "the priest!"
All her past unhappiness came back to her like a flash of lightning.
She fell back on her bed, chilled.
A moment later she felt a touch along her body which made her shudder so that she straightened herself up in a sitting posture, wide awake and furious.
The priest had just slipped in beside her.
He encircled her with both arms.
"Begone, monster! begone assassin!" she said, in a voice which was low and trembling with wrath and terror.
"Mercy! mercy!" murmured the priest, pressing his lips to her shoulder.
She seized his bald head by its remnant of hair and tried to thrust aside his kisses as though they had been bites.
"Mercy!" repeated the unfortunate man. "If you but knew what my love for you is!
She stopped his two arms with superhuman force.
"Let me go," she said, "or I will spit in your face!"
He released her. "Vilify me, strike me, be malicious!
Then she struck him with the fury of a child.
She made her beautiful hands stiff to bruise his face. "Begone, demon!"
"Love me! love me! pity!" cried the poor priest returning her blows with caresses.
All at once she felt him stronger than herself. "There must be an end to this!" he said, gnashing his teeth.
She was conquered, palpitating in his arms, and in his power.
She felt a wanton hand straying over her.
All at once, as she struggled and crawled on the floor, the gypsy's hand came in contact with something cold and metal licit was Quasimodo's whistle.
She seized it with a convulsive hope, raised it to her lips and blew with all the strength that she had left.
Almost at the same instant he felt himself raised by a vigorous arm.
The cell was dark; he could not distinguish clearly who it was that held him thus; but he heard teeth chattering with rage, and there was just sufficient light scattered among the gloom to allow him to see above his head the blade of a large knife.
The priest fancied that he perceived the form of Quasimodo.
He assumed that it could be no one but he.
He remembered to have stumbled, as he entered, over a bundle which was stretched across the door on the outside.
But, as the newcomer did not utter a word, he knew not what to think.
In a twinkling, the priest was overthrown and a leaden knee rested on his breast.
From the angular imprint of that knee he recognized Quasimodo; but what was to be done? how could he make the other recognize him? the darkness rendered the deaf man blind.
The young girl, pitiless as an enraged tigress, did not intervene to save him.
The knife was approaching his head; the moment was critical.
All at once, his adversary seemed stricken with hesitation. "No blood on her!" he said in a dull voice.
Then the priest felt a large hand dragging him feet first out of the cell; it was there that he was to die.
Quasimodo looked him full in the face, a trembling seized him, and he released the priest and shrank back.
The gypsy, who had advanced to the threshold of her cell, beheld with surprise their roles abruptly changed.
The priest, who was overwhelming the deaf man with gestures of wrath and reproach, made the latter a violent sign to retire.
The deaf man dropped his head, then he came and knelt at the gypsy's door,"Monseigneur," he said, in a grave and resigned voice, "you shall do all that you please afterwards, but kill me first."
So saying, he presented his knife to the priest.
But the young girl was quicker than be; she wrenched the knife from Quasimodo's hands and burst into a frantic laugh,"Approach," she said to the priest.
Then she added with a pitiless expression, well aware that she was about to pierce the priest's heart with thousands of redhot irons, "Ah!
When he was gone, Quasimodo picked up the whistle which had just saved the gypsy. "It was getting rusty," he said, as he handed it back to her; then he left her alone.
The young girl, deeply agitated by this violent scene, fell back exhausted on her bed, and began to sob and weep.
The priest had groped his way back to his cell.
He repeated with a thoughtful air his fatal words: "No one shall have her."
As soon as Pierre Gringoire had seen how this whole affair was turning, and that there would decidedly be the rope, hanging, and other disagreeable things for the principal personages in this comedy, he had not cared to identify himself with the matter further.
The outcasts with whom he had remained, reflecting that, after all, it was the best company in Paris,the outcasts had continued to interest themselves in behalf of the gypsy.
He had thought it very simple on the part of people who had, like herself, nothing else in prospect but Charmolue and Torterue, and who, unlike himself, did not gallop through the regions of imagination between the wings of Pegasus.
From their remarks, he had learned that his wife of the broken crock had taken refugein NotreDame, and he was very glad of it.
But he felt no temptation to go and see her there.
Moreover, he was busy executing feats of strength during the day for his living, and at night he was engaged in composing a memorial against the Bishop of Paris, for he remembered having been drenched by the wheels of his mills, and he cherished a grudge against him for it.
He also occupied himself with annotating the fine work of Baudryle Rouge, Bishop of Noyon and Tournay, De Cupa Petrarum, which had given him a violent passion for architecture, an inclination which had replaced in his heart his passion for hermeticism, of which it was, moreover, only a natural corollary, since there is an intimate relation between hermeticism and masonry.
One day he had halted near Saint Germainl'Auxerrois, at the corner of a mansion called "Forl'Evque " (the Bishop's Tribunal), which stood opposite another called "ForleRoi" (the King's Tribunal).
All at once he feels a hand laid gravely on his shoulder.
It was his old friend, his former master, monsieur the archdeacon.
It was a long time since he had seen the archdeacon, and Dom Claude was one of those solemn and impassioned men, a meeting with whom always upsets the equilibrium of a sceptical philosopher.
"And if you were to see the interior of the chapel!" resumed the poet, with his garrulous enthusiasm.
The priest laid his hand on his brow.
It was his habitual gesture.
He took the arm of the priest, who let him have his way, and made him enter the staircase turret of Forl'Evque.
"I think," said Claude, "that his name is Phoebus de Chteaupers."
Gringoire followed him, being accustomed to obey him, like all who had once approached that man so full of ascendency.
"Do you not think that the dress of those cavaliers whom we have just seen is far handsomer than yours and mine?" Gringoire tossed his head.
Gringoire, perceiving that he was in a pensive mood, quitted him to go and admire the porch of a neighboring house.
He came back clapping his hands. "If you were less engrossed with the fine clothes of men of war, monsieur the archdeacon, I would entreat you to come and see this door.
"Was she not your wife?"
By the way," added Gringoire, looking at the archdeacon in a half bantering way, "are you still thinking of her?"
"And you think of her no longer?"
"Had she not saved your life?"
"Well, what has become of her?
What have you done with her?"
I believe that they have hanged her."
I was told that she had taken refuge in NotreDame, and that she was safe there, and I am delighted to hear it, and I have not been able to discover whether the goat was saved with her, and that is all I know."
"I will tell you more," cried Dom Claude; and his voice, hitherto low, slow, and almost indistinct, turned to thunder. "She has in fact, taken refuge in NotreDame.
But in three days justice will reclaim her, and she will be hanged on the Grve.
What harm does it do if a poor girl takes shelter under the flying buttresses of Notre Dame, beside the swallows' nests?"
The archdeacon resumed after a silence, "So, she saved your life?"
"Would not you like to do something for her?"
The priest smote his brow.
In spite of the calm which he affected, a violent gesture betrayed his internal convulsions from time to time.
"How is she to be saved?"
"How is she to be saved?" repeated Claude dreamily.
Gringoire smote his brow in his turn.
What if one were to ask her pardon from the king?"
Shall I address to the midwives a request accompanied by the declaration that the girl is with child!"
Gringoire was alarmed by his air.
"But she must leave that place, nevertheless!" he murmured, "the decree is to be executed within three days.
Women have very depraved tastes!" He raised his voice:
"Master Pierre, I have reflected well; there is but one means of safety for her."
"Listen, Master Pierre, remember that you owe your life to her.
I will lead you to her.
You will change clothes with her.
She will take your doublet; you will take her petticoat."
"And then? she will go forth in your garments; you will remain with hers.
You will be hanged, perhaps, but she will be saved."
Gringoire scratched his ear, with a very serious air.
"Stay!" said he, "that is an idea which would never have occurred to me unaided."
The air, the sky, the morning, the evening, the moonlight, my good friends the thieves, our jeers with the old hags of gobetweens, the fine architecture of Paris to study, three great books to make, one of them being against the bishops and his mills; and how can I tell all?
Anaxagoras said that he was in the world to admire the sun.
And then, from morning till night, I have the happiness of passing all my days with a man ofgenius, who is myself, which is very agreeable."
Where would you be, had it not been for her?
Do you then desire that she through whom you are alive, should die? that she should die, that beautiful, sweet, adorable creature, who is necessary to the light of the world and more divine than God, while you, half wise, and half fool, a vain sketch of something, a sort of vegetable, which thinks that it walks, and thinks that it thinks, you will continue to live with the life which you have stolen from her, as useless as a candle in broad daylight?
Come, have a little pity, Gringoire; be generous in your turn; it was she who set the example."
Gringoire listened to him at first with an undecided air, then he became touched, and wound up with a grimace which made his pallid face resemble that of a newborn infant with an attack of the colic.
"You are pathetic!" said he, wiping away a tear.
That's a queer idea of yours.After all," he continued after a pause, "who knows? perhaps they will not hang me.
'Tis a death worthy of a sage who has wavered all his life; a death which is neither flesh nor fish, like the mind of a veritable sceptic; a death all stamped with Pyrrhonism and hesitation, which holds the middle station betwixt heaven and earth, which leaves you in suspense.
Some one having asked Cercidas, the Megalopolitan, if he were willing to die:
'Why not?' he replied; 'for after my death I shall see those great men, Pythagoras among the philosophers, Hecataeus among historians, Homer among poets, Olympus among musicians.'"
The archdeacon gave him his hand: "It is settled, then?
"Ah! i' faith no!" he said in the tone of a man just waking up.
"Farewell, then!" and the archdeacon added between his teeth: "I'll find you again!"
"I do not want that devil of a man to find me," thought Gringoire; and he ran after Dom Claude. "Stay, monsieur the archdeacon, no illfeeling between old friends!
You take an interest in that girl, my wife, I mean, and 'tis well.
You have devised a scheme to get her out of NotreDame, but your way is extremely disagreeable to me, Gringoire.
If I possessed an expedient for extricating her from a dilemma, without compromising my own neck to the extent of a single running knot, what would you say to it?
The priest tore out the buttons of his cassock with impatience: "Stream of words!
"Yes," resumed Gringoire, talking to himself and touching his nose with his forefinger in sign of meditation,"that's it!The thieves are brave fellows!The tribe of Egypt love her!They will rise at the first word!Nothing easier!A sudden stroke.Under cover of the disorder, they will easily carry her off!Beginning tomorrow evening. They will ask nothing better.
You see that I am composing." He meditated for a few moments more, then began to clap his hands over his thought, crying: "Admirable! success is sure!"
The headsman loveth that; he eats the beast afterwards.
Gringoire bent his head to the archdeacon's head and spoke to him in a very low voice, casting an uneasy glance the while from one end to the other of the street, though no one was passing.
When he had finished, Dom Claude took his hand and said coldly : "'Tis well.
And, while the archdeacon was disappearing in one direction, he set off in the other, saying to himself in a low voice: "Here's a grand affair, Monsieur Pierre Gringoire.
Bitou carried a great bull on his shoulders; the waterwagtails, the warblers, and the buntings traverse the ocean."
On reentering the cloister, the archdeacon found at the door of his cell his brother Jehan du Moulin, who was waiting for him, and who had beguiled the tedium of waiting by drawing on the wall with a bit of charcoal, a profile of his elder brother, enriched with a monstrous nose.
Dom Claude hardly looked at his brother; his thoughts were elsewhere.
"Brother," said Jehan timidly, "I am come to see you." The archdeacon did not even raise his eyes.
"Brother, you behold a culprit, a criminal, a wretch, a libertine, a man of enormities!
As he uttered these monstrous words, he assumed the mien of Ajax, expecting to see the lightnings descend upon his head.
At the moment when he was passing through the courtyard of the cloister, beneath his brother's window, he heard that window open, raised his eyes and beheld the archdeacon's severe head emerge.
The knave was seated on a table with his legs crossed, and in a loud voice was bestowing his knowledge of magic, both black and white, on many a gaping face which surrounded him.
The individual who had thus screwed a whole outfit upon his body, was so hidden by his warlike accoutrements that nothing was to be seen of his person save an impertinent, red, snub nose, a rosy mouth, and bold eyes.
His belt was full of daggers and poniards, a huge sword on his hip, a rusted crossbow at his left, and a vast jug of wine in front of him, without reckoning on his right, a fat wench with her bosom uncovered.
Add twenty secondary groups, the waiters, male and female, running with jugs on their heads, gamblers squatting over taws, merelles,* dice, vachettes, the ardent game of tringlet, quarrels in one corner, kisses in another, and the reader will have some idea of this whole picture, over which flickered the light of a great, flaming fire, which made a thousand huge and grotesque shadows dance over the walls of the drinking shop.
In the midst of this uproar, at the extremity of the tavern, on the bench inside the chimney, sat a philosopher meditating with his feet in the ashes and his eyes on the brands.
"Be quick! make haste, arm yourselves! we set out on the march in an hour!" said Clopin Trouillefou to his thieves.
A wench was humming,"Good night, father and mother, the last cover up the fire.
"Knave!" cried the reddest faced of the two, shaking his fist at the other; "I'll mark you with the club.
"Ugh!" roared a Norman, recognizable by his nasal accent; "we are packed in here like the saints of Caillouville!"
"My sons," the Duke of Egypt was saying to his audience, in a falsetto voice, "sorceresses in France go to the witches' sabbath without broomsticks, or grease, or steed, merely by means of some magic words.
"Hurrah! hurrah!" he was shouting. "My first day in armor!
My opinion is that if God were a ~gendarme~, he would turn robber.
Lay siege to the church, burst in the doors, drag out the beautiful girl, save her from the judges, save her from the priests, dismantle the cloister, burn the bishop in his palaceall this we will do in less time than it takes for a burgomaster to eat a spoonful of soup.
One would say he was a devil mounted on a man.
My mother wanted to make an officer of me; my father, a subdeacon; my aunt, a councillor of inquests; my grandmother, prothonotary to the king; my great aunt, a treasurer of the short robe,and I have made myself an outcast.
I said this to my father, who spit his curse in my face; to my mother, who set to weeping and chattering, poor old lady, like yonder fagot on the andirons.
Then he began to sing, his eye swimming in ecstasy, in the tone of a canon intoning vespers, ~Quoe cantica! quoe organa! quoe cantilenoe! quoe meloclioe hic sine fine decantantur! Sonant melliflua hymnorum organa, suavissima angelorum melodia, cantica canticorum mira~!
There was a moment of partial silence, during which the sharp voice of the Duke of Egypt rose, as he gave instructions to his Bohemians.
"Is she still at NotreDame?" went on a merchant with the appearance of a Jew.
Here they served Jehan with his supper.
As he threw himself back on the bosom of the wench beside him, he exclaimed,
Here is one on my left whose teeth are so long that they hide his chin.
Old woman!
He approached Gringoire, who appeared to be plunged in a profound revery, with his feet on an andiron.
"Another reason for snatching our sister from his claws," replied the old Bohemian.
"You speak like a man, Mathias," said the King of Thunes. "Moreover, we will act promptly.
The people of the parliament will be well balked tomorrow when they come to seek her! Guts of the pope I don't want them to hang the pretty girl!"
Gringoire, torn from his meditations, began to watch the wild and noisy scene which surrounded him, muttering between his teeth: "~Luxuriosa res vinum et tumultuosa ebrietas~.
"To your ranks, Argot!"* he cried. "Fall into line, Egypt!
After a few minutes, the King of Thunes raised his voice once more,
He had just made his last round of the church.
He had not noticed, that at the moment when he was closing the doors, the archdeacon had passed close to him and betrayed some displeasure on seeing him bolting and barring with care the enormous iron locks which gave to their large leaves the solidity of a wall.
Moreover, since the nocturnal adventure in the cell, he had constantly abused Quasimodo, but in vain did he ill treat, and even beat him occasionally, nothing disturbed the submission, patience, the devoted resignation of the faithful bellringer.
At the most, he gazed uneasily after Dom Claude when the latter ascended the staircase of the tower; but the archdeacon had abstained from presenting himself again before the gypsy's eyes.
On that night, accordingly, Quasimodo, after having cast a glance at his poor bells which he so neglected now, Jacqueline, Marie, and Thibauld, mounted to the summit of the Northern tower, and there setting his dark lanturn, well closed, upon the leads, he began to gaze at Paris.
As the only eye of the bellringer peered into that horizon of mist and night, he felt within him an inexpressible uneasiness.
For several days he had been upon his guard.
He had perceived men of sinister mien, who never took their eyes from the young girl's asylum, prowling constantly about the church.
He imagined that there existed a popular hatred against her, as against himself, and that it was very possible that something might happen soon.
Hence he remained upon his tower on the watch, "dreaming in his dreamplace," as Rabelais says, with his eye directed alternately on the cell and on Paris, keeping faithful guard, like a good dog, with a thousand suspicions in his mind.
All at once, while he was scrutinizing the great city with that eye which nature, by a sort of compensation, had made so piercing that it could almost supply the other organs which Quasimodo lacked, it seemed to him that there was something singular about the Quay de la VieillePelleterie, that there was a movement at that point, that the line of the parapet, standing out blackly against the whiteness of the water was not straight and tranquil, like that of the other quays, but that it undulated to the eye, like the waves of a river, or like the heads of a crowd in motion.
He redoubled his attention.
At length, dense as was the darkness, he beheld the head of a column debouch from that street, and in an instant a crowdof which nothing could be distinguished in the gloom except that it was a crowdspread over the Place.
But this noise did not even reach our deaf man, and this great multitude, of which he saw hardly anything, and of which he heard nothing, though it was marching and moving so near him, produced upon him the effect of a rabble of dead men, mute, impalpable, lost in a smoke.
It seemed to him, that he beheld advancing towards him a fog of men, and that he saw shadows moving in the shadow.
Then his fears returned to him, the idea of an attempt against the gypsy presented itself once more to his mind.
At that critical moment he took counsel with himself, with better and prompter reasoning than one would have expected from so badly organized a brain.
Ought he to awaken the gypsy? to make her escape?
This resolution once taken, he set to examining the enemy with more tranquillity.
Only, he presumed that it must be making very little noise, since the windows on the Place remained closed.
He vaguely recalled this populace, and thought that he recognized all the heads who had saluted him as Pope of the Fools some months previously.
One man who held a torch in one hand and a club in the other, mounted a stone post and seemed to be haranguing them.
Quasimodo picked up his lantern and descended to the platform between the towers, in order to get a nearer view, and to spy out a means of defence.
Clopin Trouillefou, on arriving in front of the lofty portal of NotreDame had, in fact, ranged his troops in order of battle.
Although he expected no resistance, he wished, like a prudent general, to preserve an order which would permit him to face, at need, a sudden attack of the watch or the police.
He had accordingly stationed his brigade in such a manner that, viewed from above and from a distance, one would havepronounced it the Roman triangle of the battle of Ecnomus, the boar's head of Alexander or the famous wedge of Gustavus Adolphus.
When the first arrangements were completed, and we must say, to the honor of vagabond discipline, that Clopin's orders were executed in silence, and with admirable precision, the worthy chief of the band, mounted on the parapet of the church square, and raised his hoarse and surly voice, turning towards NotreDame, and brandishing his torch whose light, tossed by the wind, and veiled every moment by its own smoke, made the reddish faade of the church appear and disappear before the eye.
Now the Court of Parliament wishes to seize her once more there, and you consent to it; so that she would be hanged tomorrow in the Grve, if God and the outcasts were not here.
That is why we call upon you to return the girl if you wish to save your church, or we will take possession of the girl again and pillage the church, which will be a good thing.
A vagabond presented his banner to Clopin, who planted it solemnly between two pavingstones.
That done, the King of Thunes turned round and cast his eyes over his army, a fierce multitude whose glances flashed almost equally with their pikes.
After a momentary pause,"Forward, my Sons!" he cried; "to work, locksmiths!"
"Courage, comrades!" resumed Clopin. "I wager my head against a dipper that you will have opened the door, rescued the girl, and despoiled the chief altar before a single beadle is awake.
"A thousand popes!" exclaimed Clopin, "you are all fools!" But he did not know how to explain the fall of the beam.
The King of Thunes, his first amazement passed, finally found an explanation which appeared plausible to his companions.
The King of Thunes ran boldly to the formidable beam, and placed his foot upon it: "Here is one!" he exclaimed; "'tis the canons who send it to you." And, making a mocking salute in the direction of the church, "Thanks, canons!"
At the sight of that long beam, in the halflight which the infrequent torches of the brigands spread over the Place, thus borne by that crowd of men whodashed it at a run against the church, one would have thought that he beheld a monstrous beast with a thousand feet attacking with lowered head the giant of stone.
Chance had, unfortunately, favored the brave deaf man.
When he had descended to the platform between the towers, his ideas were all in confusion.
The thought had occurred to him of ascending to the southern belfry and sounding the alarm, but before he could have set the bell in motion, before Marie's voice could have uttered a single clamor, was there not time to burst in the door of the church ten times over?
All at once, he remembered that some masons had been at work all day repairing the wall, the timberwork, and the roof of the south tower.
With a strength which the sense of danger increased tenfold, he seized one of the beamsthe longest and heaviest; he pushed it out through a loophole, then, grasping it again outside of the tower, he made it slide along the angle of the balustrade which surrounds the platform, and let it fly into the abyss.
Independently of the projectiles which he had piled upon the balustrade, he had collected a heap of stones on the platform itself.
As fast as the blocks on the exterior edge were exhausted, he drew on the heap.
Then he stooped and rose, stooped and rose again with incredible activity.
From time to time, he followed a fine stone with his eye, and when it did good execution, he said, "Hum!"
Nevertheless, he felt that the great door was yielding.
Although he did not hear it, every blow of the ram reverberated simultaneously in the vaults of the church and within it.
From above he beheld the vagabonds, filled with triumph and rage, shaking their fists at the gloomy faade; and both on the gypsy's account and his own he envied the wings of the owls which flitted away above his head in flocks.
At this moment of anguish, he noticed, a little lower down than the balustrade whence he was crushing the thieves, two long stone gutters which discharged immediately over the great door; the internal orifice of these gutters terminated on the pavement of the platform.
An idea occurred to him; he ran in search of a fagot in his bellringer's den, placed on this fagot a great many bundles of laths, and many rolls of lead, munitions which he had not employed so far, and having arranged this pile in front of the hole to the two gutters, he set it on fire with his lantern.
The bandits, panting like a pack of hounds who are forcing a boar into his lair, pressed tumultuously round the great door, all disfigured by the battering ram, but still standing.
All at once, at the moment when they were grouping themselves round the ram for a last effort, each one holding his breath and stiffening his muscles in order to communicate all his force to the decisive blow, a howl more frightful still than that which had burst forth and expired beneath the beam, rose among them.
Without doubt, this strange beacon light would awaken far away, the woodcutter of the hills of Bictre, terrified to behold the gigantic shadow of the towers of NotreDame quivering over his heaths.
Clopin Trouillefou bit his huge fists with rage.
"Impossible to get in!" he muttered between his teeth.
The Bohemian tossed his head. "I tell you, that 'tis the spirit Sabnac, the grand marquis, the demon of fortifications.
Sometimes he rides a hideous horse.
He changes men into stones, of which he builds towers.
He commands fifty legions 'Tis he indeed; I recognize him.
Sometimes he is clad in a handsome golden robe, figured after the Turkish fashion."
Andry the Red laughed in an idiotic way: "NotreDame is making work for the hospital," said he.
"Is there, then, no way of forcing this door," exclaimed the King of Thunes, stamping his foot.
"Churches have been known to defend themselves thus all by themselves," he remarked with a sigh.
"SaintSophia at Constantinople, forty years ago, hurled to the earth three times in succession, the crescent of Mahom, by shaking her domes, which are her heads.
Mathias Hungadi shook his head.
By the way, where is the little scholar Jehan, who is so encased in iron?" "He is dead, no doubt," some one replied; "we no longer hear his laugh."
Clopin stamped his foot. "GueuleDieu! 'twas he who pushed us on hither, and he has deserted us in the very middle of the job!
"Praised be Pluto!" said Clopin. "But what the devil is he dragging after him?"
It was, in fact, Jehan, who was running as fast as his heavy outfit of a Paladin, and a long ladder which trailed on the pavement, would permit, more breathless than an ant harnessed to a blade of grass twenty times longer than itself.
I made use of her to get the ladder, and I have the ladder, ~PasqueMahom~!
The poor girl came to open the door to me in her shift."
Jehan gazed at him with a malicious, knowing look, and cracked his fingers like castanets.
At that moment he was sublime.
On his head he wore one of those overloaded helmets of the fifteenth century, which frightened the enemy with their fanciful crests.
"Then find a ladder, Clopin!" Jehan set out on a run across the Place, dragging his ladder and shouting: "Follow me, lads!"
But Jehan maintained his right, and was the first to set foot on the rungs.
Jehan mounted slowly, a good deal incommoded by his heavy armor, holding his crossbow in one hand, and clinging to a rung with the other.
When he reached the middle of the ladder, he cast a melancholy glance at the poor dead outcasts, with which the steps were strewn. "Alas!" said he, "here is a heap of bodies worthy of the fifth book of the Iliad!"
Then he continued his ascent.
Thus master of the citadel, he uttered a shout of joy, and suddenly halted, petrified.
Before a second assailant could gain a foothold on the gallery, the formidable hunchback leaped to the head of the ladder, without uttering a word, seized the ends of the two uprights with his powerful hands, raised them, pushed them out from the wall, balanced the long and pliant ladder, loaded with vagabonds from top to bottom for a moment, in the midst of shrieks of anguish, then suddenly, with superhuman force, hurled this cluster of men backward into the Place.
He had the air of an old, bushyheaded king at his window.
As for Jehan Frollo, he was in a critical position.
He found himself in the gallery with the formidable bellringer, alone, separated from his companions by a vertical wall eighty feet high.
While Quasimodo was dealing with the ladder, the scholar had run to the postern which he believed to be open.
It was not. The deaf man had closed it behind him when he entered the gallery.
Jehan had then concealed himself behind a stone king, not daring to breathe, and fixing upon the monstrous hunchback a frightened gaze, like the man, who, when courting the wife of the guardian of a menagerie, went one evening to a love rendezvous, mistook the wall which he was to climb, and suddenly found himself face to face with a white bear.
For the first few moments, the deaf man paid no heed to him; but at last he turned his head, and suddenly straightened up.
Jehan prepared himself for a rough shock, but the deaf man remained motionless; only he had turned towards the scholar and was looking at him.
As he spoke thus, the young scamp stealthily adjusted his crossbow.
"Quasimodo!" he cried, "I am going to change your surname: you shall be called the blind man."
He laid his hand on the arrow, tore it from his arm, and tranquilly broke it across his big knee; then he let the two pieces drop on the floor, rather than threw them down.
The arrow broken, Quasimodo breathing heavily, bounded like a grasshopper, and he fell upon the scholar, whose armor was flattened against the wall by the blow.
Quasimodo had grasped with his left hand the two arms of Jehan, who did not offer any resistance, so thoroughly did he feel that he was lost.
With his right hand, the deaf man detached one by one, in silence, with sinister slowness, all the pieces of his armor, the sword, the daggers, the helmet, the cuirass, the leg pieces.
Quasimodo flung the scholar's iron shell at his feet, piece by piece.
When the scholar beheld himself disarmed, stripped, weak, and naked in those terrible hands, he made no attempt to speak to the deaf man, but began to laugh audaciously in his face, and to sing with his intrepid heedlessness of a child of sixteen, the then popular ditty:
The vagabonds howled, panted, swore, climbed; and Quasimodo, powerless against so many enemies, shuddering for the gypsy, beholding the furious faces approaching ever nearer and nearer to his gallery, entreated heaven for a miracle, and wrung his arms in despair.
The reader has not, perhaps, forgotten that one moment before catching sight of the nocturnal band of vagabonds, Quasimodo, as he inspected Paris from the heights of his bell tower, perceived only one light burning, which gleamed like a star from a window on the topmost story of a lofty edifice beside the Porte SaintAntoine.
He was to take his departure on the next day but one for his citadel of MontilzlesTours.
He made but seldom and brief appearance in his good city of Paris, since there he did not feel about him enough pitfalls, gibbets, and Scotch archers.
The great chamber five toises* square, which he had at the Louvre, with its huge chimneypiece loaded with twelve great beasts and thirteen great prophets, and his grand bed, eleven feet by twelve, pleased him but little.
Such was the chamber which was called "the retreat where Monsieur Louis de France says his prayers."
The man who wore it had his armorial bearings embroidered on his breast in vivid colors; a chevron accompanied by a deer passant.
This man wore in his girdle a rich dagger whose hilt, of silver gilt, was chased in the form of a helmet, and surmounted by a count's coronet.
He had a forbidding air, a proud mien, and a head held high.
At the first glance one read arrogance on his visage; at the second, craft.
He was standing bareheaded, a long roll of parchment in his hand, behind the armchair in which was seated, his body ungracefully doubled up, his knees crossed, his elbow on the table, a very badly accoutred personage.
He held his head so bent upon his breast, that nothing was to be seen of his face thus thrown into shadow, except the tip of his nose, upon which fell a ray of light, and which must have been long.
From the thinness of his wrinkled hand, one divined that he was an old man.
Finally, quite at the end of the room, near the door, in the dark, stood, motionless as a statue, a vigorous man with thickset limbs, a military harness, with a surcoat of armorial bearings, whose square face pierced with staring eyes, slit with an immense mouth, his ears concealed by two large screens of flat hair, had something about it both of the dog and the tiger.
The gentleman who stood near the king was reading him a sort of long memorial to which his majesty seemed to be listening attentively.
"CroixDieu!" resumed Coppenole, thoroughly unhappy at being obliged to lower his voice thus, "I should like to sit down on the floor, with my legs crossed, like a hosier, as I do in my shop."
Master Guillaume! can one only remain here on his feet?"
"Or on his knees," said Rym.
As he spoke thus, the old man raised his head.
The golden shells of the collar of SaintMichael could be seen gleaming on his neck.
The candle fully illuminated his gaunt and morose profile.
"You are ruining us!" he cried, casting his hollow eyes over the scroll. "What is all this?
A groom of the stables and his two aids at four and twenty livres a month!
And next year, if God and our Lady (here he raised his hat) lend us life, we shall drink our potions from a pewter pot!"
So saying, he cast a glance at the silver goblet which gleamed upon the table.
Here he smiled, in the consciousness of his power; this softened his bad humor, and he turned towards the Flemings,
He remained in thought for a moment, then added, shaking his aged head,
The person whom he designated by this name, took the papers into his hands again, and began to read aloud,
"To Guillaume Frre, the sum of four livres, four sols parisis, for his trouble and salary, for having nourished and fed the doves in the two dovecots of the Htel des Tournelles, during the months of January, February, and March of this year; and for this he hath given seven sextiers of barley.
From time to time be coughed; then he raised the goblet to his lips and drank a draught with a grimace.
There is a great red lion whom I love for his pleasant ways.
Guillaume Rym bowed low, while Coppenole, with his surly mien, had the air of one of the bears of which his majesty was speaking.
He had just dipped his lips into the goblet, and he spat out the beverage, saying: "Foh! what a disagreeable potion!" The man who was reading continued:
Olivier made a mark with his thumb against the article of the "rascally foot soldier," and passed on.
"Ah!" said the king, grasping the arms of his chair in both hands, "I knew well that I came hither to this Bastille for some purpose.
Then he rose, leaned on the arm of his interlocutor, made a sign to the sort of mute who stood before the door to precede him, to the two Flemings to follow him, and quitted the room.
The captain of the Bastille marched at their head, and caused the wickets to be opened before the bent and aged king, who coughed as he walked.
At each wicket, all heads were obliged to stoop, except that of the old man bent double with age. "Hum," said he between his gums, for he had no longer any teeth, "we are already quite prepared for the door of the sepulchre.
"Very fine heart of oak," said the king, striking the woodwork with his fist.
At his order, Master Olivier resumed his reading, and his majesty coldly continued his inspection of the cage.
He tore the book from Master Olivier's hands, and set to reckoning it himself upon his fingers, examining the paper and the cage alternately.
"Olivier," cried the king, throwing back his head, "I observe that they charge me twenty sols a hogshead for plaster, while it is worth but twelve.
He turned his back on the cage, and set out to leave the room.
The miserable prisoner divined from the removal of the torches and the noise, that the king was taking his departure.
He no longer saw anything, and heard only the hoarse voice of the turnkey, singing in his ears this ditty,
Master Jean Balue has lost sight of his bishoprics. Monsieur of Verdun has no longer one; all have been killed off.
The king reascended in silence to his retreat, and his suite followed him, terrified by the last groans of the condemned man.
All at once his majesty turned to the Governor of the Bastille,
"By the way," said he, "was there not some one in that cage?"
But it was a mania of his.
"Ah!" said he, with the innocent air of thinking of it for the first time, "Guillaume de Harancourt, the friend of Monsieur the Cardinal Balue.
During the king's absence, several despatches had been placed on his table, and he broke the seals himself.
Then he began to read them promptly, one after the other, made a sign to Master Olivier who appeared to exercise the office of minister, to take a pen, and without communicating to him the contents of the despatches, he began to dictate in a low voice, the replies which the latter wrote, on his knees, in an inconvenient attitude before the table.
The king spoke so low that the Flemings heard nothing of his dictation, except some isolated and rather unintelligible scraps, such as,
Once he raised his voice,
Monsieur the King of Sicily seals his letters with yellow wax, like a king of France.
"Oh! oh!" said he, "What a long message!
What doth our brother the emperor claim?" And running his eye over the missive and breaking his reading with interjection:
He dictated this letter aloud, in a firm tone, and in jerks.
At the moment when he finished it, the door opened and gave passage to a new personage, who precipitated himself into the chamber, crying in affright,
"Sire! sire! there is a sedition of the populace in Paris!" Louis XI.'s grave face contracted; but all that was visible of his emotion passed away like a flash of lightning.
The king, who had risen, grasped him roughly by the arm, and said in his ear, in such a manner as to be heard by him alone, with concentrated rage and a sidelong glance at the Flemings,
The new comer understood, and began in a low tone to give a very terrified account, to which the king listened calmly, while Guillaume Rym called Coppenole's attention to the face and dress of the new arrival, to his furred cowl, (~caputia fourrata~), his short cape, (~epitogia curta~), his robe of black velvet, which bespoke a president of the court of accounts.
"Ah!" said Gossip Jacques, "because he is their lord."
"Yes, certainly!" retorted the king with a smile of satis faction which he strove in vain to disguise.
He rubbed his hands, he laughed with that inward mirth which makes the countenance beam; he was unable to dissimulate his joy, although he endeavored at moments to compose himself.
"Are they in force?" he suddenly inquired.
The king could not refrain from saying: "Good!" he went on, "Are they armed?"
Jacques considered it his duty to add,
"If your majesty does not send prompt succor to the bailiff, he is lost."
After a silence, Louis XI. raised his voice once more, "You should know that, Gossip Jacques.
Of these divers places he is voyer, high, middle, and low, justiciary, full seigneur."
"Bless me!" said the king, scratching his left ear with his right hand, "that makes a goodly bit of my city!
This time he did not correct himself.
All at once he broke out explosively, "~PasqueDieu~!" What people are those who claim to be voyers, justiciaries, lords and masters in our domains? who have their tollgates at the end of every field? their gallows and their hangman at every crossroad among our people?
So that as the Greek believed that he had as many gods as there were fountains, and the Persian as many as he beheld stars, the Frenchman counts as many kings as he sees gibbets!
He lifted his cap again, and continued, still dreamily, with the air and accent of a hunter who is cheering on his pack of hounds: "Good, my people! bravely done! break these false lords! do your duty! at them! have at them! pillage them! take them! sack them!....Ah! you want to be kings, messeigneurs? On, my people on!"
Here he interrupted himself abruptly, bit his lips as though to take back his thought which had already half escaped, bent his piercing eyes in turn on each of the five persons who surrounded him, and suddenly grasping his hat with both hands and staring full at it, he said to it: "Oh! I would burn you if you knew what there was in my head."
Then casting about him once more the cautious and uneasy glance of the fox reentering his hole, "No matter! we will succor monsieur the bailiff.
He was clothed in rags, and walked with one knee bent and dragging his leg.
"What were you going to do in this damnable sedition?" The outcast stared at the king, and swung his arms with a stupid air.
"I know not," said he. "They went, I went."
That is all." A soldier pointed out to the king a billhook which he had seized on the person of the vagabond.
"And do you recognize this man as your companion?" added Louis XI., pointing to the other prisoner.
"That will do," said the king, making a sign with his finger to the silent personage who stood motionless beside the door, to whom we have already called the reader's attention.
"Gossip Tristan, here is a man for you."
"Hold your tongue!" said the king, between two swallows of his ptisan. "You split our head!"
Tristan l'Hermite advanced and pointing to Gringoire, "Sire, can this one be hanged also?" This was the first word that he had uttered.
He perceived from the king's cold and indifferent mien that there was no other resource than something very pathetic, and he flung himself at the feet of Louis XI., exclaiming, with gestures of despair:
Sire, you are an august and, very puissant monarch; have pity on a poor man who is honest, and who would find it more difficult to stir up a revolt than a cake of ice would to give out a spark!
Alas! rigor only frightens minds; the impetuous gusts of the north wind do not make the traveller lay aside his cloak; the sun, bestowing his rays little by little, warms him in such ways that it will make him strip to his shirt.
I am not the man to fling myself into those clouds which break out into seditious clamor.
That same jealousy which a husband cherisheth for the honor of his wife, the resentment which the son hath for the love of his father, a good vassal shouldfeel for the glory of his king; he should pine away for the zeal of this house, for the aggrandizement of his service.
What matters it to your majesty, who dazzles all faces, if there is one poor man more on earth, a poor innocent philosopher spluttering amid the shadows of calamity, with an empty pocket which resounds against his hollow belly?
Moreover, sire, I am a man of letters.
What a stain on Alexander if he had hung Aristoteles!
This act would not be a little patch on the face of his reputation to embellish it, but a very malignant ulcer to disfigure it. Sire!
And without troubling himself about the Jupiter of Crete, the hosier replied with a heavy smile, and his eyes fixed on Gringoire: "Oh! that's it exactly!
When Gringoire paused at last, quite out of breath, he raised his head tremblingly towards the king, who was engaged in scratching a spot on the knee of his breeches with his finger nail; then his majesty began to drink from the goblet of ptisan.
But he uttered not a word, and this silence tortured Gringoire.
At last the king looked at him. "Here is a terrible bawler!" said, he.
Release him at once, the wanton (Louis XI. was fond of this word which formed, with ~PasqueDieu~, the foundation of his joviality), and put him out with a buffet."
And for fear of a counter order, he rushed towards the door, which Tristan opened for him with a very bad grace.
Tristan l'Hermite in his corner wore the surly look of a dog who has had a bone snatched away from him.
Meanwhile, the king thrummed gayly with his fingers on the arm of his chair, the March of PontAudemer.
He was a dissembling prince, but one who understood far better how to hide his troubles than his joys.
These external manifestations of joy at any good news sometimes proceeded to very great lengths thus, on the death, of Charles the Bold, to the point of vowing silver balustrades to Saint Martin of Tours; on his advent to the throne, so far as forgetting to order his father's obsequies.
Coictier took the king's hand, and begun to feel of his pulse with a knowing air.
They are his whole court.
As he felt the king's pulse, Coictier assumed an air of greater and greater alarm.
The brave man had no other farm than the king's bad health.
He speculated on it to the best of his ability.
"Oh! oh!" he murmured at length, "this is serious indeed."
"~PasqueDieu~!" "This may carry off its man in less than three days."
"I am meditating upon that, sire." He made Louis XI. put out his tongue, shook his head, made a grimace, and in the very midst of these affectations,
"Pardieu, sire," he suddenly said, "I must tell you that there is a receivership of the royal prerogatives vacant,
There is a Diana flying in the air, but so excellent, so tender, so delicate, of so ingenuous an action, her hair so well coiffed and adorned with a crescent, her flesh so white, that she leads into temptation those who regard her too curiously.
She is seated on sheaves of wheat and crowned with a gallant garland of wheat ears interlaced with salsify and other flowers.
Master Olivier, perceiving the king to be in a liberal mood, and judging the moment to be propitious, approached in his turn.
"Sire, his place is vacant." As he spoke thus, Master Olivier's haughty face quitted its arrogant expression for a lowly one.
"Good!" he muttered, almost aloud, "'tis easy to see that the king is ill today; he giveth all to the leech."
Yes, gentlemen," added the king turning to the Flemings, "this man hath been an ambassador.
There, my gossip," he pursued, addressing Master Olivier, "let us not get angry; we are old friends.
At court he was politely called Olivier le Daim (the Deer); among the people Olivier the Devil.
"Yes, yes, the physician!" he said between his teeth.
'Tis very simple; he has taken hold upon us by the whole body, and you hold us only by the chin.
What would you say and what would become of your office if I were a king like Chilperic, whose gesture consisted in holding his beard in one hand?
Olivier perceiving that the king had made up his mind to laugh, and that there was no way of even annoying him, went off grumbling to execute his orders.
The king rose, approached the window, and suddenly opening it with extraordinary agitation, "Oh! yes!" he exclaimed, clapping his hands, "yonder is a redness in the sky over the City.
The hosier, in spite of the signs made to him by Guillaume Rym, appeared determined to hold his own against the king.
Monsieur the Duke of Burgundy was a great gentleman, and he turned up his nose at that rabble rout.
At the battle of Grandson, sire, he cried: 'Men of the cannon! Fire on the villains!' and he swore by SaintGeorge.
But Advoyer Scharnachtal hurled himself on the handsome duke with his battleclub and his people, and when the glittering Burgundian army came in contact with these peasants in bull hides, it flew in pieces like a pane of glass at the blow of a pebble.
Many lords were then slain by lowborn knaves; and Monsieur de ChteauGuyon, the greatest seigneur in Burgundy, was found dead, with his gray horse, in a little marsh meadow."
My father, Charles the Seventh, was accustomed to say that the truth was ailing; I thought her dead, and that she had found no confessor.
Then, laying his hand familiarly on Coppenole's shoulder, "You were saying, Master Jacques?"
"I say, sire, that you may possibly be in the right, that the hour of the people may not yet have come with you." Louis XI. gazed at him with his penetrating eye,
"On what clock, if you please?" Coppenole, with his tranquil and rustic countenance, made the king approach the window.
He remained silent for a moment, then he gently patted with his hand the thick wall of the donjon, as one strokes the haunches of a steed.
"Oh! no!" said he. "You will not crumble so easily, will you, my good Bastille?"
They always love the prince's son; the prince, never.
One morning, I will suppose, some one enters my shop, and says to me: 'Father Coppenole, there is this and there is that, the Demoiselle of Flanders wishes to save her ministers, the grand bailiff is doubling the impost on shagreen, or something else,'what you will.
He was followed by two pages, who bore the king's toilet articles; but what struck Louis XI. was that he was also accompanied by the provost of Paris and the chevalier of the watch, who appeared to be in consternation.
It was he who spoke first.
"Sire, I ask your majesty's pardon for the calamitous news which I bring." The king turned quickly and grazed the mat on the floor with the feet of his chair, "What does this mean?"
"Sire," resumed Olivier le Daim, with the malicious air of a man who rejoices that he is about to deal a violent blow, "'tis not against the bailiff of the courts that this popular sedition is directed."
"Against you, sire?' The aged king rose erect and straight as a young man, "Explain yourself, Olivier!
The oath was formidable; Louis XI. had only sworn twice in the course of his life by the cross of SaintL.
Olivier opened his mouth to reply. "Sire"
"On your knees!" interrupted the king violently. "Tristan, have an eye to this man."
The people are trying to take her from thence by main force.
"NotreDame! They lay siege to our Lady, my good mistress in her cathedral!Rise, Olivier.
Then, rendered young by fury, he began to walk up and down with long strides.
He no longer laughed, he was terrible, he went and came; the fox was changed into a hyaena.
He seemed suffocated to such a degree that he could not speak; his lips moved, and his fleshless fists were clenched.
All at once he raised his head, his hollow eye appeared full of light, and his voice burst forth like a clarion:
This eruption having passed, he returned to his seat, and said with cold and concentrated wrath,
"Ah!" said he, "the sorceress!
Monsieur d'Estouteville, what did the people wish to do with her?"
"Sire," replied the provost of Paris, "I imagine that since the populace has come to tear her from her asylum in Notre Dame, 'tis because that impunity wounds them, and they desire to hang her."
"Enough, sire," replied Tristan. "If the sorceress is still in NotreDame, must she be seized in spite of the sanctuary?"
"~PasqueDieu~! the sanctuary!" said the king, scratching his ear. "But the woman must be hung, nevertheless."
Here, as though seized with a sudden idea, he flung himself on his knees before his chair, took off his hat, placed it on the seat, and gazing devoutly at one of the leaden amulets which loaded it down,
"Oh!" said he, with clasped hands, "our Lady of Paris, my gracious patroness, pardon me.
I assure you, madame the virgin, my good mistress, that she is a sorceress who is not worthy of your amiable protection.
Saint Hugues, bishop of England, permitted King Edward to hang a witch in his church.
SaintLouis of France, my master, transgressed, with the same object, the church of Monsieur SaintPaul; and Monsieur Alphonse, son of the king of Jerusalem, the very church of the Holy Sepulchre.
He made the sign of the cross, rose, donned his hat once more, and said to Tristan,
I have seen Charles of Burgundy drunk, and he was less malignant than Louis XI. when ailing."
On arriving at the Baudoyer gate, he walked straight to the stone cross which rose in the middle of that place, as though he were able to distinguish in the darkness the figure of a man clad and cloaked in black, who was seated on the steps of the cross.
The man on the tower of SaintGervais has just cried halfpast one o'clock in the morning."
The brave deaf man, assailed on all sides, had lost, if not all courage, at least all hope of saving, not himself (he was not thinking of himself), but the gypsy.
Quasimodo who did not hear, saw the naked swords, the torches, the irons of the pikes, all that cavalry, at the head of which he recognized Captain Phoebus; he beheld the confusion of the outcasts, the terror of some, the disturbance among the bravest of them, and from this unexpected succor he recovered so much strength, that he hurled from the church the first assailants who were already climbing into the gallery.
He was singing a ditty, with a nasal intonation, he swung and drew back his scythe incessantly.
At every blow he traced around him a great circle of severed limbs.
When Quasimodo, who had not ceased to fight for a moment, beheld this rout, he fell on his knees and raised his hands to heaven; then, intoxicated with joy, he ran, he ascended with the swiftness of a bird to that cell, the approaches to which he had so intrepidly defended.
He had but one thought now; it was to kneel before her whom he had just saved for the second time.
When he entered the cell, he found it empty.
Soon the everincreasing uproar around the edifice, and the uneasy bleating of her goat which had been awakened, had roused her from her slumbers.
She had sat up, she had listened, she had looked; then, terrified by the light and noise, she had rushed from her cell to see.
Imbued from her very infancy with the superstitions of the Bohemian tribe, her first thought was that she had caught the strange beings peculiar to the night, in their deeds of witchcraft.
Then she ran in terror to cower in her cell, asking of her pallet some less terrible nightmare.
But little by little the first vapors of terror had been dissipated; from the constantly increasing noise, and from many other signs of reality, she felt herself besieged not by spectres, but by human beings.
Then her fear, though it did not increase, changed its character.
She had dreamed of the possibility of a popular mutiny to tear her from her asylum.
The idea of once more recovering life, hope, Phoebus, who was ever present in her future, the extreme helplessness of her condition, flight cut off, no support, her abandonment, her isolation,these thoughts and a thousand others overwhelmed her.
She fell upon her knees, with her head on her bed, her hands clasped over her head, full of anxiety and tremors, and, although a gypsy, an idolater, and a pagan, she began to entreat with sobs, mercy from the good Christian God, and to pray to our Lady, her hostess.
In the midst of this anguish, she heard some one walking near her.
Two men, one of whom carried a lantern, had just entered her cell.
"Fear nothing," said a voice which was not unknown to her, "it is I."
"Who are you?" she asked.
"Pierre Gringoire." This name reassured her.
She raised her eyes once more, and recognized the poet in very fact.
But there stood beside him a black figure veiled from head to foot, which struck her by its silence.
The little goat had not, in fact, waited for Gringoire to announce his name.
No sooner had he entered than it rubbed itself gently against his knees, covering the poet with caresses and with white hairs, for it was shedding its hair.
Then the philosopher setting his lantern on the ground, crouched upon the stones, and exclaimed enthusiastically, as he pressed Djali in his arms, "Oh! 'tis a graceful beast, more considerable no doubt, for it's neatness than for its size, but ingenious, subtle, and lettered as a grammarian!
The man in black did not allow him to finish.
'Tis true," said he: "I forgot that we are in haste.
"Is it true?" she exclaimed in dismay.
"I am willing," she stammered. "But why does not your friend speak?"
"Ah!" said Gringoire, "'tis because his father and mother were fantastic people who made him of a taciturn temperament."
Gringoire took her by the hand; his companion picked up the lantern and walked on in front.
Fear stunned the young girl.
The goat followed them, frisking, so joyous at seeing Gringoire again that it made him stumble every moment by thrusting its horns between his legs.
"Such is life," said the philosopher, every time that he came near falling down; "'tis often our best friends who cause us to be overthrown."
The man in black opened it with a key which he had about him.
Rembrandt has such backgrounds to his pictures.
The man with the lantern walked straight to the point of the Terrain.
The man made a sign to Gringoire and his companion to enter.
The man was the last to step in. Then he cut the boat's moorings, pushed it from the shore with a long boat hook, and, seizing two oars, seated himself in the bow, rowing with all his might towards midstream.
The Seine is very rapid at this point, and he had a good deal of trouble in leaving the point of the island.
Gringoire's first care on entering the boat was to place the goat on his knees.
He took a position in the stern; and the young girl, whom the stranger inspired with an indefinable uneasiness, seated herself close to the poet.
When our philosopher felt the boat sway, he clapped his hands and kissed Djali between the horns.
"Oh!" said he, "now we are safe, all four of us."
The young girl watched the unknown man with secret terror.
He had carefully turned off the light of his dark lantern.
His cowl, which was still lowered, formed a sort of mask; and every time that he spread his arms, upon which hung large black sleeves, as he rowed, one would have said they were two huge bat's wings.
Moreover, he had not yet uttered a word or breathed a syllable.
No other noise was heard in the boat than the splashing of the oars, mingled with the rippling of the water along her sides.
He still owes me the money for my epithalamium, and he came within a nick of hanging me this evening, which would have been very inconvenient to me.He is niggardly towards men of merit.
In truth! 'Tis a paltry king in his ways with men of letters, and one who commits very barbarous cruelties.
The man in black let the garrulous poet chatter on.
"By the way, master!" continued Gringoire suddenly. "At the moment when we arrived on the Parvis, through the enraged outcasts, did your reverence observe that poor little devil whose skull your deaf man was just cracking on the railing of the gallery of the kings?
Do you know who he could be?"
But he suddenly ceased rowing, his arms fell as though broken, his head sank on his breast, and la Esmeralda heard him sigh convulsively.
But the man in black finally recovered himself, seized the oars once more and began to row against the current.
Let us not rest our glance too long on our neighbor's wife, however gratified our senses may be by her beauty.
The unhappy girl dropped her head upon her hands, and the unknown began to row furiously towards the shore.
He clasped the goat in his arms, and gently drew away from the gypsy, who pressed closer and closer to him, as though to the only asylum which remained to her.
He was thinking that the goat also, "according to existing law," would be hung if recaptured; which would be a great pity, poor Djali! that he had thus two condemned creatures attached to him; that his companion asked no better than to take charge of the gypsy.
A violent combat began between his thoughts, in which, like the Jupiter of the Iliad, he weighed in turn the gypsy and the goat; and he looked at them alternately with eyes moist with tears, saying between his teeth:
The unknown rose, approached the gypsy, and endeavored to take her arm to assist her to alight.
She repulsed him and clung to the sleeve of Gringoire, who, in his turn, absorbed in the goat, almost repulsed her.
Then she sprang alone from the boat.
She was so troubled that she did not know what she did or whither she was going.
Thus she remained for a moment, stunned, watching the water flow past; when she gradually returned to her senses, she found herself alone on the wharf with the unknown.
The poor gypsy shivered when she beheld herself alone with this man.
She tried to speak, to cry out, to call Gringoire; her tongue was dumb in her mouth, and no sound left her lips.
All at once she felt the stranger's hand on hers.
Her teeth chattered, she turned paler than the ray of moonlight which illuminated her.
The man spoke not a word.
He began to ascend towards the Place de Grve, holding her by the hand.
At that moment, she had a vague feeling that destiny is an irresistible force.
She had no more resistance left in her, she allowed herself to be dragged along, running while he walked.
At this spot the quay ascended. But it seemed to her as though she were descending a slope.
She gazed about her on all sides.
She heard no sound, she felt no people moving save in the tumultuous and glowing city, from which she was separated only by an arm of the Seine, and whence her name reached her, mingled with cries of "Death!"
The rest of Paris was spread around her in great blocks of shadows.
Meanwhile, the stranger continued to drag her along with the same silence and the same rapidity.
She had no recollection of any of the places where she was walking.
As she passed before a lighted window, she made an effort, drew up suddenly, and cried out, "Help!"
The bourgeois who was standing at the window opened it, appeared there in his shirt with his lamp, stared at the quay with a stupid air, uttered some words which she did not understand, and closed his shutter again.
It was her last gleam of hope extinguished.
The man in black did not utter a syllable; he held her firmly, and set out again at a quicker pace.
From time to time she called together a little strength, and said, in a voice broken by the unevenness of the pavement and the breathlessness of their flight, "Who are you?
She recognized all this, and saw where she was.
The man halted, turned towards her and raised his cowl.
"Oh!" she stammered, almost petrified, "I knew well that it was he again!"
"Listen!" he said to her; and she shuddered at the sound of that fatal voice which she had not heard for a long time.
He continued speaking with those brief and panting jerks, which betoken deep internal convulsions.
(As he spoke thus he paced to and fro, like a man who cannot remain in one place, and dragged her after him.)
Then, like a body which recovers its centre of gravity, he became motionless once more, but his words betrayed no less agitation.
He extended his arm toward the City.
As he went with hurried step and made her hurry also, for he did not release her, he walked straight to the gallows, and pointed to it with his finger,
"Choose between us two," he said, coldly.
She tore herself from his hands and fell at the foot of the gibbet, embracing that funereal support, then she half turned her beautiful head, and looked at the priest over her shoulder.
One would have said that she was a Holy Virgin at the foot of the cross.
The priest remained motionless, his finger still raised toward the gibbet, preserving his attitude like a statue.
Then he allowed his arm to sink slowly, and gazed at the pavement in profound dejection.
"If these stones could speak," he murmured, "yes, they would say that a very unhappy man stands here.
The young girl, kneeling before the gallows, enveloped in her long flowing hair, let him speak on without interruption.
He now had a gentle and plaintive accent which contrasted sadly with the haughty harshness of his features.
Alas! young girl, night and dayyes, night and day I tell you,it is torture. Oh!
I really wish that you should no longer cherish this horror of me.After all, if a man loves a woman, 'tis not his fault!Oh, my God!What!
He hid his face in his hands.
The young girl heard him weeping.
Thus erect and shaken by sobs, he was more miserable and more suppliant than when on his knees.
"Come!" he said, these first tears passed, "I have no more words.
As he uttered these last words, his air became utterly distracted.
There was another silence, and he went on
Yes, Lord, they have just dashed his head before my eyes on the stone of thine house, and it is because of me, because of this woman, because of her."
His voice grew ever weaker; he repeated many times, yet, mechanically, at tolerably long intervals, like a bell prolonging its last vibration: "Because of her.Because of her."
Then his tongue no longer articulated any perceptible sound; but his lips still moved.
All at once he sank together, like something crumbling, and lay motionless on the earth, with his head on his knees.
A touch from the young girl, as she drew her foot from under him, brought him to himself.
He passed his hand slowly over his hollow cheeks, and gazed for several moments at his fingers, which were wet, "What!" he murmured, "I have wept!"
Nothing touches when it comes from the man whom one does not love. If you were to see me die, you would laugh.
Reflect that I hold the destinies of both of us in my hand, that I am mad,it is terrible,that I may let all go to destruction, and that there is beneath us a bottomless abyss, unhappy girl, whither my fall will follow yours to all eternity!
She opened her mouth to answer him.
He flung himself on his knees to receive with adoration the word, possibly a tender one, which was on the point of issuing from her lips.
The priest clasped her in his arms with fury, and began to laugh with an abominable laugh.
"Well, yes, an assassin!" he said, "and I will have you.
Come! joy; kiss me, mad girl!
His lewd lips reddened the young girl's neck.
She struggled in his arms.
He covered her with furious kisses.
"Do not bite me, monster!" she cried. "Oh! the foul, odious monk! leave me!
He reddened, turned pale, then released her and gazed at her with a gloomy air.
He gave vent to a horrible cry, like the wretch to whom a hot iron is applied. "Die, then!" he said, gnashing his teeth.
She saw his terrible look and tried to fly.
He caught her once more, he shook her, he flung her on the ground, and walked with rapid strides towards the corner of the Tour Roland, dragging her after him along the pavement by her beautiful hands.
On arriving there, he turned to her,
Then he cried in a loud voice,
The young girl felt herself seized suddenly by the elbow.
A fleshless arm was stretched from an opening in the wall, and held her like a hand of iron.
"Hold her well," said the priest; "'tis the gypsy escaped.
Release her not.
You shall see her hanged."
The young girl had recognized the spiteful recluse.
Panting with terror, she tried to disengage herself.
She writhed, she made many starts of agony and despair, but the other held her with incredible strength.
The lean and bony fingers which bruised her, clenched on her flesh and met around it.
One would have said that this hand was riveted to her arm.
She fell back against the wall exhausted, and then the fear of death took possession of her.
She thought of the beauty of life, of youth, of the view of heaven, the aspects of nature, of her love for Phoebus, of all that was vanishing and all that was approaching, of the priest who was denouncing her, of the headsman who was to come, of the gallows which was there.
Then she felt terror mount to the very roots of her hair and she heard the mocking laugh of the recluse, saying to her in a very low tone: "Hah! hah! hah! you are going to be hanged!"
She turned a dying look towards the window, and she beheld the fierce face of the sacked nun through the bars.
"What have I done to you?" she said, almost lifeless.
The recluse did not reply, but began to mumble with a singsong irritated, mocking intonation: "Daughter of Egypt! daughter of Egypt! daughter of Egypt!"
The unhappy Esmeralda dropped her head beneath her flowing hair, comprehending that it was no human being she had to deal with.
All at once the recluse exclaimed, as though the gypsy's question had taken all this time to reach her brain,"'What have you done to me?' you say!
I had a child! a child, I tell you!a pretty little girl!my Agnes!" she went on wildly, kissing something in the dark."Well! do you see, daughter of Egypt? they took my child from me; they stole my child; they ate my child.
The young girl replied like a lamb,
She would be the same age as you! so!I have been here fifteen years; fifteen years have I suffered; fifteen years have I prayed; fifteen years have I beat my head against these four wallsI tell you that 'twas the gypsies who stole her from me, do you hear that? and who ate her with their teeth.Have you a heart? imagine a child playing, a child sucking; a child sleeping.
My head is too large!Poor little one! while she was asleep!
And if they woke her up when they took her, in vain she might cry; I was not there!Ah! gypsy mothers, you devoured my child! come see your own."
Then she began to laugh or to gnash her teeth, for the two things resembled each other in that furious face.
On the other side, in the direction of the bridge of NotreDame, the poor condemned girl fancied that she heard the sound of cavalry approaching.
"Madam," she cried, clasping her hands and falling on her knees, dishevelled, distracted, mad with fright; "madam! have pity!
Again the young girl fell; exhausted, broken, and having already the glassy eye of a person in the grave.
"Alas!" she faltered, "you seek your child, I seek my parents."
"You do not know where she is?
I was a woman of the town, I had a child, they took my child.
When your mother, the gypsy, comes to reclaim you, I shall say to her: 'Mother, look at that gibbet!Or, give me back my child.
Do you know where she is, my little daughter?
Here is her shoe, all that is left me of her.
As she spoke thus, with her other arm extended through the window, she showed the gypsy the little embroidered shoe.
And at the same time, with her hand which was at liberty, she quickly opened the little bag ornamented with green glass, which she wore about her neck.
All at once, she stopped short, trembled in every limb, and cried in a voice which proceeded from the very depths of her being: "My daughter!"
When thou shalt find its mate, thy mother will stretch out her arms to thee.
Quicker than a flash of lightning, the recluse had laid the two shoes together, had read the parchment and had put close to the bars of the window her face beaming with celestial joy as she cried,
"My daughter! my daughter!"
"My mother!" said the gypsy.
The young girl passed her arm through the opening; the recluse threw herself on that hand, pressed her lips to it and there remained, buried in that kiss, giving no other sign of life than a sob which heaved her breast from time to time.
In the meanwhile, she wept in torrents, in silence, in the dark, like a rain at night.
The poor mother poured out in floods upon that adored hand the dark and deep well of tears, which lay within her, and into which her grief had filtered, drop by drop, for fifteen years.
All at once she rose, flung aside her long gray hair from her brow, and without uttering a word, began to shake the bars of her cage cell, with both hands, more furiously than a lioness.
Then she went to seek in the corner of her cell a huge paving stone, which served her as a pillow, and launched it against them with such violence that one of the bars broke, emitting thousands of sparks.
Then with her two hands, she finished breaking and removing the rusted stumps of the bars.
There are moments when woman's hands possess superhuman strength.
A passage broken, less than a minute was required for her to seize her daughter by the middle of her body, and draw her into her cell. "Come let me draw you out of the abyss," she murmured.
When her daughter was inside the cell, she laid her gently on the ground, then raised her up again, and bearing her in her arms as though she were still only her little Agnes, she walked to and fro in her little room,intoxicated, frantic, joyous, crying out, singing, kissing her daughter, talking to her, bursting into laughter, melting into tears, all at once and with vehemence.
"My daughter! my daughter!" she said. "I have my daughter! here she is!
The good God has given her back to me!
Is there any one there to see that I have my daughter?
Lord Jesus, how beautiful she is!
You have made me wait fifteen years, my good God, but it was in order to give her back to me beautiful.Then the gypsies did not eat her!
My little daughter! my little daughter!
See her neck, her eyes, her hair, her hands.
Oh! I promise you she will have lovers, that she will!
All my beauty has departed and has fallen to her.
She addressed to her a thousand other extravagant remarks, whose accent constituted their sole beauty, disarranged the poor girl's garments even to the point of making her blush, smoothed her silky hair with her hand, kissed her foot, her knee, her brow, her eyes, was in raptures over everything.
The young girl let her have her way, repeating at intervals and very low and with infinite tenderness, "My mother!"
"Do you see, my little girl," resumed the recluse, interspersing her words with kisses, "I shall love you dearly?
I have my daughter!"
"Oh, my mother!" said the young girl, at length finding strength to speak in her emotion, "the gypsy woman told me so.
It was she who placed this little bag about my neck.
She always said to me: 'Little one, guard this jewel well!
It will cause thee to find thy mother once again.
Thou wearest thy mother about thy neck.'The gypsy predicted it!"
The sacked nun again pressed her daughter in her arms.
And then she began to clap her hands again and to laugh and to cry out: "We are going to be so happy!"
"Save me! save me! mother! they are coming!"
"To die!" said Gudule, staggering as though struck by lightning; "to die!" she repeated slowly, gazing at her daughter with staring eyes.
"Yes, mother," replied the frightened young girl, "they want to kill me.
The recluse remained for several moments motionless and petrified, then she moved her head in sign of doubt, and suddenly giving vent to a burst of laughter, but with that terrible laugh which had come back to her,
Ah, yes! I lost her, that lasted fifteen years, and then I found her again, and that lasted a minute!
And they would take her from me again! And now, when she is beautiful, when she is grown up, when she speaks to me, when she loves me; it is now that they would come to devour her, before my very eyes, and I her mother!
The priest says that we shall find her at the RatHole." The noise of the horses began again.
The recluse sprang to her feet with a shriek of despair. "Fly! fly! my child!
She thrust her head through the window, and withdrew it again hastily.
"Remain," she said, in a low, curt, and lugubrious tone, as she pressed the hand of the gypsy, who was more dead than alive.
She remained silent for a moment; but she paced the cell hurriedly, and halted now and then to pluck out handfuls of her gray hairs, which she afterwards tore with her teeth.
Suddenly she said: "They draw near.
She set her daughter (down for she was still carrying her), in one corner of the cell which was not visible from without.
She made her crouch down, arranged her carefully so that neither foot nor hand projected from the shadow, untied her black hair which she spread over her white robe to conceal it, placed in front of her her jug and her paving stone, the only articles of furniture which she possessed, imagining that this jug and stone would hide her.
And when this was finished she became more tranquil, and knelt down to pray.
At that name, at that voice, la Esmeralda, crouching in her corner, made a movement.
The mother rose quickly and went to post herself before her window, in order to stop it up.
The commander dismounted, and came toward her.
"Old woman!" said this man, who had an atrocious face, "we are in search of a witch to hang her; we were told that you had her."
The poor mother assumed as indifferent an air as she could, and replied, "I know not what you mean."
Where is he?"
What have you done with her?"
"If you are speaking of a big young girl who was put into my hands a while ago, I will tell you that she bit me, and that I released her.
"Don't lie to me, old spectre!" said he. "My name is Tristan l'Hermite, and I am the king's gossip.
He added, as he glanced at the Place de Grve around him, "'Tis a name which has an echo here."
So the witch girl hath fled!
And in which direction did she go?"
"Through the Rue du Mouton, I believe." Tristan turned his head and made a sign to his troop to prepare to set out on the march again.
"Monseigneur," suddenly said an archer, "ask the old elf why the bars of her window are broken in this manner." This question brought anguish again to the heart of the miserable mother.
Nevertheless, she did not lose all presence of mind. They have always been thus," she stammered.
"I think the old dame is getting confused!" The unfortunate woman felt that all depended on her self possession, and, although with death in her soul, she began to grin.
"Bah!" said she, "the man is drunk.
But she was condemned to a perpetual alternative of hope and alarm.
Reply to what he says, old woman." "Good heavens!" she exclaimed, driven to bay, and in a voice that was full of tears in despite of her efforts, "I swear to you, monseigneur, that 'twas a cart which broke those bars.
You hear the man who saw it.
Tristan tossed his head. She turned pale.
"Monseigneur!" she cried, still pressed against the opening, and trembling lest suspicion should lead them to thrust their heads through and look into her cell; "monseigneur, I swear to you that 'twas a cart which broke this grating.
"You put a great deal of heat into that oath;" said Tristan, with his inquisitorial glance.
The poor woman felt her assurance vanishing more and more.
She had reached the point of blundering, and she comprehended with terror that she was saying what she ought not to have said.
I believe, in fact, that she crossed the water."
"That is in the opposite direction," said the provost, "and it is not very likely that she would wish to reenter the city, where she was being pursued.
You are lying, old woman."
"She swam across," replied the recluse, defending her ground foot by foot.
"~Tte Dieu~! old woman!
Quick, quick! let us set out at once!During that time," she said to herself, "my daughter will make her escape."
If she released the gypsy, it was not her fault, for she loves not the gypsies.
I have been of the watch these fifteen years, and I hear her every evening cursing the Bohemian women with endless imprecations.
If the one of whom we are in pursuit is, as I suppose, the little dancer with the goat, she detests that one above all the rest."
Tristan l'Hermite, in despair at extracting anything from the recluse, turned his back on her, and with unspeakable anxiety she beheld him direct his course slowly towards his horse.
"Come!" he said, between his teeth, "March on! let us set out again on the quest.
But he still hesitated for some time before mounting his horse.
Gudule palpitated between life and death, as she beheld him cast about the Place that uneasy look of a hunting dog which instinctively feels that the lair of the beast is close to him, and is loath to go away.
At length he shook his head and leaped into his saddle.
Gudule's horribly compressed heart now dilated, and she said in a low voice, as she cast a glance at her daughter, whom she had not ventured to look at while they were there, "Saved!"
The poor child had remained all this time in her corner, without breathing, without moving, with the idea of death before her.
She had lost nothing of the scene between Gudule and Tristan, and the anguish of her mother had found its echo in her heart.
She had heard all the successive snappings of the thread by which she hung suspended over the gulf; twenty times she had fancied that she saw it break, and at last she began to breathe again and to feel her foot on firm ground. At that moment she heard a voice saying to the provost:
Monsieur le Prevt, 'tis no affair of mine, a man of arms, to hang witches.
The voice was that of Phoebus de Chteaupers; that which took place within her was ineffable.
He was there, her friend, her protector, her support, her refuge, her Phoebus.
She rose, and before her mother could prevent her, she had rushed to the window, crying,
He had just turned the corner of the Rue de la Coutellerie at a gallop.
But Tristan had not yet taken his departure.
The recluse rushed upon her daughter with a roar of agony.
She dragged her violently back, digging her nails into her neck.
A tigress mother does not stand on trifles.
"H! h!" he exclaimed with a laugh which laid bare all his teeth and made his face resemble the muzzle of a wolf, "two mice in the trap!"
Come!" he added, "where is Henriet Cousin?"
A man who had neither the garments nor the air of a soldier, stepped from the ranks.
He wore a costume half gray, half brown, flat hair, leather sleeves, and carried a bundle of ropes in his huge hand.
This man always attended Tristan, who always attended Louis XI.
"There is one yonder, under the shed of the PillarHouse," replied the man. "Is it on this justice that the thing is to be done?" he added, pointing to the stone gibbet.
"Ho, h!" continued the man with a huge laugh, which was still more brutal than that of the provost, "we shall not have far to go."
In the meantime, the recluse had not uttered another word since Tristan had seen her daughter and all hope was lost.
In this attitude she was seen to cast upon all those soldiers her glance which had become wild and frantic once more.
At the moment when Rennet Cousin approached her cell, she showed him so savage a face that he shrank back.
"Monseigneur," he said, returning to the provost, "which am I to take?"
The mother's eyes made his own droop.
"It is not you," he said, "it is the other."
She began to shake her head, crying, "There is no one! there is no one! there is no one!"
"Let me have the other, madam; 'tis monsieur the provost who wills it." She repeated with a look of madness, "There is no one here."
The executioner observed the mother's fingernails and dared not.
"Make haste!" shouted Tristan, who had just ranged his troops in a circle round the RatHole, and who sat on his horse beside the gallows.
He had flung his rope on the ground, and was twisting his hat between his hands with an awkward air.
"Monseigneur," he asked, "where am I to enter?"
The mother still looked on steadfastly from the depths of her cavern.
She no longer hoped for anything, she no longer knew what she wished, except that she did not wish them to take her daughter.
Rennet Cousin went in search of the chest of tools for the night man, under the shed of the PillarHouse.
He drew from it also the double ladder, which he immediately set up against the gallows.
"Old woman," said the provost, in a severe tone, "deliver up to us that girl quietly."
The wretched woman began to laugh in her wild way.
"Why? She is my daughter."
The tone in which she pronounced these words made even Henriet Cousin shudder.
She cried, redoubling her terrible laugh, "What is your king to me?
I tell you that she is my daughter!"
When the mother heard the picks and crowbars mining her fortress, she uttered a terrible cry; then she began to stride about her cell with frightful swiftness, a wild beasts' habit which her cage had imparted to her.
She no longer said anything, but her eyes flamed.
All at once she seized her paving stone, laughed, and hurled it with both fists upon the workmen.
The stone, badly flung (for her hands trembled), touched no one, and fell short under the feet of Tristan's horse.
She gnashed her teeth.
The recluse had gone and seated herself by her daughter, covering her with her body, in front of her, with staring eyes, listening to the poor child, who did not stir, but who kept murmuring in a low voice, these words only, "Phoebus!
In proportion as the work of the demolishers seemed to advance, the mother mechanically retreated, and pressed the young girl closer and closer to the wall.
All at once, the recluse beheld the stone (for she was standing guard and never took her eyes from it), move, and she heard Tristan's voice encouraging the workers.
Then she aroused from the depression into which she had fallen during the last few moments, cried out, and as she spoke, her voice now rent the ear like a saw, then stammered as though all kind of maledictions were pressing to her lips to burst forth at once.
Are you really going to take my daughter?
Then, addressing Tristan, foaming at the mouth, with wild eyes, all bristling and on all fours like a female panther,
"Draw near and take my daughter!
Do not you understand that this woman tells you that she is my daughter?
Eh! lynx, have you never lain with your female? have you never had a cub? and if you have little ones, when they howl have you nothing in your vitals that moves?"
The crowbars raised the heavy course. It was, as we have said, the mother's last bulwark.
She threw herself upon it, she tried to hold it back; she scratched the stone with her nails, but the massive block, set in movement by six men, escaped her and glided gently to the ground along the iron levers.
The mother, perceiving an entrance effected, fell down in front of the opening, barricading the breach with her body, beating the pavement with her head, and shrieking with a voice rendered so hoarse by fatigue that it was hardly audible,
The mother gazed at the soldiers in such formidable fashion that they were more inclined to retreat than to advance.
The provost swore, "~Tte de Christ~! my men of war! afraid of a woman!"
"Monseigneur," said Rennet, "do you call that a woman?"
"She has the mane of a lion," said another.
I will make two pieces of the first man who draws back!"
Placed between the provost and the mother, both threatening, the soldiers hesitated for a moment, then took their resolution, and advanced towards the RatHole.
When the recluse saw this, she rose abruptly on her knees, flung aside her hair from her face, then let her thin flayed hands fall by her side.
Then great tears fell, one by one, from her eyes; they flowed down her cheeks through a furrow, like a torrent through a bed which it has hollowed for itself.
At the same time she began to speak, but in a voice so supplicating, so gentle, so submissive, so heartrending, that more than one old convictwarder around Tristan who must have devoured human flesh wiped his eyes.
She is my daughter, do you see? my dear little daughter whom I had lost!
I was a poor woman of the town.
It was the Bohemians who stole her from me.
And I kept her shoe for fifteen years. Stay, here it is.
That was the kind of foot which she had.
The gypsies stole her from me; they hid her from me for fifteen years.
I thought her dead.
Fancy, my good friends, believed her to be dead.
This night he has given my daughter back to me.
You will not take her from me, I am sure.
If it were myself, I would say nothing; but she, a child of sixteen!
Leave her time to see the sun!
What has she done to you? nothing at all.
Nor have I. If you did but know that she is all I have, that I am old, that she is a blessing which the Holy Virgin has sent to me!
You did not know that she was my daughter; but now you do know it.
Oh! I love her!
Monsieur, the grand provost. I would prefer a stab in my own vitals to a scratch on her finger!
Oh! if you have had a mother, monsiegneur! you are the captain, leave me my child!
The good God, who is the master, has not given her back to me for nothing!
It would not cause him much pleasure to have my little daughter killed!
And then, the king is good! she is my daughter! she is my own daughter!
She belongs not to the king! she is not yours!
I want to go away! we want to go away! and when two women pass, one a mother and the other a daughter, one lets them go!
We will not try to give an idea of her gestures, her tone, of the tears which she swallowed as she spoke, of the hands which she clasped and then wrung, of the heartbreaking smiles, of the swimming glances, of the groans, the sighs, the miserable and affecting cries which she mingled with her disordered, wild, and incoherent words.
When she became silent Tristan l'Hermite frowned, but it was to conceal a tear which welled up in his tiger's eye.
Then he bent down to the ear of Rennet Cousin, and said to him in a very low tone,
"Make an end of it quickly!" Possibly, the redoubtable provost felt his heart also failing him.
The mother offered no resistance, only she dragged herself towards her daughter and threw herself bodily upon her.
The horror of death reanimated her,
"Mother!" she shrieked, in a tone of indescribable distress, "Mother! they are coming! defend me!"
"Yes, my love, I am defending you!" replied the mother, in a dying voice; and clasping her closely in her arms, she covered her with kisses.
The two lying thus on the earth, the mother upon the daughter, presented a spectacle worthy of pity.
Rennet Cousin grasped the young girl by the middle of her body, beneath her beautiful shoulders.
When she felt that hand, she cried, "Heuh!" and fainted.
The executioner who was shedding large tears upon her, drop by drop, was about to bear her away in his arms.
He tried to detach the mother, who had, so to speak, knotted her hands around her daughter's waist; but she clung so strongly to her child, that it was impossible to separate them.
Then Rennet Cousin dragged the young girl outside the cell, and the mother after her.
The mother's eyes were also closed.
Rennet Cousin paused at the foot of the fatal ladder, with that which he was dragging, and, barely breathing, with so much pity did the thing inspire him, he passed the rope around the lovely neck of the young girl. The unfortunate child felt the horrible touch of the hemp.
She raised her eyelids, and saw the fleshless arm of the stone gallows extended above her head.
Then she shook herself and shrieked in a loud and heartrending voice: "No! no!
I will not!" Her mother, whose head was buried and concealed in her daughter's garments, said not a word; only her whole body could be seen to quiver, and she was heard to redouble her kisses on her child.
The executioner took advantage of this moment to hastily loose the arms with which she clasped the condemned girl.
Either through exhaustion or despair, she let him have his way.
Then he took the young girl on his shoulder, from which the charming creature hung, gracefully bent over his large head.
Then he set his foot on the ladder in order to ascend.
At that moment, the mother who was crouching on the pavement, opened her eyes wide.
Without uttering a cry, she raised herself erect with a terrible expression; then she flung herself upon the hand of the executioner, like a beast on its prey, and bit it.
Those near by rushed up. With difficulty they withdrew his bleeding hand from the mother's teeth.
They thrust her back with much brutality, and noticed that her head fell heavily on the pavement. They raised her, she fell back again.
The executioner, who had not loosed his hold on the young girl, began to ascend the ladder once more.
When Quasimodo saw that the cell was empty, that the gypsy was no longer there, that while he had been defending her she had been abducted, he grasped his hair with both hands and stamped with surprise and pain; then he set out to run through the entire church seeking his Bohemian, howling strange cries to all the corners of the walls, strewing his red hair on the pavement.
Quasimodo, poor, deaf fellow, aided them in their fatal intentions, without suspecting it; he thought that the outcasts were the gypsy's enemies.
If the unfortunate girl had still been there, it would have been he himself who would have delivered her up.
He made the tour of the church twenty times, length and breadth, up and down, ascending and descending, running, calling, sbouting, peeping, rummaging, ransacking, thrusting his head into every hole, pushing a torch under every vault, despairing, mad.
A male who has lost his female is no more roaring nor more haggard.
At last when he was sure, perfectly sure that she was no longer there, that all was at an end, that she had been snatched from him, he slowly mounted the staircase to the towers, that staircase which he had ascended with so much eagerness and triumph on the day when he had saved her.
Quasimodo, left alone in that vast NotreDame, so besieged and tumultuous but a short time before, once more betook himself to the cell where the gypsy had slept for so many weeks under his guardianship.
As he approached it, he fancied that he might, perhaps, find her there.
When, at the turn of the gallery which opens on the roof of the side aisles, he perceived the tiny cell with its little window and its little door crouching beneath a great flying buttress like a bird's nest under a branch, the poor man's heart failed him, and he leaned against a pillar to keep from falling.
He imagined that she might have returned thither, that some good genius had, no doubt, brought her back, that this chamber was too tranquil, too safe, too charming for her not to be there, and he dared not take another step for fear of destroying his illusion. "Yes," he said to himself, "perchance she is sleeping, or praying.
I must not disturb her."
At length he summoned up courage, advanced on tiptoe, looked, entered.
The unhappy deaf man walked slowly round it, lifted the bed and looked beneath it, as though she might be concealed between the pavement and the mattress, then he shook his head and remained stupefied.
All at once, he crushed his torch under his foot, and, without uttering a word, without giving vent to a sigh, he flung himself at full speed, head foremost against the wall, and fell fainting on the floor.
When he recovered his senses, he threw himself on the bed and rolling about, he kissed frantically the place where the young girl had slept and which was still warm; he remained there for several moments asmotionless as though he were about to expire; then he rose, dripping with perspiration, panting, mad, and began to beat his head against the wall with the frightful regularity of the clapper of his bells, and the resolution of a man determined to kill himself.
At length he fell a second time, exhausted; he dragged himself on his knees outside the cell, and crouched down facing the door, in an attitude of astonishment.
He remained thus for more than an hour without making a movement, with his eye fixed on the deserted cell, more gloomy, and more pensive than a mother seated between an empty cradle and a full coffin.
He uttered not a word; only at long intervals, a sob heaved his body violently, but it was a tearless sob, like summer lightning which makes no noise.
It appears to have been then, that, seeking at the bottom of his lonely thoughts for the unexpected abductor of the gypsy, he thought of the archdeacon.
He remembered that Dom Claude alone possessed a key to the staircase leading to the cell; he recalled his nocturnal attempts on the young girl, in the first of which he, Quasimodo, had assisted, the second of which he had prevented.
He recalled a thousand details, and soon he no longer doubted that the archdeacon had taken the gypsy.
Nevertheless, such was his respect for the priest, such his gratitude, his devotion, his love for this man had taken such deep root in his heart, that they resisted, even at this moment, the talons of jealousy and despair.
He reflected that the archdeacon had done this thing, and the wrath of blood and death which it would have evoked in him against any other person, turned in the poor deaf man, from the moment when Claude Frollo was in question, into an increase of grief and sorrow.
At the moment when his thought was thus fixed upon the priest, while the daybreak was whitening the flying buttresses, he perceived on the highest story of NotreDame, at the angle formed by the external balustrade as it makes the turn of the chancel, a figure walking.
He did not look before him as he walked, he was directing his course towards the northern tower, but his face was turned aside towards the right bank of the Seine, and he held his head high, as though trying to see something over the roofs.
The deaf man, who had been petrified by this sudden apparition, beheld him disappear through the door of the staircase to the north tower.
Moreover, the poor bellringer did not know what he (Quasimodo) should do, what he should say, what he wished.
The archdeacon and the gypsy had come into conflict in his heart.
When he reached the summit of the tower, before emerging from the shadow of the staircase and stepping upon the platform, he cautiously examined the position of the priest.
The priest, whose eyes looked down upon the town, was resting his breast on that one of the four sides of the balustrades which looks upon the Pont NotreDame.
Quasimodo, advancing with the tread of a wolf behind him, went to see what he was gazing at thus.
The priest's attention was so absorbed elsewhere that he did not hear the deaf man walking behind him.
He was one of the men for whom there are no mornings, no birds, no flowers.
In that immense horizon, which assumed so many aspects about him, his contemplation was concentrated on a single point.
Quasimodo was burning to ask him what he had done with the gypsy; but the archdeacon seemed to be out of the world at that moment.
He remained motionless and silent, with his eyes steadily fixed on a certain point; and there was something so terrible about this silence and immobility that the savage bellringer shuddered before it and dared not come in contact with it.
Only, and this was also one way of interrogating the archdeacon, he followed the direction of his vision, and in this way the glance of the unhappy deaf man fell upon the Place de Grve.
Thus he saw what the priest was looking at.
A man was dragging a white thing, from which hung something black, along the pavement.
This man halted at the foot of the gallows.
It was not because his only eye had not preserved its long range, but there was a group of soldiers which prevented his seeing everything.
Meanwhile, the man began to mount the ladder.
He was carrying a woman on his shoulder, a young girl dressed in white; that young girl had a noose about her neck.
Quasimodo recognized her.
It was she.
The man reached the top of the ladder.
There he arranged the noose.
All at once the man kicked away the ladder abruptly, and Quasimodo, who had not breathed for several moments, beheld the unhappy child dangling at the end of the rope two fathoms above the pavement, with the man squatting on her shoulders.
The priest, on his side, with outstretched neck and eyes starting from his head, contemplated this horrible group of the man and the young girl,the spider and the fly.
Quasimodo did not hear that laugh, but he saw it.
The bellringer retreated several paces behind the archdeacon, and suddenly hurling himself upon him with fury, with his huge hands he pushed him by the back over into the abyss over which Dom Claude was leaning.
The spout, above which he had stood, arrested him in his fall.
He clung to it with desperate hands, and, at the moment when he opened his mouth to utter a second cry, he beheld the formidable and avenging face of Quasimodo thrust over the edge of the balustrade above his head.
Then he was silent.
He merely writhed upon the spout, with incredible efforts to climb up again; but his hands had no hold on the granite, his feet slid along the blackened wall without catching fast.
Quasimodo had but to stretch out his hand in order to draw him from the gulf; but he did not even look at him. He was looking at the Grve.
The deaf man was leaning, with his elbows on the balustrade, at the spot where the archdeacon had been a moment before, and there, never detaching his gaze from the only object which existed for him in the world at that moment, he remained motionless and mute, like a man struck by lightning, and a long stream of tears flowed in silence from that eye which, up to that time, had never shed but one tear.
His bald brow was dripping with perspiration, his nails were bleeding against the stones, his knees were flayed by the wall.
He heard his cassock, which was caught on the spout, crack and rip at every jerk that he gave it.
To complete his misfortune, this spout ended in a leaden pipe which bent under the weight of his body.
The miserable man said to himself that, when his hands should be worn out with fatigue, when his cassock should tear asunder, when the lead should give way, he would be obliged to fall, and terror seized upon his very vitals.
Now and then he glanced wildly at a sort of narrow shelf formed, ten feet lower down, by projections of the sculpture, and he prayed heaven, from the depths of his distressed soul, that he might be allowed to finish his life, were it to last two centuries, on that space two feet square.
Once, he glanced below him into the Place, into the abyss; the head which he raised again had its eyes closed and its hair standing erect.
The archdeacon, seeing that all his exertions served only to weaken the fragile support which remained to him, decided to remain quiet.
There he hung, embracing the gutter, hardly breathing, no longer stirring, making no longer any other movements than that mechanical convulsion of the stomach, which one experiences in dreams when one fancies himself falling.
He lost ground little by little, nevertheless, his fingers slipped along the spout; he became more and more conscious of the feebleness of his arms and the weight of his body.
All was stone around him; before his eyes, gaping monsters; below, quite at the bottom, in the Place, the pavement; above his head, Quasimodo weeping.
The priest heard them saying, for their voices reached him, clear and shrill: "Why, he will break his neck!"
Nevertheless, he collected all the strength which remained to him for a final effort.
He stiffened himself upon the spout, pushed against the wall with both his knees, clung to a crevice in the stones with his hands, and succeeded in climbing back with one foot, perhaps; but this effort made the leaden beak on which he rested bend abruptly.
Then, feeling everything give way beneath him, with nothing but his stiffened and failing hands to support him, the unfortunate man closed his eyes and let go of the spout.
The archdeacon, launched into space, fell at first head foremost, with outspread hands; then he whirled over and over many times; the wind blew him upon the roof of a house, where the unfortunate man began to break up.
Nevertheless, he was not dead when he reached there.
The bellringer saw him still endeavor to cling to a gable with his nails; but the surface sloped too much, and he had no more strength.
There he no longer moved.
Then Quasimodo raised his eyes to the gypsy, whose body he beheld hanging from the gibbet, quivering far away beneath her white robe with the last shudderings of anguish, then he dropped them on the archdeacon, stretched out at the base of the tower, and no longer retaining the human form, and he said, with a sob which heaved his deep chest, "Oh! all that I have ever loved!"
It was presumed that he had broken the body when taking the soul, like monkeys who break the shell to get at the nut.
As for Pierre Gringoire, he succeeded in saving the goat, and he won success in tragedy.
It appears that, after having tasted astrology, philosophy, architecture, hermetics,all vanities, he returned to tragedy, vainest pursuit of all.
This is what he called "coming to a tragic end."
This is what is to be read, on the subject of his dramatic triumphs, in 1483, in the accounts of the "Ordinary:" "To Jehan Marchand and Pierre Gringoire, carpenter and composer, who have made and composed the mystery made at the Chtelet of Paris, at the entry of Monsieur the Legate, and have ordered the personages, clothed and dressed the same, as in the said mystery was required; and likewise, for having made the scaffoldings thereto necessary; and for this deed,one hundred livres."
During the night which followed the execution of la Esmeralda, the night men had detached her body from the gibbet, and had carried it, according to custom, to the cellar of Montfauon.
To that deep charnelhouse, where so many human remains and so many crimes have rotted in company, many great ones of this world, many innocent people, have contributed their bones, from Enguerrand de Marigni, the first victim, and a just man, to Admiral de Coligni, who was its last, and who was also a just man.
One of these skeletons, which was that of a woman, still had a few strips of a garment which had once been white, and around her neck was to be seen a string of adrzarach beads with a little silk bag ornamented with green glass, which was open and empty.
The other, which held this one in a close embrace, was the skeleton of a man.
It was noticed that his spinal column was crooked, his head seated on his shoulder blades, and that one leg was shorter than the other.
Moreover, there was no fracture of the vertebrae at the nape of the neck, and it was evident that he had not been hanged.
Hence, the man to whom it had belonged had come thither and had died there.
When they tried to detach the skeleton which he held in his embrace, he fell to dust.
Someone must have been telling lies about Josef K., he knew he had done nothing wrong but, one morning, he was arrested.
Every day at eight in the morning he was brought his breakfast by Mrs. Grubach's cook - Mrs. Grubach was his landlady - but today she didn't come.
K. waited a little while, looked from his pillow at the old woman who lived opposite and who was watching him with an inquisitiveness quite unusual for her, and finally, both hungry and disconcerted, rang the bell.
There was immediately a knock at the door and a man entered. He had never seen the man in this house before.
He was slim but firmly built, his clothes were black and close-fitting, with many folds and pockets, buckles and buttons and a belt, all of which gave the impression of being very practical but without making it very clear what they were actually for.
"Who are you?" asked K., sitting half upright in his bed.
The man, however, ignored the question as if his arrival simply had to be accepted, and merely replied, "You rang?"
"Anna should have brought me my breakfast," said K. He tried to work out who the man actually was, first in silence, just through observation and by thinking about it, but the man didn't stay still to be looked at for very long.
Instead he went over to the door, opened it slightly, and said to someone who was clearly standing immediately behind it, "He wants Anna to bring him his breakfast."
The strange man could not have learned anything from it that he hadn't known already, but now he said to K., as if making his report
"It would be the first time that's happened," said K., as he jumped out of bed and quickly pulled on his trousers. "I want to see who that is in the next room, and why it is that Mrs. Grubach has let me be disturbed in this way."
It immediately occurred to him that he needn't have said this out loud, and that he must to some extent have acknowledged their authority by doing so, but that didn't seem important to him at the time.
That, at least, is how the stranger took it, as he said, "Don't you think you'd better stay where you are?"
The next room, which K. entered more slowly than he had intended, looked at first glance exactly the same as it had the previous evening.
"And what is it you want, then?" said K., looking back and forth between this new acquaintance and the one named Franz, who had remained in the doorway. Through the open window he noticed the old woman again, who had come close to the window opposite so that she could continue to see everything.
She was showing an inquisitiveness that really made it seem like she was going senile. "I want to see Mrs. Grubach ... ," said K., making a movement as if tearing himself away from the two men - even though they were standing well away from him - and wanted to go.
"No," said the man at the window, who threw his book down on a coffee table and stood up. "You can't go away when you're under arrest."
"That's how it seems," said K. "And why am I under arrest?" he then asked.
It's not really part of my job to be friendly towards you like this, but I hope no-one, apart from Franz, will hear about it, and he's been more friendly towards you than he should have been, under the rules, himself.
K. wanted to sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the chair by the window, there was nowhere anywhere in the room where he could sit.
"You'll get the chance to see for yourself how true all this is," said Franz and both men then walked up to K. They were significantly bigger than him, especially the second man, who frequently slapped him on the shoulder.
The two of them felt K.'s nightshirt, and said he would now have to wear one that was of much lower quality, but that they would keep the nightshirt along with his other underclothes and return them to him if his case turned out well.
K. paid hardly any attention to what they were saying, he did not place much value on what he may have still possessed or on who decided what happened to them. It was much more important to him to get a clear understanding of his position, but he could not think clearly while these people were here, the second policeman's belly - and they could only be policemen - looked friendly enough, sticking out towards him, but when K. looked up and saw his dry, boney face it did not seem to fit with the body.
What office did they belong to? K. was living in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all laws were decent and were upheld, who was it who dared accost him in his own home?
He was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, to cross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even when everything seemed under threat.
But here that did not seem the right thing to do. He could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set up by his colleagues at the bank for some unknown reason, or also perhaps because today was his thirtieth birthday, it was all possible of course, maybe all he had to do was laugh in the policemen's face in some way and they would laugh with him, maybe they were tradesmen from the corner of the street, they looked like they might be - but he was nonetheless determined, ever since he first caught sight of the one called Franz, not to lose any slight advantage he might have had over these people.
There was a very slight risk that people would later say he couldn't understand a joke, but - although he wasn't normally in the habit of learning from experience - he might also have had a few unimportant occasions in mind when, unlike his more cautious friends, he had acted with no thought at all for what might follow and had been made to suffer for it.
He didn't want that to happen again, not this time at least; if they were play-acting he would act along with them.
He still had time. "Allow me," he said, and hurried between the two policemen through into his room.
"He seems sensible enough," he heard them say behind him.
Once in his room, he quickly pulled open the drawer of his writing desk, everything in it was very tidy but in his agitation he was unable to find the identification documents he was looking for straight away.
He finally found his bicycle permit and was about to go back to the policemen with it when it seemed to him too petty, so he carried on searching until he found his birth certificate.
Just as he got back in the adjoining room the door on the other side opened and Mrs. Grubach was about to enter.
He only saw her for an instant, for as soon as she recognised K. she was clearly embarrassed, asked for forgiveness and disappeared, closing the door behind her very carefully.
But now he stood in the middle of the room with his papers in his hand and still looking at the door which did not open again. He stayed like that until he was startled out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the little table at the open window and, as K. now saw, was eating his breakfast.
"Why didn't she come in?" he asked.
"That's true, you know, you'd better believe it," said Franz, holding a cup of coffee in his hand which he did not lift to his mouth but looked at K. in a way that was probably meant to be full of meaning but could not actually be understood.
K. found himself, without intending it, in a mute dialogue with Franz, but then slapped his hand down on his papers and said, "Here are my identity documents."
Mind you, what we can do is make sure that the high officials we work for find out just what sort of person it is they're going to arrest, and why he should be arrested, before they issue the warrant.
"It's probably exists only in your heads," said K., he wanted, in some way, to insinuate his way into the thoughts of the policemen, to re-shape those thoughts to his benefit or to make himself at home there.
Franz joined in, and said, "Look at this, Willem, he admits he doesn't know the law and at the same time insists he's innocent."
K. stopped talking with them; do I, he thought to himself, do I really have to carry on getting tangled up with the chattering of base functionaries like this? - and they admit themselves that they are of the lowest position.
He walked up and down the free space in the room a couple of times, across the street he could see the old woman who, now, had pulled an old man, much older than herself, up to the window and had her arms around him.
K. had to put an end to this display, "Take me to your superior," he said.
Not before," said the policeman, the one called Willem. "And now my advice to you," he added, "is to go into your room, stay calm, and wait and see what's to be done with you.
Perhaps, if he opened the door of the next room or even the front door, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps that would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to a head.
But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the ground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had over them.
So he decided on the more certain solution, the way things would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his room without another word either from him or from the policemen.
He threw himself down on his bed, and from the dressing table he took the nice apple that he had put there the previous evening for his breakfast.
Now it was all the breakfast he had and anyway, as he confirmed as soon as he took his first, big bite of it, it was far better than a breakfast he could have had through the good will of the policemen from the dirty caf.
He felt well and confident, he had failed to go into work at the bank this morning but that could easily be excused because of the relatively high position he held there.
Should he really send in his explanation?
If nobody believed him, and in this case that would be understandable, he could bring Mrs. Grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from across the street, who probably even now were on their way over to the window opposite.
It puzzled K., at least it puzzled him looking at it from the policemen's point of view, that they had made him go into the room and left him alone there, where he had ten different ways of killing himself.
At the same time, though, he asked himself, this time looking at it from his own point of view, what reason he could have to do so.
Because those two were sitting there in the next room and had taken his breakfast, perhaps?
It would have been so pointless to kill himself that, even if he had wanted to, the pointlessness would have made him unable.
They could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over to the cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottle of good schnapps, how he first emptied a glass of it in place of his breakfast and how he then took a second glassful in order to give himself courage, the last one just as a precaution for the unlikely chance it would be needed.
Then he was so startled by a shout to him from the other room that he struck his teeth against the glass.
It was only the shout that startled him, this curt, abrupt, military shout, that he would not have expected from the policeman called Franz.
In itself, he found the order very welcome.
"At last!" he called back, locked the cupboard and, without delay, hurried into the next room.
The two policemen were standing there and chased him back into his bedroom as if that were a matter of course.
"Let go of me for God's sake!" called K., who had already been pushed back as far as his wardrobe, "if you accost me when I'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in my evening dress."
"That won't help you," said the policemen, who always became very quiet, almost sad, when K. began to shout, and in that way confused him or, to some extent, brought him to his senses.
"Ridiculous formalities!" he grumbled, as he lifted his coat from the chair and kept it in both his hands for a little while, as if holding it out for the policemen's inspection.
At that, K. threw the coat to the floor and said - without knowing even himself what he meant by it - "Well it's not going to be the main trial, after all."
"Well that's alright by me if it makes things go any faster," said K. He opened the wardrobe himself, spent a long time searching through all the clothes, and chose his best black suit which had a short jacket that had greatly surprised those who knew him, then he also pulled out a fresh shirt and began, carefully, to get dressed.
He secretly told himself that he had succeeded in speeding things up by letting the policemen forget to make him have a bath.
Once he was properly dressed, K. had to pass by Willem as he went through the next room into the one beyond, the door of which was already wide open.
K. knew very well that this room had recently been let to a typist called 'Miss Brstner'. She was in the habit of going out to work very early and coming back home very late, and K. had never exchanged more than a few words of greeting with her.
Now, her bedside table had been pulled into the middle of the room to be used as a desk for these proceedings, and the supervisor sat behind it.
He had his legs crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair.
At the window across the street, there was the old pair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, and far taller than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that showed his chest and a reddish goatee beard which he squeezed and twisted with his fingers.
"Josef K.?" asked the supervisor, perhaps merely to attract K.'s attention as he looked round the room.
K. nodded. "I daresay you were quite surprised by all that's been taking place this morning," said the supervisor as, with both hands, he pushed away the few items on the bedside table - the candle and box of matches, a book and a pin cushion which lay there as if they were things he would need for his own business.
"Certainly," said K., and he began to feel relaxed now that, at last, he stood in front of someone with some sense, someone with whom he would be able to talk about his situation. "Certainly I'm surprised, but I'm not in any way very surprised."
"You're not very surprised?" asked the supervisor, as he positioned the candle in the middle of the table and the other things in a group around it.
"Perhaps you don't quite understand me," K. hurriedly pointed out. "What I mean is ... " here K. broke off what he was saying and looked round for somewhere to sit.
"But on the other hand," K. went on, looking round at everyone there and even wishing he could get the attention of the three who were looking at the photographs, "on the other hand this really can't be all that important.
None of you is wearing a uniform, unless what you are wearing" - here he turned towards Franz - "is meant to be a uniform, it's actually more of a travelling suit.
"You're making a big mistake," he said. "These gentlemen and I have got nothing to do with your business, in fact we know almost nothing about you.
Was this man, probably younger than he was, lecturing him like a schoolmaster?
Was he being punished for his honesty with a telling off?
And was he to learn nothing about the reasons for his arrest or those who were arresting him? He became somewhat cross and began to walk up and down.
No-one stopped him doing this and he pushed his sleeves back, felt his chest, straightened his hair, went over to the three men, said, "It makes no sense," at which these three turned round to face him and came towards him with serious expressions. He finally came again to a halt in front of the supervisor's desk.
"State Attorney Hasterer is a good friend of mine," he said, "can I telephone him?"
"You can call him if you want to," said the supervisor, stretching his had out towards the outer room where the telephone was, "please, go on, do make your phone call."
Across the street, the people were still there at the window, and it was only now that K. had gone up to his window that they seemed to become uneasy about quietly watching what was going on.
The old couple wanted to get up but the man behind them calmed them down.
"We've got some kind of audience over there," called K. to the supervisor, quite loudly, as he pointed out with his forefinger.
"Go away," he then called across to them.
And the three of them did immediately retreat a few steps, the old pair even found themselves behind the man who then concealed them with the breadth of his body and seemed, going by the movements of his mouth, to be saying something incomprehensible into the distance.
"Intrusive, thoughtless people!" said K. as he turned back into the room.
The supervisor may have agreed with him, at least K. thought that was what he saw from the corner of his eye.
But it was just as possible that he had not even been listening as he had his hand pressed firmly down on the table and seemed to be comparing the length of his fingers.
"Now, gentlemen," called out K., and for a moment it seemed as if he was carrying all of them on his shoulders, "it looks like your business with me is over with.
If you are of the same opinion, then please... " and he walked up to the supervisor's desk and held out his hand to him.
The supervisor raised his eyes, bit his lip and looked at K.'s outstretched hand; K still believed the supervisor would do as he suggested.
But instead, he stood up, picked up a hard round hat that was laying on Miss Brstner's bed and put it carefully onto his head, using both hands as if trying on a new hat.
"Everything seems so simple to you, doesn't it," he said to K. as he did so, "so you think we should bring the matter to a peaceful close, do you.
"In to the bank?" asked K., "I thought I was under arrest." K. said this with a certain amount of defiance as, although his handshake had not been accepted, he was feeling more independent of all these people, especially since the supervisor had stood up.
If they left, he had decided he would run after them and offer to let them arrest him.
That's why he even repeated, "How can I go in to the bank when I'm under arrest?"
"I never meant it should be anything else," he replied.
He could only remember seeing them in their group by the photographs, but these characterless, anaemic young people were indeed officials from his bank, not colleagues of his, that was putting it too high and it showed a gap in the omniscience of the supervisor, but they were nonetheless junior members of staff at the bank.
How occupied he must have been with the supervisor and the policemen not to have recognised these three!
Rabensteiner, with his stiff demeanour and swinging hands, Kullich, with his blonde hair and deep-set eyes, and Kaminer, with his involuntary grin caused by chronic muscle spasms.
"Good morning," said K. after a while, extending his hand to the gentlemen as they bowed correctly to him. "I didn't recognise you at all.
So, we'll go into work now, shall we?" The gentlemen laughed and nodded enthusiastically, as if that was what they had been waiting for all the time, except that K. had left his hat in his room so they all dashed, one after another, into the room to fetch it, which caused a certain amount of embarrassment.
K. stood where he was and watched them through the open double doorway, the last to go, of course, was the apathetic Rabensteiner who had broken into no more than an elegant trot.
Kaminer got to the hat and K., as he often had to do at the bank, forcibly reminded himself that the grin was not deliberate, that he in fact wasn't able to grin deliberately.
At that moment Mrs. Grubach opened the door from the hallway into the living room where all the people were. She did not seem to feel guilty about anything at all, and K., as often before, looked down at the belt of her apron which, for no reason, cut so deeply into her hefty body.
Once downstairs, K., with his watch in his hand, decided to take a taxi - he had already been delayed by half an hour and there was no need to make the delay any longer.
Kaminer ran to the corner to summon it, and the two others were making obvious efforts to keep K. diverted when Kullich pointed to the doorway of the house on the other side of the street where the large man with the blonde goatee beard appeared and, a little embarrassed at first at letting himself be seen in his full height, stepped back to the wall and leant against it.
K. was cross with Kullich for pointing out this man whom he had already seen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting.
"Don't look at him!" he snapped, without noticing how odd it was to speak to free men in this way.
Inside the taxi, K. remembered that he had not noticed the supervisor and the policemen leaving - the supervisor had stopped him noticing the three bank staff and now the three bank staff had stopped him noticing the supervisor.
This showed that K. was not very attentive, and he resolved to watch himself more carefully in this respect.
Nonetheless, he gave it no thought as he twisted himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car to catch sight of the supervisor and the policemen if he could.
But he turned back round straight away and leant comfortably into the corner of the taxi without even having made the effort to see anyone.
Although it did not seem like it, now was just the time when he needed some encouragement, but the gentlemen seemed tired just then, Rabensteiner looked out of the car to the right, Kullich to the left and only Kaminer was there with his grin at K.'s service. It would have been inhumane to make fun of that.
That spring, whenever possible, K. usually spent his evenings after work - he usually stayed in the office until nine o'clock - with a short walk, either by himself or in the company of some of the bank officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the regulars' table with mostly older men until eleven.
There were, however, also exceptions to this habit, times, for instance, when K. was invited by the bank's manager (whom he greatly respected for his industry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or to eat dinner with him at his large house.
K. would also go, once a week, to see a girl called Elsa who worked as a waitress in a wine bar through the night until late in the morning. During the daytime she only received visitors while still in bed.
Each time he had any small break from the day's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in mind, that Mrs. Grubach's flat seemed to have been put into great disarray by the events of that morning, and that it was up to him to put it back into order.
K. had called each of them, separately or all together, into his office that day for no other reason than to observe them; he was always satisfied and had always been able to let them go again.
At half past nine that evening, when he arrived back in front of the building where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who was standing there, his legs apart and smoking a pipe.
"Who are you?" immediately asked K., bringing his face close to the lad's, as it was hard to see in the half light of the landing.
"I'm the landlord's son, sir," answered the lad, taking the pipe from his mouth and stepping to one side.
"The landlord's son?" asked K., and impatiently knocked on the ground with his stick.
Would you like me to fetch my father?"
"No, no," said K., there was something forgiving in his voice, as if the boy had harmed him in some way and he was excusing him.
"It's alright," he said then, and went on, but before going up the stairs he turned round once more.
He could have gone directly to his room, but as he wanted to speak with Mrs. Grubach he went straight to her door and knocked.
She was sat at the table with a knitted stocking and a pile of old stockings in front of her.
K. apologised, a little embarrassed at coming so late, but Mrs. Grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology, she was always ready to speak to him, he knew very well that he was her best and her favourite tenant.
"A woman's hands will do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, he might himself have smashed all the dishes on the spot but certainly would not have been able to carry it all out.
"Why are you working so late?" he asked.
They were now both sitting at the table, and K. now and then sank his hands into the pile of stockings.
"There's a lot of work to do," she said, "during the day I belong to the tenants; if I'm to sort out my own things there are only the evenings left to me."
"How do you mean, Mr. K.?" she asked, becoming more interested and leaving her work in her lap.
"Oh, I see," she said, and went peacefully back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, not especially."
K. looked on in silence as she took up the knitted stocking once more.
She seems surprised at my mentioning it, he thought, she seems to think it's improper for me to mention it.
An old woman is the only person I can speak about it with. "But it must have caused some work for you," he said then, "but it won't happen again."
"No, it can't happen again," she agreed, and smiled at K. in a way that was almost pained.
"Do you mean that seriously?" asked K. "Yes," she said, more gently, "but the important thing is you mustn't take it too hard.
But now it's over with, and I didn't really even want to talk about it any more, only I wanted to hear what you, as a sensible woman, thought about it all, and I'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement.
Will she shake hands with me?
The supervisor didn't shake hands, he thought, and looked at the woman differently from before, examining her.
She stood up, as he had also stood up, and was a little self-conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that that K. said.
As a result of this self consciousness she said something that she certainly did not intend and certainly was not appropriate.
"Don't take it so hard, Mr. K.," she said, with tears in her voice and also, of course, forgetting the handshake.
"I didn't know I was taking it hard," said K., feeling suddenly tired and seeing that if this woman did agree with him it was of very little value.
Before going out the door he asked, "Is Miss Brstner home?"
"No," said Mrs. Grubach, smiling as she gave this simple piece of information, saying something sensible at last.
Did you want to see her?
Should I give her a message?"
"I, er, I just wanted to have a few words with her."
"I'm afraid I don't know when she's coming in; she usually gets back late when she's been to the theatre."
"It really doesn't matter," said K. his head hanging as he turned to the door to leave, "I just wanted to give her my apology for taking over her room today."
"There's no need for that, Mr. K., you're too conscientious, the young lady doesn't know anything about it, she hasn't been home since early this morning and everything's been tidied up again, you can see for yourself." And she opened the door to Miss Brstner's room.
"Miss Brstner often comes home late," said K., looking at Mrs. Grubach as if that were her responsibility.
I certainly wouldn't want to say anything nasty about Miss Brstner, she is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, I appreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to have more pride, be a bit less forthcoming.
Twice this month already, in the street over the way, I've seen her with a different gentleman.
And it's not the only thing about her that I'm worried about."
"Mrs. Grubach, you are on quite the wrong track ," said K., so angry that he was hardly able to hide it, "and you have moreover misunderstood what I was saying about Miss Brstner, that is not what I meant.
In fact I warn you quite directly not to say anything to her, you are quite mistaken, I know Miss Brstner very well and there is no truth at all in what you say.
And what's more, perhaps I'm going to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whatever you see fit.
"Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach as if asking him for something and hurrying to his door which he had already opened, "I don't want to speak to Miss Brstner at all, not yet, of course I'll continue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one I've told what I know.
And it is, after all something that everyone who lets rooms has to do if she's to keep the house decent, that's all I'm trying to do."
"Decent!" called out K. through the crack in the door, "if you want to keep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice." Then he slammed the door shut, there was a gentle knocking to which he paid no more attention.
He did not feel at all like going to bed, so he decided to stay up, and this would also give him the chance to find out when Miss Brstner would arrive home.
Perhaps it would also still be possible, even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her.
As he lay there by the window, pressing his hands to his tired eyes, he even thought for a moment that he might punish Mrs. Grubach by persuading Miss Brstner to give in her notice at the same time as he would.
But he immediately realised that that would be shockingly excessive, and there would even be the suspicion that he was moving house because of the incidents of that morning.
When he had become tired of looking out onto the empty street he slightly opened the door to the living room so that he could see anyone who entered the flat from where he was and lay down on the couch.
He wasn't able to hold out longer than that, and went a little way into the hallway as if in that way he could make Miss Brstner arrive sooner.
He had no particular desire for her, he could not even remember what she looked like, but now he wanted to speak to her and it irritated him that her late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease and disorder right to its very end.
It was also her fault that he had not had any dinner that evening and that he had been unable to visit Elsa as he had intended.
He could still make up for both of those things, though, if he went to the wine bar where Elsa worked.
K., who had been lost in his thoughts in the hallway, walking up and down loudly as if it were his own room, fled behind his door.
Shivering, she pulled a silk shawl over her slender shoulders as she locked the door.
The next moment she would certainly go into her room, where K. ought not to intrude in the middle of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but, unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so that when he stepped out of the dark it would give the impression of being an attack and would certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming.
There was no time to lose, and in his helplessness he whispered through the crack of the door,
"Miss Brstner." It sounded like he was pleading with her, not calling to her.
"Is there someone there?" asked Miss Brstner, looking round with her eyes wide open.
"Good Evening," and offered him her hand.
K. did as he was told, and then even waited until Miss Brstner came out of her room and quietly invited him, once more, to come in.
"Sit down," she said, indicating the ottoman, while she herself remained standing by the bedpost despite the tiredness she had spoken of; she did not even take off her hat, which was small but decorated with an abundance of flowers. "What is it you wanted, then?
I'm really quite curious." She gently crossed her legs.
With her hand laid flat on her lower hip, she made a tour around the room.
At the mat where the photographs were she stopped.
"Look at this!" she cried. "My photographs really have been put in the wrong places.
K. nodded, and quietly cursed Kaminer who worked at his bank and who was always active doing things that had neither use nor purpose.
"But I did explain to you," said K., and went over to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interfered with your photographs; but as you don't believe me I'll have to admit that the investigating committee brought along three bank employees with them, one of them must have touched your photographs and as soon as I get the chance I'll ask to have him dismissed from the bank.
"Because of you?" she asked.
"So you have been making fun of me, then," said Miss Brstner exceedingly disappointed, "you really ought not to try something like that on at this time of night." And she stepped away from the photographs where they had stood so long together.
"What was it like then?" she asked.
"It was terrible" said K., although his mind was no longer on the subject, he had become totally absorbed by Miss Brstner's gaze who was supporting her chin on one hand - the elbow rested on the cushion of the ottoman - and slowly stroking her hip with the other.
"What's too vague?" asked K. Then he remembered himself and asked, "Would you like me to show you what it was like?" He wanted to move in some way but did not want to leave.
Ah yes, I'm forgetting myself, the most important person of all, so I'm standing here in front of the table. the supervisor is sitting extremely comfortably with his legs crossed and his arm hanging over the backrest here like some layabout.
And now it really does begin. the supervisor calls out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shouts at me, I'm afraid, if I'm to make it clear to you, I'll have to shout as well, and it's nothing more than my name that he shouts out."
Miss Brstner, laughing as she listened to him, laid her forefinger on her mouth so that K. would not shout, but it was too late.
K. was too engrossed in his role and slowly called out, "Josef K.!". It was not as loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had suddenly called it out, the cry seemed gradually to spread itself all round the room.
Miss Brstner went pale and laid her hand on her heart.
K. was especially startled, as for a moment he had been quite unable to think of anything other than the events of that morning and the girl for whom he was performing them.
He had hardly pulled himself together when he jumped over to Miss Brstner and took her hand.
"Don't be afraid," he whispered, "I'll put everything right.
"There is no reason for it," said K., and, now as she sank back onto the cushion, kissed her forehead.
"Go away, go away," she said, hurriedly sitting back up, "get out of here, go, what is it you want, he's listening at the door he can hear everything.
"I won't go," said K., "until you've calmed down a bit. Come over into the other corner of the room, he won't be able to hear us there."
She let him lead her there. "Don't forget," he said, "although this might be unpleasant for you you're not in any real danger.
You know how much esteem Mrs. Grubach has for me, she's the one who will make all the decisions in this, especially as the captain is her nephew, but she believes everything I say without question.
What's more, she has borrowed a large sum of money from me and that makes her dependent on me.
I will confirm whatever you say to explain our being here together, however inappropriate it might be, and I guarantee to make sure that Mrs. Grubach will not only say she believes the explanation in public but will believe it truly and sincerely.
If you wish to let it be known that I have attacked you then Mrs. Grubach will be informed of such and she will believe it without even losing her trust in me, that's how much respect she has for me."
Miss Brstner looked at the floor in front of her, quiet and a little sunk in on herself.
"Why would Mrs. Grubach not believe that I've attacked you?" added K. He looked at her hair in front of him, parted, bunched down, reddish and firmly held in place.
He thought she would look up at him, but without changing her manner she said,
K. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist, "You're not cross with me, though?" he said.
She pulled her hand away and answered, "No, no, I'm never cross with anyone."
He grasped her wrist once more, she tolerated it now and, in that way, lead him to the door.
But when he reached the door he came to a halt as if he hadn't expected to find a door there, Miss Brstner made use of that moment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway and gently say to K. from there, "Now, come along, please.
Look," she pointed to the captain's door, from under which there was a light shining, "he's put a light on and he's laughing at us."
"Alright, I'm coming," said K., moved forward, took hold of her, kissed her on the mouth and then over her whole face like a thirsty animal lapping with its tongue when it eventually finds water.
He finally kissed her on her neck and her throat and left his lips pressed there for a long time.
"I'll go now," he said, he wanted to address Miss Brstner by her Christian name, but did not know it.
She gave him a tired nod, offered him her hand to kiss as she turned away as if she did not know what she was doing, and went back into her room with her head bowed.
A short while later, K. was lying in his bed.
He very soon went to sleep, but before he did he thought a little while about his behaviour, he was satisfied with it but felt some surprise that he was not more satisfied; he was seriously worried about Miss Brstner because of the captain.
K. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearing concerning his case the following Sunday.
Sunday had been chosen as the day for the hearings so that K. would not be disturbed in his professional work.
It was assumed that he would be in agreement with this, but if he wished for another date then, as far as possible, he would be accommodated.
It was a matter of course that he would have to appear without fail, there was probably no need to point this out to him.
He would be given the number of the building where he was to present himself, which was in a street in a suburb well away from the city centre which K. had never been to before.
Once he had received this notice, K. hung up the receiver without giving an answer; he had decided immediately to go there that Sunday, it was certainly necessary, proceedings had begun and he had to face up to it, and this first examination would probably also be the last.
He was still standing in thought by the telephone when he heard the voice of the deputy director behind him - he wanted to use the telephone but K. stood in his way.
"No, no, " said K., he stepped to one side but did not go away entirely.
The deputy director picked up the receiver and, as he waited for his connection, turned away from it and said to K.,
It was of no small importance for him, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he had never got on very well, meant that he was trying to improve his relations with him. It showed how important K. had become in the bank and how its second most important official seemed to value his friendship, or at least his impartiality.
He was only speaking at the side of the telephone receiver while he waited for his connection, but in giving this invitation the deputy director was humbling himself.
But K. would have to humiliate him a second time as a result, he said,
It was only when the deputy director hung up that he was shocked into awareness and said, in order to partially excuse his standing there for no reason,
"It's not that important," said K., although in that way his earlier excuse, already weak enough, was made even weaker.
As he went, the deputy director continued to speak about other things.
K. forced himself to answer, but his thoughts were mainly about that Sunday, how it would be best to get there for nine o'clock in the morning as that was the time that courts always start work on weekdays.
K. was very tired, as he had stayed out drinking until late in the night celebrating with some of the regulars, and he had almost overslept.
He dressed hurriedly, without the time to think and assemble the various plans he had worked out during the week. With no breakfast, he rushed to the suburb he had been told about.
Oddly enough, although he had little time to look around him, he came across the three bank officials involved in his case, Rabensteiner, Kullich and Kaminer.
All of them seemed to be looking at him, surprised at seeing their superior running; it was a kind of pride that made K. want to go on foot, this was his affair and the idea of any help from strangers, however slight, was repulsive to him, he also wanted to avoid asking for anyone's help because that would initiate them into the affair even if only slightly. And after all, he had no wish at all to humiliate himself before the committee by being too punctual.
Anyway, now he was running so that he would get there by nine o'clock if at all possible, even though he had no appointment for this time.
He had thought that he would recognise the building from a distance by some kind of sign, without knowing exactly what the sign would look like, or from some particular kind of activity outside the entrance.
K. had been told that the building was in Juliusstrasse, but when he stood at the street's entrance it consisted on each side of almost nothing but monotonous, grey constructions, tall blocks of flats occupied by poor people.
Other windows were piled up with bedding, above which the dishevelled head of a woman would briefly appear.
A fruitmonger, taking his goods up to the windows, was just as inattentive as K. and nearly knocked him down with his cart.
K. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenty of time now, or as if the examining magistrate were looking at him from one of the windows and therefore knew that K. had found his way there.
It was clearly intended for delivery wagons belonging to the various warehouses all round the yard which were now locked up and carried the names of companies some of which K. knew from his work at the bank.
In contrast with his usual habits, he remained standing a while at the entrance to the yard taking in all these external details.
Near him, there was a bare-footed man sitting on a crate and reading a newspaper.
In front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacket who, as the water flowed into her can, looked at K. There was a piece of rope stretched between two windows in a corner of the yard, with some washing hanging on it to dry.
A man stood below it calling out instructions to direct the work being done.
K. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hearing was to take place, but then stood still again as besides these steps he could see three other stairway entrances, and there also seemed to be a small passageway at the end of the yard leading into a second yard.
It irritated him that he had not been given more precise directions to the room, it meant they were either being especially neglectful with him or especially indifferent, and he decided to make that clear to them very loudly and very unambiguously.
In the end he decided to climb up the stairs, his thoughts playing on something that he remembered the policeman, Willem, saying to him; that the court is attracted by the guilt, from which it followed that the courtroom must be on the stairway that K. selected by chance.
As he went up he disturbed a large group of children playing on the stairs who looked at him as he stepped through their rows.
"Next time I come here," he said to himself, "I must either bring sweets with me make them like me or a stick to hit them with." Just before he reached the first landing he even had to wait a little while until a ball had finished its movement, two small lads with sly faces like grown-up scoundrels held him by his trouser-legs until it had; if he were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid of what noise they would make by shouting.
On the first floor, his search began for real.
He still felt unable to ask for the investigating committee, and so he invented a joiner called Lanz - that name occurred to him because the captain, Mrs. Grubach's nephew, was called Lanz - so that he could ask at every flat whether Lanz the joiner lived there and thus obtain a chance to look into the rooms.
It was usually a woman who opened the door, heard the enquiry and turned to somebody in the room who would raise himself from the bed.
"A joiner, called Lanz?" he would ask from the bed.
"That's right," K. would say, although it was clear that the investigating committee was not to be found there, and so his task was at an end.
K. eventually had to give up asking if he did not want to be led all round from floor to floor in this way.
He regretted his initial plan, which had at first seemed so practical to him.
As he reached the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took his leave of a friendly, young worker who wanted to lead him on still further and went down the stairs.
But then the thought of how much time he was wasting made him cross, he went back again and knocked at the first door on the fifth floor.
The first thing he saw in the small room was a large clock on the wall which already showed ten o'clock.
"Is there a joiner called Lanz who lives here?" he asked.
"Pardon?" said a young woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment, washing children's underclothes in a bucket. She pointed her wet hand towards the open door of the adjoining room.
K. thought he had stepped into a meeting.
K., who found the air too stuffy, stepped out again and said to the young woman, who had probably misunderstood what he had said,
"Yes," said the woman, "please go on in."
K. would probably not have followed her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door handle and said, "I'll have to close the door after you, no-one else will be allowed in."
But then he went back in anyway.
"Come in, come in," he said.
These clothes were the only thing that puzzled K., as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for a local political meeting.
At the other end of the hall where K. had been led there was a little table set at an angle on a very low podium which was as overcrowded as everywhere else, and behind the table, near the edge of the podium, sat a small, fat, wheezing man who was talking with someone behind him. This second man was standing with his legs crossed and his elbows on the backrest of the chair, provoking much laughter.
From time to time he threw his arm in the air as if doing a caricature of someone.
The youth who was leading K. had some difficulty in reporting to the man.
He had already tried twice to tell him something, standing on tip-toe, but without getting the man's attention as he sat there above him.
It was only when one of the people up on the podium drew his attention to the youth that the man turned to him and leant down to hear what it was he quietly said.
Then he pulled out his watch and quickly looked over at K.
"You should have been here one hour and five minutes ago," he said.
K. was going to give him a reply but had no time to do so, as hardly had the man spoken than a general muttering arose all over the right hand side of the hall. "You should have been here one hour and five minutes ago," the man now repeated, raising his voice this time, and quickly looked round the hall beneath him.
The muttering also became immediately louder and, as the man said nothing more, died away only gradually.
K. had decided he would do more watching than talking, so he did not defend himself for supposedly having come late, and simply said, "Well maybe I have arrived late, I'm here now." There followed loud applause, once more from the right hand side of the hall.
He wondered what he could say to get all of them to support him together or, if that were not possible, to at least get the support of the others for a while.
"Yes," said the man, "but I'm now no longer under any obligation to hear your case" - there was once more a muttering, but this time it was misleading as the man waved the people's objections aside with his hand and continued - "I will, however, as an exception, continue with it today.
He stood pressed closely against the table, the press of the crowd behind him was so great that he had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge's desk down off the podium and perhaps the judge along with it.
The judge, however, paid no attention to that but sat very comfortably on his chair and, after saying a few words to close his discussion with the man behind him, reached for a little note book, the only item on his desk.
"Now then," said the judge, thumbing through the book. He turned to K. with the tone of someone who knows his facts and said, "you are a house painter?"
The judge had become quite cross but seemed to have no power over those below him in the hall, he tried to reduce what harm had been done in the gallery and jumped up threatening them, his eyebrows, until then hardly remarkable, pushed themselves up and became big, black and bushy over his eyes.
When K. now began to speak he was convinced he was doing it in the same way as them.
He had spoken sharply, more sharply than he had intended, but he had been quite right.
It was somewhat disturbing that just then the door at the end of the hall opened, the young washerwoman, who seemed to have finished her work, came in and, despite all her caution, attracted the attention of some of the people there.
It was only the judge who gave K. any direct pleasure, as he seemed to have been immediately struck by K.'s words.
Until then, he had listened to him standing, as K.'s speech had taken him by surprise while he was directing his attention to the gallery.
Now, in the pause, he sat down very slowly, as if he did not want anyone to notice.
He took out the notebook again, probably so that he could give the impression of being calmer.
K. was satisfied to hear nothing but his own quiet words in this room full of strangers, and he even dared casually to pick up the examining judge's notebook and, touching it only with the tips of his fingers as if it were something revolting, lifted it in the air, holding it just by one of the middle pages so that the others on each side of it, closely written, blotted and yellowing, flapped down.
"Those are the official notes of the examining judge," he said, and let the notebook fall down onto the desk. "You can read in your book as much as you like, sir, I really don't have anything in this charge book to be afraid of, even though I don't have access to it as I wouldn't want it in my hand, I can only touch it with two fingers."
The judge grabbed the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk - which could only have been a sign of his deep humiliation, or at least that is how it must have been perceived - tried to tidy it up a little, and held it once more in front of himself in order to read from it.
The people in the front row looked up at him, showing such tension on their faces that he looked back down at them for some time.
Every one of them was an old man, some of them with white beards.
Could they perhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembly one way or the other? They had sunk into a state of motionlessness while K. gave his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from this passivity even when the judge was being humiliated.
"What has happened to me," continued K., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, he continually scanned the faces in the first row, and this gave his address a somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happened to me is not just an isolated case. If it were it would not be of much importance as it's not of much importance to me, but it is a symptom of proceedings which are carried out against many.
Without having intended it, he had raised his voice.
Somewhere in the hall, someone raised his hands and applauded him shouting, "Bravo!
Not even K. thought him of any importance but it did raise his spirits; he no longer thought it at all necessary that all of those in the hall should applaud him, it was enough if the majority of them began to think about the matter and if only one of them, now and then, was persuaded.
I'm sure the examining judge can speak far better than I can, it is part of his job after all.
It was not easy to stay calm, but I managed to do so and was completely calm when I asked the supervisor why it was that I was under arrest. If he were here he would have to confirm what I say.
I can see him now, sitting on the chair belonging to that lady I mentioned - a picture of dull-witted arrogance. What do you think he answered?
What he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all; perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest and was satisfied.
In fact he had done more than that and brought three junior employees from the bank where I work into the lady's room; they had made themselves busy interfering with some photographs that belonged to the lady and causing a mess.
There was, of course, another reason for bringing these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid, were expected to spread the news of my arrest and damage my public reputation and in particular to remove me from my position at the bank.
Well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even my landlady, who is quite a simple person - and I will give you here her name in full respect, her name is Mrs. Grubach - even Mrs. Grubach was understanding enough to see that an arrest like this has no more significance than an attack carried out on the street by some youths who are not kept under proper control.
K. broke off here and looked at the judge, who said nothing. As he did so he thought he saw the judge use a movement of his eyes to give a sign to someone in the crowd.
It really doesn't matter to me, and I give his lordship the judge my full and public permission to stop giving secret signs to his paid subordinate down there and give his orders in words instead; let him just say "Boo now!," and then the next time "Clap now!".
Whether it was embarrassment or impatience, the judge rocked backwards and forwards on his seat.
The man behind him, whom he had been talking with earlier, leant forward again, either to give him a few general words of encouragement or some specific piece of advice.
"I have nearly finished what I have to say," said K., and as there was no bell available he struck the desk with his fist in a way that startled the judge and his advisor and made them look up from each other.
K was pleased at the tension among all the people there as they listened to him, a rustling rose from the silence which was more invigorating than the most ecstatic applause could have been. "There is no doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enormous organisation determining what is said by this court.
K. was interrupted by a screeching from the far end of the hall, he shaded his eyes to see that far, as the dull light of day made the smoke whitish and hard to see through.
It was the washerwoman whom K. had recognised as a likely source of disturbance as soon as she had entered.
It was hard to see now whether it was her fault or not.
K. could only see that a man had pulled her into a corner by the door and was pressing himself against her.
But it was not her who was screaming, but the man, he had opened his mouth wide and looked up at the ceiling.
K.'s first thought was to run over there, and he also thought that everyone would want to bring things back into order there or at least to make the pair leave the room, but the first row of people in from of him stayed were they were, no-one moved and no-one let K. through.
On the contrary, they stood in his way, old men held out their arms in front of him and a hand from somewhere - he did not have the time to turn round - took hold of his collar.
K., by this time, had forgotten about the pair, it seemed to him that his freedom was being limited as if his arrest was being taken seriously, and, without any thought for what he was doing, he jumped down from the podium.
Now he stood face to face with the crowd.
Had he judged the people properly?
Had he put too much faith in the effect of his speech?
Had they been putting up a pretence all the time he had been speaking, and now that he come to the end and to what must follow, were they tired of pretending?
As far as he could see, every one of them was wearing one of these badges.
All of them belonged to the same group, even though they seemed to be divided to the right and the left of him, and when he suddenly turned round he saw the same badge on the collar of the examining judge who calmly looked down at him with his hands in his lap.
"So," called out K, throwing his arms in the air as if this sudden realisation needed more room, "all of you are working for this organisation, I see now that you are all the very bunch of cheats and liars I've just been speaking about, you've all pressed yourselves in here in order to listen in and snoop on me, you gave the impression of having formed into factions, one of you even applauded me to test me out, and you wanted to learn how to trap an innocent man!
Well, I hope you haven't come here for nothing, I hope you've either had some fun from someone who expected you to defend his innocence or else - let go of me or I'll hit you," shouted K. to a quivery old man who had pressed himself especially close to him - "or else that you've actually learned something.
He briskly took his hat from where it lay on the edge of the table and, surrounded by a silence caused perhaps by the completeness of their surprise, pushed his way to the exit.
However, the examining judge seems to have moved even more quickly than K., as he was waiting for him at the doorway.
"One moment," he said.
K. stood where he was, but looked at the door with his hand already on its handle rather than at the judge.
"You bunch of louts," he called, "you can keep all your hearings as a present from me," then opened the door and hurried down the steps.
Every day over the following week, K. expected another summons to arrive, he could not believe that his rejection of any more hearings had been taken literally, and when the expected summons really had not come by Saturday evening he took it to mean that he was expected, without being told, to appear at the same place at the same time.
So on Sunday, he set out once more in the same direction, going without hesitation up the steps and through the corridors; some of the people remembered him and greeted him from their doorways, but he no longer needed to ask anyone the way and soon arrived at the right door.
It was opened as soon as he knocked and, paying no attention to the woman he had seen last time who was standing at the doorway, he was about to go straight into the adjoining room when she said to him "There's no session today".
"What do you mean; no session?" he asked, unable to believe it.
But the woman persuaded him by opening the door to the next room.
"Can I have a look at those books?" asked K., not because he was especially curious but so that he would not have come for nothing.
"No," said the woman as she re-closed the door, "that's not allowed.
"I expect you're right," said the woman, who had not understood exactly what he meant.
"Should I give a message to the examining judge?" asked the woman.
"Of course I know him," said the woman, "my husband is the court usher."
The woman saw how surprised he was and said, "Yes, we're allowed to live here as we like, only we have to clear the room out when the court's in session.
"It's not so much the room that surprises me," said K., looking at her crossly, "it's your being married that shocks me."
"Are you thinking about what happened last time the court was in session, when I disturbed what you were saying?" asked the woman.
And now you tell me yourself that you are a married woman."
"There's no-one I know who'd hold it against me," said the woman. "Him, who put his arms around me, he's been chasing after me for a long time.
I've got no protection from him, even my husband has had to get used to it; if he wants to keep his job he's got to put up with it as that man's a student and he'll almost certainly be very powerful later on.
He's always after me, he'd only just left when you arrived."
"Do you want to make things a bit better here?" the woman asked slowly, watching him as if she were saying something that could be as dangerous for K. as for herself.
Mind you, I only heard part of it, I missed the beginning of it and at the end I was lying on the floor with the student. - it's so horrible here," she said after a pause, and took hold of K.'s hand. "Do you believe you really will be able to make things better?"
K. smiled and twisted his hand round a little in her soft hands.
"It's really not my job to make things better here, as you put it," he said, "and if you said that to the examining judge he would laugh at you or punish you for it.
"How could I help you, then?" said the woman.
"Yes, certainly," the woman cried, and pulled K. along behind her as she rushed to them.
"Everything is so dirty here," said K., shaking his head, and before he could pick the books up the woman wiped some of the dust off with her apron.
A man and a woman sat naked on a sofa, the base intent of whoever drew it was easy to see but he had been so grossly lacking in skill that all that anyone could really make out were the man and the woman who dominated the picture with their bodies, sitting in overly upright postures that created a false perspective and made it difficult for them to approach each other.
K. didn't thumb through that book any more, but just threw open the next one at its title page, it was a novel with the title, What Grete Suffered from her Husband, Hans. 
"I can help you," said the woman, "would you like me to?"
You did say earlier on that your husband is wholly dependent on his superiors."
"I still want to help you," said the woman, "come over here, we've got to talk about it.
She pointed to the podium and invited him to sit down on the step with her.
"You've got lovely dark eyes," she said after they had sat down, looking up into K.'s face, "people say I've got nice eyes too, but yours are much nicer.
So that's what all this is about, thought K., she's offering herself to me, she's as degenerate as everything else around here, she's had enough of the court officials, which is understandable I suppose, and so she approaches any stranger and makes compliments about his eyes.
With that, K. stood up in silence as if he had spoken his thoughts out loud and thus explained his action to the woman.
"I don't think you can be of any assistance to me," he said, "to be of any real assistance you would need to be in contact with high officials.
"No!" she shouted, remained sitting where she was and grasped K.'s hand, which he failed to pull away fast enough.
"Course I do," said the woman, "he was the first one I thought of when I offered to help you.
I didn't know he's only a minor official, but if you say so it must be true.
Mind you, I still think the report he gives to his superiors must have some influence.
And he writes so many reports.
You say these officials are lazy, but they're certainly not all lazy, especially this examining judge, he writes ever such a lot.
Everyone had gone, but the examining judge, he stayed in the hall, I had to bring him a lamp in, all I had was a little kitchen lamp but he was very satisfied with it and started to write straight away.
Meantime my husband arrived, he always has the day off on Sundays, we got the furniture back in and got our room sorted out and then a few of the neighbours came, we sat and talked for a bit by a candle, in short, we forgot all about the examining judge and went to bed.
All of a sudden in the night, it must have been quite late in the night, I wakes up, next to the bed, there's the examining judge shading the lamp with his hand so that there's no light from it falls on my husband, he didn't need to be as careful as that, the way my husband sleeps the light wouldn't have woken him up anyway.
I was quite shocked and nearly screamed, but the judge was very friendly, warned me I should be careful, he whispered to me he's been writing all this time, and now he's brought me the lamp back, and he'll never forget how I looked when he found me there asleep.
If he writes reports as long as that they must be of some importance.
And besides all that, you can see from what happened that the examining judge is after me, and it's right now, when he's first begun to notice me, that I can have a lot of influence on him.
Yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he really trusts and who he works with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings. He said it was because I clear up in the courtroom but that's only a pretence, that job's no more than what I'm supposed to do, it's what my husband gets paid for.
Nice stockings, they are, look," - she stretched out her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at the stocking - "they are nice stockings, but they're too good for me, really."
She suddenly interrupted herself and lay her hand on K.'s as if she wanted to calm him down, and whispered, "Be quiet, Berthold is watching us."
In the doorway to the courtroom stood a young man, he was short, his legs were not quite straight, and he continually moved his finger round in a short, thin, red beard with which he hoped to make himself look dignified.
K. looked at him with some curiosity, he was the first student he had ever met of the unfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who would even most likely attain high office one day.
The student, in contrast, seemed to take no notice of K. at all, he merely withdrew his finger from his beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went over to the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "Don't be cross with me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, I've got to go to him now, to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs.
Before he realised it, K. grasped for her hand but failed to catch it.
He really was attracted to the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no good reason why he should not give in to her allure.
It briefly crossed his mind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but that was an objection he had no difficulty in fending off.
In what way could she entrap him?
Was he not still free, so free that he could crush the entire court whenever he wanted, as least where it concerned him?
Could he not have that much confidence in himself?
And her offer of help sounded sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite worthless.
And maybe there was no better revenge against the examining judge and his cronies than to take this woman from him and have her for himself.
Maybe then, after much hard work writing dishonest reports about K., the judge would go to the woman's bed late one night and find it empty.
And it would be empty because she belonged to K., because this woman at the window, this lush, supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy material belonged to him, totally to him and to him alone.
Once he had settled his thoughts towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quiet conversation at the window was taking too long, he rapped on the podium with his knuckles, and then even with his fist.
The student briefly looked away from the woman to glance at K. over his shoulder but did allow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close to the woman and put his arms around her.
She dropped her head down low as if listening to him carefully, as she did so he kissed her right on the neck, hardly even interrupting what he was saying.
K. saw this as confirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and which she had already complained about, he stood up and walked up and down the room.
Glancing sideways at the student, he wondered what would be the quickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was not unwelcome to him when the student, clearly disturbed by K.'s to-ing and fro-ing which K. had now developed into a stamping up and down, said to him,
This comment could have caused all possible rage to break out between them, but K. also bore in mind that this was a prospective court official speaking to a disfavoured defendant, and he might well have been taking pride in speaking in this way.
On the other hand, if you've come here to study - you are a student, I hear - I'll be quite happy to leave the room to you and go away with the woman.
"He shouldn't have been allowed to move about so freely," said the student, as if he wanted to give the woman an explanation for K.'s insults, "that was a mistake.
He should at least have been detained in his room between hearings.
Sometimes it's impossible to understand what the judge thinks he's doing."
"You're wasting your breath," said K., then he reached his hand out towards the woman and said, "come with me."
"So that's it," said the student, "oh no, you're not going to get her," and with a strength you would not have expected from him, he glanced tenderly at her, lifted her up on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to the door.
In this way he showed, unmistakeably, that he was to some extent afraid of K., but he nonetheless dared to provoke him still further by stroking and squeezing the woman's arm with his free hand.
K. ran the few steps up to him, but when he had reached him and was about to take hold of him and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said,
"It's no good, it's the examining judge who's sent for me, I daren't go with you, this little bastard... " and here she ran her hand over the student's face, "this little bastard won't let me."
"And you don't want to be set free!" shouted K., laying his hand on the student's shoulder, who then snapped at it with his teeth.
"No!" shouted the woman, pushing K. away with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you're doing!?
He's only carrying out the judge's orders, he's carrying me to him."
"Let him take you then, and I want to see nothing more of you," said K., enraged by his disappointment and giving the student a thump in the back so that he briefly stumbled and then, glad that he had not fallen, immediately jumped up all the higher with his burden.
K. followed them slowly. He realised that this was the first unambiguous setback he had suffered from these people.
It was of course nothing to worry about, he accepted the setback only because he was looking for a fight.
If he stayed at home and carried on with his normal life he would be a thousand times superior to these people and could get any of them out of his way just with a kick.
And he imagined the most laughable scene possible as an example of this, if this contemptible student, this inflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneeling at Elsa's bed wringing his hands and begging for forgiveness.
K. so enjoyed imagining this scene that he decided to take the student along to Elsa with him if ever he should get the opportunity.
K. was curious to see where the woman would be taken and he hurried over to the door, the student was not likely to carry her through the streets on his arm.
The student carried the woman up these steps, and after the exertions of running with her he was soon groaning and moving very slowly.
The woman waved down at K. and by raising and lowering her shoulders she tried to show that she was an innocent party in this abduction, although the gesture did not show a lot of regret.
K. watched her without expression like a stranger, he wanted to show neither that he was disappointed nor that he would easily get over his disappointment.
He had to accept that the woman had not only cheated him but that she had also lied to him when she said she was being taken to the examining judge.
The wooden stairs would explain nothing to him however long he stared at them.
What a position it was that K. found himself in, compared with the judge sitting up in the attic! K., at the bank, had a big office with an ante-room, and had an enormous window through which he could look down at the activity in the square.
It was true, though, that he had no secondary income from bribes and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servant to bring him a woman up to the office on his arm.
K. was still looking at the notice when a man came up the stairs, looked through the open door into the living room where it was also possible to see the courtroom, and finally asked K. whether he had just seen a woman there.
"That's right," said the man, "oh, yes, you're defendant K., I recognise you now as well. Nice to see you here."
And he offered K. his hand, which was far from what K. had expected.
And when K. said nothing, he added, "There's no court session planned for today, though."
"I know that," said K. as he looked at the usher's civilian coat which, beside its ordinary buttons, displayed two gilded ones as the only sign of his office and seemed to have been taken from an old army officer's coat.
The student has carried her off to the examining judge."
"Listen to this," said the usher, "they're always carrying her away from me.
So off I go running as fast as I can, shout the message through the crack in the door of the office I've been sent to, so out of breath they'll hardly be able to understand it, run back here again, but the student's been even faster than I have - well he's got less far to go, he's only got to run down the steps.
Just here, just above the floor, that's where he's crushed onto the wall, his arms stretched out, his fingers spread apart, his crooked legs twisted round into a circle and blood squirted out all around him.
"Nothing that I know of," said the usher. "And it's going to get even worse now, up till now he's only been carrying her off for himself, now he's started carrying her off for the judge and all, just like I'd always said he would."
"Does your wife, then, not share some of the responsibility?" asked K. He had to force himself as he asked this question, as he, too, felt so jealous now.
"Course she does," said the usher, "it's more her fault than theirs.
It was her who attached herself to him.
All he did, he just chases after any woman.
There's five flats in this block alone where he's been thrown out after working his way in there.
And my wife is the best looking woman in the whole building, but it's me who's not even allowed to defend himself."
"Well why not?" asked the usher. "He's a coward that student, if he wants to lay a finger on my wife all you'd have to do is give him such a good hiding he'd never dare do it again.
But I'm not allowed to do that, and nobody else is going to do me the favour as they're all afraid of his power.
The only one who could do it is a man like you."
"Yes, but that's all the more reason for me to be afraid. Even if he has no influence on the outcome of the trial he probably has some on the initial examination."
"Yes, exactly," said the usher, as if K.'s view had been just as correct as his own.
"I would be very grateful to you," said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not really seeming to believe that his highest wish could be fulfilled.
Then he looked at K. trustingly which, despite all his friendliness, he had not done until then, and added, "they're always rebelling." But the conversation seemed to have become a little uncomfortable for him, as he broke it off by saying, "now I have to report to the office.
"Is it worth seeing then?" asked K. hesitatingly, although he felt very keen to go with him.
"Alright then," said K. finally, "I'll come with you." And, quicker than the usher himself, he ran up the steps.
At the entrance he nearly fell over, as behind the door there was another step. "They don't show much concern for the public," he said.
"They must all be very dispirited," he said.
And he turned to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hair that was nearly grey.
"What is it you are waiting for here?" asked K., politely, but the man was startled at being spoken to unexpectedly, which was all the more pitiful to see because the man clearly had some experience of the world and elsewhere would certainly have been able to show his superiority and would not have easily given up the advantage he had acquired.
Here, though, he did not know what answer to give to such a simple question and looked round at the others as if they were under some obligation to help him, and as if no-one could expect any answer from him without this help.
Then the usher of the court stepped forward to him and, in order to calm him down and raise his spirits, said, "The gentleman here's only asking what it is you're waiting for.
"I'm ... I'm waiting ..." he began, and then came to a halt.
He had clearly chosen this beginning so that he could give a precise answer to the question, but now he didn't know how to continue.
In the meantime, the man whom K. had first approached had pulled himself together and even answered him with a smile.
"Yes," said the man, "it is my affair after all."
"I don't really know, exactly," said the man, once more totally unsure of himself; he clearly thought K. was joking with him and therefore probably thought it best to repeat his earlier answer in order to avoid making any new mistakes. With K. looking at him impatiently, he just said, "as far as I'm concerned, I've applied to have this evidence heard."
"Oh, please, I certainly do," said the man, stepping slightly to one side, but there was more anxiety in his answer than belief.
"You don't believe me then?" asked K., and took hold of his arm, unconsciously prompted by the man's humble demeanour, and as if he wanted to force him to believe him.
But he did not want to hurt the man and had only taken hold of him very lightly. Nonetheless, the man cried out as if K. had grasped him not with two fingers but with red hot tongs.
Shouting in this ridiculous way finally made K. tired of him, if he didn't believe he was indicted then so much the better; maybe he even thought K. was a judge.
And before leaving, he held him a lot harder, shoved him back onto the bench and walked on.
Almost all of those who had been waiting had now assembled around the man who, by now, had stopped shouted and they seemed to be asking him lots of precise questions about the incident.
K. was approached by a security guard, identifiable mainly by his sword, of which the scabbard seemed to be made of aluminium.
This greatly surprised K., and he reached out for it with his hand.
The usher of the court said a few words to try and calm him down but the guard explained that he had to look into it himself, saluted, and hurried on, walking with very short steps, probably because of gout.
K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people, especially as he saw a turning off the corridor, about half way along it on the right hand side, where there was no door to stop him going that way.
The usher remained always one or two steps behind K, which he found irritating as in a place like this it could give the impression that he was being driven along by someone who had arrested him, so he frequently waited for the usher to catch up, but the usher always remained behind him.
In order to put an end to his discomfort, K. finally said, "Now that I've seen what it looks like here, I'd like to go."
"Come with me!" K. repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught the usher out in a lie.
K. had still not looked round at anything at all in the room where he found himself, and it was only when one of the many wooden doors all around him opened that he noticed it.
A young woman, probably summoned by the loudness of K.'s voice, entered and asked, "What is it the gentleman wants?"
In the darkness behind her there was also a man approaching.
He had, after all, said that no-one would take any notice of K., and now there were two people coming, it only needed a few and everyone in the office would become aware of him and asking for explanations as to why he was there.
The only understandable and acceptable thing to say was that he was accused of something and wanted to know the date of his next hearing, but this was an explanation he did not want to give, especially as it was not true - he had only come out of curiosity. Or else, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he wanted to ascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on the outside.
And it did seem that he had been quite right in this supposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was disturbed enough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame of mind just then to face a high official such as might appear from behind any door, and he wanted to go, either with the usher of the court or, if needs be, alone.
But he must have seemed very odd standing there in silence, and the young woman and the usher were indeed looking at him as if they thought he would go through some major metamorphosis any second which they didn't want to miss seeing.
And in the doorway stood the man whom K. had noticed in the background earlier, he held firmly on to the beam above the low door swinging a little on the tips of his feet as if becoming impatient as he watched.
But the young woman was the first to recognise that K.'s behaviour was caused by his feeling slightly unwell, she brought a chair and asked,
K. sat down immediately and, in order to keep his place better, put his elbows on the armrests.
"You're a little bit dizzy, aren't you?" she asked him.
"It's nothing for you to worry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost everyone gets an attack like that the first time they come here.
K. made no answer, he felt too embarrassed at being put at the mercy of these people by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling ill made him feel not better but a little worse.
The girl noticed it straight away, and to make the air fresher for K., she took a window pole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatch directly above K.'s head that led to the outside.
But so much soot fell in that the girl had to immediately close the hatch again and clean the soot off K.'s hands with her handkerchief, as K. was too tired to do that for himself.
He would have liked just to sit quietly where he was until he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people made about him the sooner that would be.
But then the girl said, "You can't stay here, we're in people's way here ..."
K. looked at her as if to ask whose way they were impeding. "If you like, I can take you to the sick room," and turning to the man in the doorway said, "please help me".
The man immediately came over to them, but K. did not want to go to the sick room, that was just what he wanted to avoid, being led further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it must become.
So he said, "I am able to walk now," and stood up, shaking after becoming used to sitting so comfortably.
But then he was unable to stay upright.
"I can't manage it," he said shaking his head, and sat down again with a sigh.
He remembered the usher who, despite everything, would have been able to lead him out of there but who seemed to have gone long before. K. looked out between the man and the young woman who were standing in front of him but was unable to find the usher.
"I think," said the man, who was elegantly dressed and whose appearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that had two long, sharply tailored points, "the gentleman is feeling unwell because of the atmosphere here, so the best thing, and what he would most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him out of the offices altogether."
"That's right," exclaimed K., with such joy that he nearly interrupted what the man was saying, "I'm sure that'll make me feel better straight away, I'm really not that weak, all I need is a little support under my arms, I won't cause you much trouble, it's not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then I'll sit on the stairs for a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attacks like this at all, I'm surprised at it myself.
And with that he raised his shoulders to make it easier for the two of them to take him by the arms.
The man, however, didn't follow this suggestion but just stood there with his hands in his trouser pockets and laughed out loud.
"There, you see," he said to the girl, "I was quite right.
The young woman smiled too, but lightly tapped the man's arm with the tips of her fingers as if he had allowed himself too much fun with K.
"So what do you think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "I really do want to lead the gentleman out of here."
"That's alright, then," said the girl, briefly inclining her charming head.
"Don't worry too much about him laughing," said the girl to K., who had become unhappy once more and stared quietly in front of himself as if needing no further explanation. "This gentleman - may I introduce you?" - (the man gave his permission with a wave of the hand) - "so, this gentleman's job is to give out information.
He gives all the information they need to people who are waiting, as our court and its offices are not very well known among the public he gets asked for quite a lot.
But that's not his only distinction, his other distinction is his elegance of dress.
We, that's to say all of us who work in the offices here, we decided that the information-giver would have to be elegantly dressed as he continually has to deal with the litigants and he's the first one they meet, so he needs to give a dignified first impression.
So everything would be ready for him to give a good impression, except that he spoils it again by laughing and frightening people."
"That's how it is," said the man, mocking her, "but I don't understand why it is that you're explaining all our intimate facts to the gentleman, or rather why it is that you're pressing them on him, as I'm sure he's not all interested.
Just look at him sitting there, it's clear he's occupied with his own affairs."
K. just did not feel like contradicting him.. The girl's intention may have been good, perhaps she was under instructions to distract him or to give him the chance to collect himself, but the attempt had not worked.
"I had to explain to him why you were laughing," said the girl. "I suppose it was insulting."
"I think he would forgive even worse insults if I finally took him outside."
K. said nothing, did not even look up, he tolerated the two of them negotiating over him like an object, that was even what suited him best.
But suddenly he felt the information-giver's hand on one arm and the young woman's hand on the other.
"Thank you both very much," said K., pleasantly surprised, as he slowly rose and personally guided these unfamiliar hands to the places where he most needed support.
As they approached the corridor, the girl said quietly into K.'s ear, "I must seem to think it's very important to show the information-giver in a good light, but you shouldn't doubt what I say, I just want to say the truth.
It's not really his job to help litigants outside if they're unwell but he's doing it anyway, as you can see.
K. felt almost ashamed to be seen by him, earlier he had stood so upright in front of him and now he had to be supported by two others, his hat was held up by the information-giver balanced on outstretched fingers, his hair was dishevelled and hung down onto the sweat on his forehead.
"I know," he said, "that my case can't be settled today, not yet, but I've come in anyway, I thought, I thought I could wait here anyway, it's Sunday today, I've got plenty of time, and I'm not disturbing anyone here."
"He's very good with the litigants," whispered the girl.
He had said that with as decisively as he could, but in fact it would have done him a lot of good to sit down.
It was as if he were suffering sea-sickness.
He felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea, as if the water were hitting against the wooden walls, a thundering from the depths of the corridor as if the torrent were crashing over it, as if the corridor were swaying and the waiting litigants on each side of it rising and sinking.
It made the calmness of the girl and the man leading him all the more incomprehensible.
He was at their mercy, if they let go of him he would fall like a board.
Their little eyes glanced here and there, K. could feel the evenness of their steps but could not do the same, as from step to step he was virtually being carried.
He finally noticed they were speaking to him but he did not understand them, all he heard was a noise that filled all the space and through which there seemed to be an unchanging higher note sounding, like a siren.
"Louder," he whispered with his head sunk low, ashamed at having to ask them to speak louder when he knew they had spoken loudly enough, even if it had been, for him, incomprehensible.
At last, a draught of cool air blew in his face as if a gap had been torn out in the wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someone say, "First he says he wants to go, and then you can tell him a hundred times that this is the way out and he doesn't move."
K. became aware that he was standing in front of the way out, and that the young woman had opened the door.
It seemed to him that all his strength returned to him at once, and to get a foretaste of freedom he stepped straight on to one of the stairs and took his leave there of his companions, who bowed to him.
"Thank you very much," he repeated, shook their hands once more and did not let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear the comparatively fresh air from the stairway after being so long used to the air in the offices.
They were hardly able to reply, and the young woman might even have fallen over if K. had not shut the door extremely fast.
K. then stood still for a while, combed his hair with the help of a pocket mirror, picked up his hat from the next stair - the information-giver must have thrown it down there - and then he ran down the steps so fresh and in such long leaps that the contrast with his previous state nearly frightened him.
Did his body want to revolt and cause him a new trial as he was bearing the old one with such little effort?
He did not quite reject the idea that he should see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatever he did - and this was something on which he could advise himself - he wanted to spend all Sunday mornings in future better than he had spent this one.
He tried to reach her in many and various ways but she always found a way to avoid it.
He would come straight home from the office, remain in her room without the light on, and sit on the sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watch on the empty hallway.
If the maid went by and closed the door of the apparently empty room he would get up after a while and open it again.
He got up an hour earlier than usual in the morning so that he might perhaps find Miss Brstner alone as she went to the office.
Then he wrote her a letter, both to the office and the flat, attempting once more to justify his behaviour, offered to make whatever amends he could, promised never to cross whatever boundary she might set him and begged merely to have the chance to speak to her some time, especially as he was unable to do anything with Mrs. Grubach either until he had spoken with Miss Brstner, he finally informed her that the following Sunday he would stay in his room all day waiting for a sign from her that there was some hope of his request being fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him why she could not fulfil it even though he had promised to observe whatever stipulations she might make.
A French teacher, although she was German and called Montag, a pale and febrile girl with a slight limp who had previously occupied a room of her own, was moving into Miss Brstner's room.
She could be seen shuffling through the hallway for several hours, there was always another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she had forgotten and had to be fetched specially and brought into the new home.
When Mrs. Grubach brought K. his breakfast - ever since the time when she had made K. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do the slightest job - he had no choice but to speak to her, for the first time in five days.
"Why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" he asked as she poured his coffee out, "Can't something be done about it?
K. did not look up at Mrs. Grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seemed to feel some relief as she breathed in.
Even sharp questions like this from Mr. K. she perceived as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness.
"We're not clearing anything out, Mr. K.," she said, "it's just that Miss Montag is moving in with Miss Brstner and is moving her things across."
She said nothing more, but just waited to see how K. would take it and whether he would allow her to carry on speaking.
But K. kept her in uncertainty, took the spoon and pensively stirred his coffee while he remained silent.
Then he looked up at her and said, "What about the suspicions you had earlier about Miss Brstner, have you given them up?"
"Mr. K.," called Mrs. Grubach, who had been waiting for this very question, as she put her hands together and held them out towards him.
At this last outcry, Mrs. Grubach was already choking back her tears, she raised her apron to her face and blubbered out loud.
"Oh, don't cry Mrs. Grubach," said K., looking out the window, he was thinking only of Miss Brstner and how she was accepting an unknown girl into her room.
"Now don't cry," he said again as he turned his look back into the room where Mrs. Grubach was still crying. "I meant no harm either when I said that.
Mrs. Grubach pulled her apron down to below her eyes to see whether K. really was attempting a reconciliation.
"Well, yes, that's how it is," said K., and as Mrs. Grubach's behaviour indicated that the captain had said nothing he dared to add, "Do you really think, then, that I'd want to make an enemy of you for the sake of a girl we hardly know?"
"Yes, you're quite right, Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach, and then, to her misfortune, as soon as she felt just a little freer to speak, she added something rather inept.
Why does he quarrel with me over her when he knows that any cross word from him and I can't sleep that night?
K. said nothing in reply, he should have chased her from the room as soon as she had opened her mouth, and he didn't want to do that.
He contented himself with merely drinking his coffee and letting Mrs. Grubach feel that she was superfluous.
Outside, the dragging steps of Miss Montag could still be heard as she went from one side of the hallway to the other.
"Do you hear that?" asked K. pointing his hand at the door.
"Yes," said Mrs. Grubach with a sigh, "I wanted to give her some help and I wanted the maid to help her too but she's stubborn, she wants to move everything in herself.
I often feel it's a burden for me to have Miss Montag as a tenant but Miss Brstner accepts her into her room with herself."
"There's nothing there for you to worry about" said K., crushing the remains of a sugar lump in his cup.
"Does she cause you any trouble?"
"No," said Mrs. Grubach, "in itself it's very good to have her there, it makes another room free for me and I can let my nephew, the captain, occupy it.
I began to worry he might be disturbing you when I had to let him live in the living room next to you over the last few days.
You seem to think that because I can't stand this to-ing and fro-ing of Miss Montag that I'm over-sensitive - and there she goes back again."
"Should I tell her to leave moving the rest of her things over till later, then, Mr. K.?
"But she has to move in with Miss Brstner!" said K.
"So she has to take her things over there."
K. was irritated all the more by this dumb helplessness which, seen from the outside, could have seemed like a kind of defiance on her part.
He began to walk up and down the room between the window and the door, thus depriving Mrs. Grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise probably would have done.
It was the maid, to say that Miss Montag would like to have a few words with Mr. K., and therefore requested that he come to the dining room where she was waiting for him.
His look seemed to be saying that K. had been expecting this invitation for Miss Montag for a long time, and that it was confirmation of the suffering he had been made to endure that Sunday morning from Mrs. Grubach's tenants.
He sent the maid back with the reply that he was on his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change his coat, and in answer to Mrs. Grubach's gentle whining about the nuisance Miss Montag was causing merely asked her to clear away the breakfast things.
As he went through the hallway he looked at the closed door of Miss Brstner's room.
But it wasn't there that he was invited, but the dining room, to which he yanked the door open without knocking.
Then Miss Montag, her head unusually erect as always, said, "I'm not sure whether you know me."
K. looked at her with a frown.
"Of course I do," he said, "you've been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some time now."
But Miss Montag stood straight up again as she had left her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffled down the whole length of the room.
When she came back, the handbag lightly swinging, she said, "I'd like just to have a few words with you on behalf of my friend.
She would have come herself, but she's feeling a little unwell today.
Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and listen to me instead.
There's anyway nothing that she could have said that I won't.
On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more than her because I'm relatively impartial.
"What is there to say, then?" answered K., who was tired of Miss Montag continuously watching his lips.
In that way she took control of what he wanted to say before he said it.
"Miss Brstner clearly refuses to grant me the personal meeting that I asked her for."
You asked my friend, verbally or in writing, for the chance to speak with her.
Now my friend is aware of your reasons for asking for this meeting - or at least I suppose she is - and so, for reasons I know nothing about, she is quite sure that it would be of no benefit to anyone if this meeting actually took place.
Moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made it clear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself either, she feels that it can only have been a matter of chance that such an idea came to you, and that even without any explanations from her, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have not done so already, the futility of your idea.
"I thank you," said K. as soon as Miss Montag had finished. He stood slowly up, looked at her, then across the table, then out the window - the house opposite stood there in the sun - and went to the door.
Miss Montag followed him a few paces, as if she did not quite trust him.
He was a large man of about forty with a tanned, fleshy face.
He bowed slightly, intending it also for K., and then went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed her hand.
He was very elegant in the way he moved.
The courtesy he showed towards Miss Montag made a striking contrast with the way she had been treated by K. Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross with K. as it even seemed to him that she wanted to introduce the captain.
K. however, did not want to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sort of friendliness either to Miss Montag or to the captain, the kiss on the hand had, for K., bound them into a group which would keep him at a distance from Miss Brstner whilst at the same time seeming to be totally harmless and unselfish.
K. thought, however, that he saw more than that, he thought he also saw that Miss Montag had chosen a means of doing it that was good, but two-edged.
She exaggerated the importance of the relationship between K. and Miss Brstner, and above all she exaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and she tried at the same time to make out that K. was exaggerating everything.
She would be disappointed, K. did not want to exaggerate anything, he was aware that Miss Brstner was a little typist who would not offer him much resistance for long.
In doing so he deliberately took no account of what Mrs. Grubach had told him about Miss Brstner.
All these things were going through his mind as he left the room with hardly a polite word.
He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little laugh from Miss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought him to the idea that he might prepare a surprise for the two of them, the captain and Miss Montag.
There was no sound so he knocked again but there was still no answer in reply.
Was she asleep?
Or was she really unwell?
Or was she just pretending as she realised it could only be K. knocking so gently?
K. assumed she was pretending and knocked harder, eventually, when the knocking brought no result, he carefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was not only improper but also pointless.
K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardly expected to be able to find Miss Brstner so easily and had made this attempt for little more reason than to spite Miss Montag.
But that made it all the more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the door again, he saw Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway of the dining room.
They had probably been standing there ever since K. had opened the door, they avoided seeming to observe K. but chatted lightly and followed his movements with glances, the absent minded glances to the side such as you make during a conversation.
But these glances were heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back into his own room.
One evening, a few days later, K. was walking along one of the corridors that separated his office from the main stairway - he was nearly the last one to leave for home that evening, there remained only a couple of workers in the light of a single bulb in the dispatch department - when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had himself never opened but which he had always thought just led into a junk room. He stood in amazement and listened again to establish whether he might not be mistaken.
For a while there was silence, but then came some more sighs. His first thought was to fetch one of the servitors, it might well have been worth having a witness present, but then he was taken by an uncontrollable curiosity that make him simply yank the door open.
It was, as he had thought, a junk room.
One of the men was clearly in charge, and attracted attention by being dressed in a kind of dark leather costume which left his neck and chest and his arms exposed.
And now, K. finally realised that it was actually the two policemen, Franz and Willem, and that the third man held a cane in his hand with which to beat them.
"Mr. K.," said Willem, while Franz clearly tried to shelter behind him as protection from the third man, "if you knew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so badly of us.
But if he starts talking about it openly then the punishment has to follow."
"Franz," said Willem, turning to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the gentleman didn't say he wanted us to be punished?
Now you can hear for yourself, he didn't even know we'd have to be punished."
"Don't you let them persuade you, talking like that," said the third man to K., "this punishment is both just and unavoidable."
"Don't listen to him," said Willem, interrupting himself only to quickly bring his hand to his mouth when it had received a stroke of the cane, "we're only being punished because you made a complaint against us.
"Oh, I see," said K., looking straight at the whip-man, his skin was burned brown like a sailor's, and his face showed health and vigorous.
"Is there then no possibility of sparing these two their beating?" he asked him.
"No," said the whip-man, shaking his head with a laugh.
"Get undressed!" he ordered the policemen.
And to K. he said, "You shouldn't believe everything they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it's already made them a bit weak in the head.
This one here, for instance," he pointed at Willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects, it's just ridiculous.
Look at him, look how fat he is - the first strokes of the cane will just get lost in all that fat. Do you know what it is that's made him so fat?
He's in the habit of, everyone that gets arrested by him, he eats their breakfast.
Didn't he eat up your breakfast?
But a man with a belly like that can't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quite out of the question."
"No," said the whip-man, striking him such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made him wince, "you shouldn't be listening to this, just get undressed."
"I would make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said K., and without looking at the whip-man again - as such matters are best carried on with both pairs of eyes turned down - he pulled out his wallet.
"If you had a senior judge here beneath your stick," said K., pressing down the cane as he spoke to stop it being raised once more, "I really would do nothing to stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to give you all the more strength."
Franz, the policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably in expectation of a good result from K.'s intervention, but now he stepped forward to the door wearing just his trousers, kneeled down hanging on to K.'s arm and whispered, "Even if you can't get mercy shown for both of us, at least try and get me set free.
Willem is older than me, he's less sensitive than me in every way, he even got a light beating a couple of years ago, but my record's still clean, I only did things the way I did because Willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both for good and bad.
His face was flowing over with tears, and he wiped it dry on K.'s coat.
"I'm not going to wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane in both hands and laying in to Franz while Willem cowered back in a corner and looked on secretly, not even daring to turn his head.
"Don't shout like that!", called out K., unable to prevent himself, and, as he looked anxiously in the direction from which the servitor would come, he gave Franz a shove, not hard, but hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, clawing at the ground with his hands by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod still found him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularly up and down while he rolled to and fro under its blows.
So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he called out, "It's only me!"
There was no sound from the servitors so he added, "You can go back to what you were doing."
He did not want to become involved with a conversation with them, and so he leant out of the window.
A little while later, when he looked out in the corridor, they had already gone.
Now, K. remained at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk room, and he did not want to go home either.
The yard he looked down into was small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all the windows were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflection of the moon.
He felt anguish at not having been able to prevent the flogging, but that was not his fault, if Franz had not screamed like that - clearly it must have caused a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain control of oneself at important moments - if Franz had not screamed then it was at least highly probable that K. would have been able to dissuade the whip-man.
If all the junior officers were contemptible why would the whip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception, and K. had noticed very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw the banknotes, he had obviously only seemed serious about the flogging to raise the level of the bribe a little.
And K. had not been ungenerous, he really had wanted to get the policemen freed; if he really had now begun to do something against the degeneracy of the court then it was a matter of course that he would have to do something here as well.
K. could not possibly have let the junior bank staff, and perhaps even all sorts of other people, come along and catch him by surprise as he haggled with those people in the junk room.
If that had been his intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would have taken his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in the policemen's place.
The whip-man would certainly not have accepted this substitution anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violated his duty without gaining any benefit. He would most likely have violated his duty twice over, as court employees were probably under orders not to cause any harm to K. while he was facing charges, although there may have been special conditions in force here.
However things stood, K. was able to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that would still do nothing to remove all the dangers he faced.
It was regrettable that he had given Franz a shove, and it could only be excused by the heat of the moment.
In the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did not want them to be too aware of his presence, so he closed the window and walked towards the main staircase.
At the door of the junk room he stopped and listened for a little while.
The two policemen were entirely at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beaten them to death.
K. reached his hand out for the door handle but drew it suddenly back.
He was no longer in any position to help anyone, and the servitors would soon be back; he did, though, promise himself that he would raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as it was in his power, those who really were guilty, the high officials whom nobody had so far dared point out to him, received their due punishment.
As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank, he looked carefully round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to be seen who might have been waiting for somebody, not even within some distance from the bank.
Franz's claim that his bride was waiting for him was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable and intended only to elicit more sympathy.
The policemen were still on K.'s mind all through the following day; he was unable to concentrate on his work and had to stay in his office a little longer than the previous day so that he could finish it.
On the way home, as he passed by the junk room again, he opened its door as if that had been his habit.
Instead of the darkness he expected, he saw everything unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know how he should respond.
Everything was exactly the same as he had seen it when he had opened the door the previous evening.
The forms and bottles of ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, the two policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the two policemen began to wail and call out "Mr. K.!" K. slammed the door immediately shut, and even thumped on it with his fists as if that would shut it all the firmer.
Almost in tears, he ran to the servitors working quietly at the copying machine.
"Go and get that junk room cleared out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stopped what they were doing. "It should have been done long ago, we're sinking in dirt!"
They would be able to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it was too late in the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally intended. He sat down briefly in order to keep them near him for a little longer, looked through a few of the copies to give the impression that he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not dare to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind numb.
One afternoon - K. was very busy at the time, getting the post ready - K.'s Uncle Karl, a small country land owner, came into the room, pushing his way between two of the staff who were bringing in some papers.
K. had long expected his uncle to appear, but the sight of him now shocked K. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time before.
He already thought at the time he could see how his uncle would arrive, slightly bowed, his battered panama hat in his left hand, his right hand already stretched out over the desk long before he was close enough as he rushed carelessly towards K. knocking over everything that was in his way.
K.'s uncle was always in a hurry, as he suffered from the unfortunate belief that he had a number things to do while he was in the big city and had to settle all of them in one day - his visits were only ever for one day - and at the same time thought he could not forgo any conversation or piece of business or pleasure that might arise by chance.
Uncle Karl was K.'s former guardian, and so K. was duty-bound to help him in all of this as well as to offer him a bed for the night. 'I'm haunted by a ghost from the country', he would say.
As soon as they had greeted each other - K. had invited him to sit in the armchair but Uncle Karl had no time for that - he said he wanted to speak briefly with K. in private.
"It is necessary," he said with a tired gulp, "it is necessary for my peace of mind."
"What's this that I've been hearing, Josef?" cried K.'s uncle when they were alone, as he sat on the table shoving various papers under himself without looking at them to make himself more comfortable.
K. said nothing, he knew what was coming, but, suddenly relieved from the effort of the work he had been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitude and looked out the window at the other side of the street. From where he sat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of the empty walls of houses between two shop windows.
"You're staring out the window!" called out his uncle, raising his arms, "For God's sake, Josef, give me an answer!
"Uncle Karl," said K., wrenching himself back from his daydreaming, "I really don't know what it is you want of me."
"Josef," said his uncle in a warning tone, "as far as I know, you've always told the truth.
"That's right," answered his uncle with a slow nod, "I've heard about your trial."
"Erna wrote to me," said his uncle, "she doesn't have much contact with you, it's true, you don't pay very much attention to her, I'm afraid to say, but she learned about it nonetheless.
I got her letter today and, of course, I came straight here.
I can read you out the part of the letter that concerns you." He drew the letter out from his wallet.
Like I said, they would not let me through to see him at the bank because he was negotiating with some gentleman just then.
After I had been waiting quietly for quite a long time I asked one of the staff whether his meeting would last much longer.
He said it might well do, as it was probably about the legal proceedings, he said, that were being conducted against him.
I asked what sort of legal proceedings it was that were being conducted against the chief clerk, and whether he was not making some mistake, but he said he was not making any mistake, there were legal proceedings underway and even that they were about something quite serious, but he did not know any more about it.
He would have liked to have been of some help to the chief clerk himself, as the chief clerk was a gentleman, good and honest, but he did not know what it was he could do and merely hoped there would be some influential gentlemen who would take his side.
Of course, I did not place too much importance on this conversation, and even did my best to put the bank clerk's mind at rest, he was quite a simple man.
I told him he was not to speak to anyone else about this, and I think it is all just a rumour, but I still think it might be good if you, Dear Father, if you looked into the matter the next time you visit. It will be easy for you to find out more detail and, if it is really necessary, to do something about it through the great and influential people you know.
But if it is not necessary, and that is what seems most likely, then at least your daughter will soon have the chance to embrace you and I look forward to it.' - She's a good child," said K.'s uncle when he had finished reading, and wiped a few tears from his eyes.
K. nodded. With all the different disruptions he had had recently he had completely forgotten about Erna, even her birthday, and the story of the chocolates had clearly just been invented so that he wouldn't get in trouble with his aunt and uncle.
It was very touching, and even the theatre tickets, which he would regularly send her from then on, would not be enough to repay her, but he really did not feel, now, that it was right for him to visit her in her lodgings and hold conversations with a little, eighteen year old schoolgirl.
"And what do you have to say about that?" asked his uncle,who had forgotten all his rush and excitement as he read the letter, and seemed to be about to read it again.
"True!" called out his uncle. "What is true?
"And you sit quietly here while you've got a criminal trial round your neck?" shouted his uncle, getting ever louder.
"How can I help worrying?!" shouted his uncle, "Josef, my Dear Josef, think about yourself, about your family, think about our good name!
I don't like the way you're behaving," he said, looking at K. with his head at an angle, "that's not how an innocent man behaves when he's accused of something, not if he's still got any strength in him.
"No," said K. as he stood up, "and you're speaking too loud, Uncle, I expect one of the staff is listening at the door and I find that rather unpleasant.
"You certainly do!" his uncle shouted, "Quite right, you do. Now just get a move on, Josef, hurry up now!"
"I still have a few documents I need to prepare," said K., and, using the intercom, he summoned his deputy who entered a few moments later.
K.'s uncle, still angry and excited, gestured with his hand to show that K. had summoned him, even though there was no need whatever to do so. K. stood in front of the desk and explained to the young man, who listened calm and attentive, what would need to be done that day in his absence, speaking in a calm voice and making use of various documents.
The presence of K.'s uncle while this was going on was quite disturbing; he did not listen to what was being said, but at first he stood there with eyes wide open and nervously biting his lips.
Then he began to walk up and down the room, stopped now and then at the window, or stood in front of a picture always making various exclamations such as, "That is totally incomprehensible to me!" or "Now just tell me, what are you supposed to make of that?!"
The young man pretended to notice nothing of this and listened to K.'s instructions through to the end, he made a few notes, bowed to both K. and his uncle and then left the room. K.'s uncle had turned his back to him and was looking out the window, bunching up the curtains with his outstretched hands.
The door had hardly closed when he called out, "At last! Now that he's stopped jumping about we can go too!"
"Now then, Josef," he began, lightly acknowledging the bows from those around them as they passed, "tell me everything about this trial; what sort of trial is it?"
K. made a few comments which conveyed little information, even laughed a little, and it was only when they reached the front steps that he explained to his uncle that he had not wanted to talk openly in front of those people.
"Quite right," said his uncle, "but now start talking."
With his head to one side, and smoking his cigar in short, impatient draughts, he listened.
"So much the worse," said his uncle.
"What I mean is, that's for the worse," he repeated.
They were standing on the front steps of the bank; as the doorkeeper seemed to be listening to what they were saying K. drew his uncle down further, where they were absorbed into the bustle of the street.
His uncle took K.'s arm and stopped asking questions with such urgency about the trial, they walked on for a while in silence. "But how did all this come about?" he eventually asked, stopping abruptly enough to startle the people walking behind, who had to avoid walking into him.
"You could forbid me to leave," said K., who had been drawn slightly into his uncle's way of thinking by what he had been saying.
"I didn't think you would do it," said his uncle thoughtfully, "you won't suffer too much loss of power by moving away."
K. grasped his uncle under the arm to prevent him stopping still and said, "I thought you'd think all this is less important than I do, and now you're taking it so hard."
"Josef," called his uncle trying to disentangle himself from him so that he could stop walking, but K. did not let go, "you've completely changed, you used to be so astute, are you losing it now?
"You're right," said his uncle in a tone that seemed to indicate they were finally coming closer to each other, "I just made the suggestion because, as I saw it, if you stay in the city the case will be put in danger by your indifference to it, and I thought it was better if I did the work for you.
"Well, naturally I'll have to think about it," said his uncle, "you must bear in mind that I've been living in the country for twenty years now, almost without a break, you lose your ability to deal with matters like this.
Even while he was still speaking, K.'s uncle had stood on tiptoe to summon a taxi and now he pulled K. into the car behind himself as he called out an address to the driver.
"We're going now to see Dr. Huld, the lawyer," he said, "we were at school together.
"It's alright with me, whatever you do," said K., although he was made uneasy by the rushed and urgent way his uncle was dealing with the matter.
"I didn't know," he said, "that you could take on a lawyer in matters like this."
"Well of course you can," said his uncle, "that goes without saying.
K. instantly began telling his uncle about what had been happening, holding nothing back - being completely open with him was the only way that K. could protest at his uncle's belief that the trial was a great disgrace.
He mentioned Miss Brstner's name just once and in passing, but that did nothing to diminish his openness about the trial as Miss Brstner had no connection with it.
As he spoke, he looked out the window and saw how, just then, they were getting closer to the suburb where the court offices were. He drew this to his uncle's attention, but he did not find the coincidence especially remarkable.
K.'s uncle knocked at the very first door at ground level; while they waited he smiled, showing his big teeth, and whispered, "Eight o'clock; not the usual sort of time to be visiting a lawyer, but Huld won't mind it from me."
K. and his uncle confirmed to each other the fact that they had seen the two eyes.
"Open the door," called K.'s uncle, raising his fist against it, "we are friends of Dr. Huld, the lawyer!"
In a doorway at the far end of a narrow passage stood a man in his dressing gown, giving them this information in an extremely quiet voice.
You say he's ill?" and strode towards the gentleman in a way that seemed almost threatening, as if he were the illness himself.
He pulled his dressing gown together and disappeared. The door had indeed been opened, a young girl - K. recognised the dark, slightly bulging eyes - stood in the hallway in a long white apron, holding a candle in her hand.
"Next time, open up sooner!" said K.'s uncle instead of a greeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey.
"Come along, Josef," he then said to K. who was slowly moving over towards the girl.
"Dr. Huld is unwell," said the girl as K.'s uncle, without stopping, rushed towards one of the doors.
K. continued to look at the girl in amazement as she turned round to block the way into the living room, she had a round face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheeks and the chin were round but the temples and the hairline were too.
"Josef!" called his uncle once more, and he asked the girl, "It's trouble with his heart, is it?"
"I think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time to go ahead with the candle and open the door into the room.
"Leni, who's this coming in?" asked the lawyer, unable to recognise his guests because he was dazzled by the candle.
"Oh, Albert," said the lawyer, falling back onto his pillow as if this visit meant he would not need to keep up appearances.
"I see," said K.'s uncle, pressing his panama hat firmly against his knee with his big hand.
Even your young lady here doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she's just pretending."
The maid was still standing by the door with the candle; as far as could be made out, she was watching K. more than she was watching his uncle even while the latter was still speaking about her.
K. leant against a chair that he had pushed near to the girl.
After a short pause he added, "and Leni looks after me well, she's a good girl."
But that was not enough to persuade K.'s uncle, he had visibly taken against his friend's carer and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecuted her with his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on the bedside table and, leaning over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidying the pillows.
K.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to show any consideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walked up and down behind the carer, and K. would not have been surprised if he had grabbed hold of her skirts behind her and dragged her away from the bed.
K. himself looked on calmly, he was not even disappointed at finding the lawyer unwell, he had been able to do nothing to oppose the enthusiasm his uncle had developed for the matter, he was glad that this enthusiasm had now been distracted without his having to do anything about it.
Dr. Huld's carer was still leant far over the invalid's bed and smoothing out the cloth covering the wall next to it, she merely turned her head and then, in striking contrast with the anger that first stopped K.'s uncle from speaking and then let the words out in a gush, she said very quietly, "You can see that Dr. Huld is so ill that he can't discuss any matters at all."
It was probably just for the sake of convenience that she had repeated the words spoken by K.'s uncle, but an onlooker might even have perceived it as mocking him and he, of course, jumped up as if he had just been stabbed.
"You damned ... ," in the first gurglings of his excitement his words could hardly be understood, K. was startled even though he had been expecting something of the sort and ran to his uncle with the intention, no doubt, of closing his mouth with both his hands.
Fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raised himself up, K.'s uncle made an ugly face as if swallowing something disgusting and then, somewhat calmer, said, "We have naturally not lost our senses, not yet; if what I am asking for were not possible I would not be asking for it.
The carer stood up straight by the bed directly facing K.'s uncle, K. thought he noticed that with one hand she was stroking the lawyer's hand.
And he twisted himself round as if wanting to go into no more negotiations but giving himself a little more time to think.
"Whose business is it then?" asked the lawyer in an exhausted voice as he leant back again.
And he introduced him, "Chief Clerk Josef K."
"Oh!" said the invalid, now with much more life in him, and reached out his hand towards K. "Do forgive me, I didn't notice you there at all."
Then he then said to his carer, "Leni, go," stretching his hand out to her as if this were a farewell that would have to last for a long time. This time the girl offered no resistance.
"So you," he finally said to K.'s uncle, who had also calmed down and stepped closer, "you haven't come to visit me because I'm ill but you've come on business."
The lawyer now looked so much stronger that it seemed the idea of being visited because he was ill had somehow made him weak, he remained supporting himself of one elbow, which must have been rather tiring, and continually pulled at a lock of hair in the middle of his beard.
He interrupted himself, whispered, "I bet you she's listening!" and sprang over to the door.
But behind the door there was no-one, K.'s uncle came back not disappointed, as her not listening seemed to him worse than if she had been, but probably somewhat embittered.
"You're mistaken about her," said the lawyer, but did nothing more to defend her; perhaps that was his way of indicating that she did not need defending.
But in a tone that was much more committed he went on, "As far as your nephew's affairs are concerned, this will be an extremely difficult undertaking and I'd count myself lucky if my strength lasted out long enough for it; I'm greatly afraid it won't do, but anyway I don't want to leave anything untried; if I don't last out you can always get somebody else.
K. believed he understood not a word of this entire speech, he looked at his uncle for an explanation but his uncle sat on the bedside table with the candle in his hand, a medicine bottle had rolled off the table onto the floor, he nodded to everything the lawyer said, agreed to everything, and now and then looked at K. urging him to show the same compliance.
But that was impossible, everything that had happened so far spoke against it. So he said,
"But you work in the High Court, not that court in the attic," he had wanted to say but could not bring himself to actually utter it.
"You have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as if he were explaining something obvious, unnecessary and incidental, "you have to realise that I also derive great advantage for my clients from mixing with those people, and do so in many different ways, it's not something you can keep talking about all the time.
And he pointed into a dark corner of the room.
"Where?" asked K., almost uncouth in his surprise.
He had been sitting there for so long without being noticed that he could hardly have been breathing.
Now he stood up with a great deal of fuss, clearly unhappy that attention had been drawn to him.
It was as if, by flapping his hands about like short wings, he hoped to deflect any introductions and greetings, as if he wanted on no account to disturb the others by his presence and seemed to be exhorting them to leave him back in the dark and forget about his being there.
"You took us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation, cheerfully indicating to the gentleman that he should come closer, which, slowly, hesitatingly, looking all around him, but with a certain dignity, he did. "The office director - oh, yes, forgive me, I haven't introduced you - this is my friend Albert K., this is his nephew, the chief clerk Josef K., and this is the office director - so, the office director was kind enough to pay me a visit.
Well, he came anyway, we were having a peaceful chat, as far as I was able when I'm so weak, and although we hadn't told Leni she mustn't let anyone in as we weren't expecting anyone, we still would rather have remained alone, but then along came you, Albert, thumping your fists on the door, the office director moved over into the corner pulling his table and chair with him, but now it turns out we might have, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something to discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back together again. - Office director ... , " he said with his head on one side, pointing with a humble smile to an armchair near the bed.
"I'm afraid I'll only be able to stay a few minutes more," smiled the office director as he spread himself out in the armchair and looked at the clock.
He inclined his head slightly toward K.'s uncle, who seemed very happy with his new acquaintance, but he was not the sort of person to express his feelings of deference and responded to the office director's words with embarrassed, but loud, laughter.
K. was able to quietly watch everything as nobody paid any attention to him, the office director took over as leader of the conversation as seemed to be his habit once he had been called forward, the lawyer listened attentively with his hand to his ear, his initial weakness having perhaps only had the function of driving away his new visitors, K.'s uncle served as candle-bearer - balancing the candle on his thigh while the office director frequently glanced nervously at it - and was soon free of his embarrassment and was quickly enchanted not only by the office director's speaking manner but also by the gentle, waving hand-movements with which he accompanied it.
K., leaning against the bedpost, was totally ignored by the office director, perhaps deliberately, and served the old man only as audience.
And besides, he had hardly any idea what the conversation was about and his thoughts soon turned to the care assistant and the ill treatment she had suffered from his uncle. Soon after, he began to wonder whether he had not seen the office director somewhere before, perhaps among the people who were at his first hearing.
He had hardly stepped into the hallway, finding his bearings in the darkness with his hand still firmly holding the door, when another small hand, much smaller than K.'s own, placed itself on his and gently shut the door.
"Nothing has happened," she whispered to him, "I just threw a plate against the wall to get you out of there."
"Come in here," she said.
When he had sat down, K. continued to look round the room, it was a large room with a high ceiling, the clients of this lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it.
K. thought he could see the little steps with which visitors would approach the massive desk.
But then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only for the carer who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him against the armrest.
"I did think," she said "you would come out here to me by yourself with me having to call you first.
And you ought to call me Leni, too," she added quickly and suddenly, as if no moment of this conversation should be lost.
"Oh!" she exclaimed with a smile, thus making use of K.'s comment to gain an advantage over him.
By now, he had become used to the darkness in the room and was able to make out various fixtures and fittings.
He was especially impressed by a large picture hanging to the right of the door, he leant forward in order to see it better.
It depicted a man wearing a judge's robes; he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forth from the picture.
The odd thing about the picture was that this judge was not sitting there in dignified calm but had his left arm pressed against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely free and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up any moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even to pass sentence.
That picture is from when he was young, but he can never have looked anything like it, as he's tiny, minute almost.
But despite that, he had himself made to look bigger in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round here.
K. replied to that last comment merely by embracing Leni and drawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder.
To the rest of it, though, he said, "What rank is he?"
"He's an examining judge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which K. held her and playing with his fingers.
But here he is sitting on a throne."
"That's all just made up," said Leni with her face bent over K.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen chair with an old horse blanket folded over it.
But do you have to be always thinking about your trial?" she added slowly.
"Who said that?" asked K., he felt her body against his chest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair.
"You understand a lot about this court and what sort of tricks are needed," said K. as he lifted her, since she was pressing in much too close to him, onto his lap.
"That's alright, then," she said, and made herself comfortable on his lap by smoothing out her skirt and adjusting her blouse.
Then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back and took a long look at him.
"And what if I don't confess, could you not help me then?" asked K. to test her out.
I'm accumulating women to help me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first Miss Brstner, then the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seems to have some incomprehensible need for me.
The way she sits on my lap as if it were her proper place!
"No," answered Leni, slowly shaking her head, "I couldn't help you then.
But you don't want my help anyway, it means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded." Then, after a while she asked, "Do you have a lover?"
"Oh, you must have," she said.
"Well, I have really," said K. "Just think, I've even betrayed her while I'm carrying her photograph with me."
Leni insisted he show her a photograph of Elsa, and then, hunched on his lap, studied the picture closely.
The photograph was not one that had been taken while Elsa was posing for it, it showed her just after she had been in a wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars, her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed her hands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one side with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was intended for.
"She's very tightly laced," said Leni, pointing to the place where she thought this could be seen. "I don't like her, she's clumsy and crude.
But maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you, that's the impression you get from the picture.
Would she be capable of sacrificing herself for you, though?"
"No," said K., "she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of sacrificing herself for me.
But I've never yet asked any of those things of her.
"You can't think much of her, then," said Leni. "She can't be your lover after all."
"Yes she is," said K., "I'm not going to take my word back on that."
"Well she might be your lover now, then," said Leni, "but you wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchanged her for somebody else, me for instance."
"That is certainly conceivable," said K. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, she knows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think about it.
"Well that's no advantage," said Leni. "If she's got no advantage other than that, I can keep on hoping.
Has she got any bodily defects?"
She spread the middle and ring fingers of her right hand apart from each other. Between those fingers the flap of skin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of the little finger.
In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it was she wanted to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel.
"What a freak of nature," said K., and when he had taken a look at the whole hand he added, "What a pretty claw!"
Leni looked on with a kind of pride as K. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers in amazement, until, finally, he briefly kissed them and let go.
"Oh!" she immediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!"
Hurriedly, and with her mouth open, she clambered up K.'s lap with her knees.
He was almost aghast as he looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a bitter, irritating smell from her, like pepper, she grasped his head, leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting into his hair.
"I've taken her place!" she exclaimed from time to time. "Just look, now you've taken me instead of her!"
Just then, her knee slipped out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, K. tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled down with her.
"Now you're mine," she said. Her last words to him as he left were, "Here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and she planted an undirected kiss on his back.
When he stepped out the front door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle of the street to see if he could still glimpse Leni at the window when K.'s uncle leapt out of a car that K., thinking of other things, had not seen waiting outside the building. He took hold of K. by both arms and shoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him to it.
"Young man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?!
You don't even try to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite open about it, you run off with her and stay there.
We wanted to discuss how best to help you, I had to handle the lawyer very carefully, he had to handle the office director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give me some support.
In the end the office director stood up, as he had stayed far longer than he had originally intended, made his farewell, looked at me in sympathy without being able to help, he waited at the door for a long time although it's more than I can understand why he was being so good, and then he went.
I, of course, was glad he'd gone, I'd been holding my breath all this time.
All this had even more affect on the lawyer lying there ill, when I took my leave of him, the good man, he was quite unable to speak.
You have probably contributed to his total collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependent on closer to his death.
One winter morning - snow was falling in the dull light outside - K. was sitting in his office, already extremely tired despite the early hour.
He had told the servitor he was engaged in a major piece of work and none of the junior staff should be allowed in to see him, so he would not be disturbed by them at least.
But instead of working he turned round in his chair, slowly moved various items around his desk, but then, without being aware of it, he lay his arm stretched out on the desk top and sat there immobile with his head sunk down on his chest.
He was no longer able to get the thought of the trial out of his head.
It would contain a short description of his life and explain why he had acted the way he had at each event that was in any way important, whether he now considered he had acted well or ill, and his reasons for each.
There was no doubt of the advantages a written defence of this sort would have over relying on the lawyer, who was anyway not without his shortcomings.
K. had no idea what actions the lawyer was taking; it was certainly not a lot, it was more than a month since the lawyer had summoned him, and none of the previous discussions had given K. the impression that this man would be able to do much for him.
Most importantly, he had asked him hardly any questions.
K. had the feeling that he would be able to ask all the questions needed here himself.
The lawyer, in contrast, did not ask questions but did all the talking himself or sat silently facing him, leant forward slightly over the desk, probably because he was hard of hearing, pulled on a strand of hair in the middle of his beard and looked down at the carpet, perhaps at the very spot where K. had lain with Leni.
Now and then he would give K. some vague warning of the sort you give to children.
His speeches were as pointless as they were boring, and K. decided that when the final bill came he would pay not a penny for them.
Once the lawyer thought he had humiliated K. sufficiently, he usually started something that would raise his spirits again.
He had already, he would then say, won many such cases, partly or in whole, cases which may not really have been as difficult as this one but which, on the face of it, had even less hope of success.
He had a list of these cases here in the drawer - here he would tap on one or other of the drawers in his desk - but could, unfortunately, not show them to K. as they dealt with official secrets.
Nonetheless, the great experience he had acquired through all these cases would, of course, be of benefit to K. He had, of course, begun work straight away and was nearly ready to submit the first documents.
Unfortunately, though, he would still have to make it clear to K. that the first documents submitted are sometimes not even read by the court.
As a result, the accused and his defence don't have access even to the court records, and especially not to the indictment, and that means we generally don't know - or at least not precisely - what the first documents need to be about, which means that if they do contain anything of relevance to the case it's only by a lucky coincidence.
The effect of all this, of course, is to remove the dignity of the whole procedure, the next time K. is in the court offices he might like to have a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he's seen it.
He might well be quite shocked by the people he sees assembled there.
The only light in the room comes through a little window that is so high up that, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of your colleagues to support you on his back, and even then the smoke from the chimney just in front of it will go up your nose and make your face black.
In the floor of this room - to give yet another example of the conditions there - there is a hole that's been there for more than a year, it's not so big that a man could fall through, but it is big enough for your foot to disappear through it.
Counsel for the defence are not normally allowed to be present while the accused is being questioned, so afterwards, and if possible still at the door of the interview room, he has to learn what he can about it from him and extract whatever he can that might be of use, even though what the accused has to report is often very confused.
But that is not the most important thing, as there's really not a lot that can be learned in this way, although in this, as with anything else, a competent man will learn more than another.
Now K. will most likely have already learned from his own experience that, among its very lowest orders, the court organisation does have its imperfections, the court is strictly closed to the public, but staff who forget their duty or who take bribes do, to some extent, show where the gaps are.
You could have seen many gentlemen at this window, gentlemen of whom you would least expect it, staring out this window in despair on the street below while the lawyer is at his desk studying the documents so that he can give them good advice.
The different ranks and hierarchies of the court are endless, and even someone who knows his way around them cannot always tell what's going to happen.
It goes like this: One of the older officials, a good and peaceful man, was dealing with a difficult matter for the court which had become very confused, especially thanks to the contributions from the lawyers.
He had been studying it for a day and a night without a break - as these officials are indeed hard working, no-one works as hard as they do. When it was nearly morning, and he had been working for twenty-four hours with probably very little result, he went to the front entrance, waited there in ambush, and every time a lawyer tried to enter the building he would throw him down the steps.
In the end, they agreed that they would try to tire the old man out.
One lawyer after another was sent out to run up the steps and let himself be thrown down again, offering what resistance he could as long as it was passive resistance, and his colleagues would catch him at the bottom of the steps.
That went on for about an hour until the old gentleman, who was already exhausted from working all night, was very tired and went back to his office.
Even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationship there to some extent, but one significant point is that almost every defendant, even very simple people, begins to think of suggestions for improving the court as soon as his proceedings have begun, many of them often even spend time and energy on the matter that could be spent far better elsewhere.
It doesn't do much good to make accusations, especially if you can't make it clear what they're based on and their full significance, but it must be said that K. caused a great deal of harm to his own case by his behaviour towards the office director, he was a very influential man but now he might as well be struck off the list of those who might do anything for K. If the trial is mentioned, even just in passing, it's quite obvious that he's ignoring it.
It's not that the accused takes the case away from him, that hardly ever happens, once a defendant has taken on a certain lawyer he has to stay with him whatever happens.
How could he ever carry on by himself after he's taken on help from a lawyer?
The trial will have entered a stage where no more help can be given, where it's being processed in courts to which no-one has any access, where the defendant cannot even be contacted by his lawyer.
As he had said, the time for submitting documents was still in the future and there was no rush to prepare them, it was much more important to start the initial discussions with the appropriate officials, and they had already taken place.
It was much better not to give away any details before their time, as in that way K. could only be influenced unfavourably and his hopes might be raised or he might be made too anxious, better just to say that some individuals have spoken very favourably and shown themselves very willing to help, although others have spoken less favourably, but even they have not in any way refused to help.
When he started talking on in this way the lawyer was quite tireless.
There was always some progress, but he could never be told what sort of progress it was.
But he had come to him late and that lateness would bring still further difficulties, and not only where time was concerned.
The only welcome interruption during these visits was always when Leni contrived to bring the lawyer his tea while K. was there.
Then she would stand behind K. - pretending to watch the lawyer as he bent greedily over his cup, poured the tea in and drank - and secretly let K. hold her hand.
"Still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he was ready.
"I wanted to take the dishes away," said Leni, they would give each other's hands a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe his mouth and then start talking at K. again with renewed energy.
K. could not tell, but it seemed clear to him that his defence was not in good hands.
Maybe everything the lawyer said was quite right, even though he obviously wanted to make himself as conspicuous as possible and probably had never even taken on a case as important as he said K.'s was.
But it was still suspicious how he continually mentioned his personal contacts with the civil servants.
It certain did not mean that they would do that in every trial, that was not likely at all, and there were probably also trials where they gave the lawyer advantages and all the room he needed to turn it in the direction he wanted, as it would also be to their advantage to keep his reputation intact.
On winter's mornings such as this, when he was very tired and everything dragged itself lethargically through his head, this belief of his seemed irrefutable.
He no longer felt the contempt for the trial that he had had earlier.
If he had been alone in the world it would have been easy for him to ignore it, although it was also certain that, in that case, the trial would never have arisen in the first place.
But now, his uncle had already dragged him to see the lawyer, he had to take account of his family; his job was no longer totally separate from the progress of the trial, he himself had carelessly - with a certain, inexplicable complacency - mentioned it to acquaintances and others had learned about it in ways he did not know, his relationship with Miss Brstner seemed to be in trouble because of it. In short, he no longer had any choice whether he would accept the trial or turn it down, he was in the middle of it and had to defend himself.
If he was tired, then that was bad.
But there was no reason to worry too much before he needed to.
He had been capable of working himself up to his high position in the bank in a relatively short time and to retain it with respect from everyone, now he simply had to apply some of the talents that had made that possible for him to the trial, and there was no doubt that it had to turn out well.
The most important thing, if something was to be achieved, was to reject in advance any idea that he might be in any way guilty.
The trial was nothing but a big piece of business, just like he had already concluded to the benefit of the bank many times, a piece of business that concealed many lurking dangers waiting in ambush for him, as they usually did, and these dangers would need to be defended against.
If that was to be achieved then he must not entertain any idea of guilt, whatever he did, he would need to look after his own interests as closely as he could.
Seen in this way, there was no choice but to take his representation away from the lawyer very soon, at best that very evening.
The lawyer had told him, as he talked to him, that that was something unheard of and would probably do him a great deal of harm, but K. could not tolerate any impediment to his efforts where his trial was concerned, and these impediments were probably caused by the lawyer himself.
But once he had shaken off the lawyer the documents would need to be submitted straight away and, if possible, he would need to see to it that they were being dealt with every day.
It would of course not be enough, if that was to be done, for K. to sit in the corridor with his hat under the bench like the others.
Day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebody else on his behalf, would have to run after the officials and force them to sit at their desks and study K.'s documents instead of looking out on the corridor through the grating.
There could be no let-up in these efforts, everything would need to be organised and supervised, it was about time that the court came up against a defendant who knew how to defend and make use of his rights.
Earlier, just a week or so before, he could only have felt shame at the thought of being made to write out such documents himself; it had never entered his head that the task could also be difficult.
He remembered one morning when, already piled up with work, he suddenly shoved everything to one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketched out some of his thoughts on how documents of this sort should proceed. Perhaps he would offer them to that slow-witted lawyer, but just then the door of the manager's office opened and the deputy-director entered the room with a loud laugh.
K. was very embarrassed, although the deputy-director, of course, was not laughing at K.'s documents, which he knew nothing about, but at a joke he had just heard about the stock-exchange, a joke which needed an illustration if it was to be understood, and now the deputy-director leant over K.'s desk, took his pencil from his hand, and drew the illustration on the writing pad that K. had intended for his ideas about his case.
If, as was very likely, he could find no time to do it in the office he would have to do it at home at night.
If the nights weren't enough he would have to take a holiday.
Above he could not stop half way, that was nonsense not only in business but always and everywhere.
This was not because of laziness or deceit, which were the only things that might have hindered the lawyer in preparing it, but because he did not know what the charge was or even what consequences it might bring, so that he had to remember every tiny action and event from the whole of his life, looking at them from all sides and checking and reconsidering them.
It would have been more suitable as a way of passing the long days after he had retired and become senile.
But now, just when K. needed to apply all his thoughts to his work, when he was still rising and already posed a threat to the deputy-director, when every hour passed so quickly and he wanted to enjoy the brief evenings and nights as a young man, this was the time he had to start working out these documents. Once more, he began to feel resentment.
Almost involuntarily, only to put an end to it, his finger felt for the button of the electric bell in the ante-room.
As he pressed it he glanced up to the clock. It was eleven o'clock, two hours, he had spent a great deal of his costly time just dreaming and his wits were, of course, even more dulled than they had been before.
But the time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to some decisions that could be of value.
Why had they come at such an awkward time, and why, the gentlemen on the other side of the closed door seemed to be asking, was the industrious K. using up the best business time for his private affairs?
He was a short, jolly man, a manufacturer who K. knew well.
He apologised for disturbing K. at some important work, and K., for his part, apologised for having kept the manufacturer waiting for so long.
But even this apology was spoken in such a mechanical way and with such false intonation that the manufacturer would certainly have noticed if he had not been fully preoccupied with his business affairs.
Instead, he hurriedly pulled calculations and tables out from all his pockets, spread them out in front of K., explained several items, corrected a little mistake in the arithmetic that he noticed as he quickly glanced over it all, and reminded K. of a similar piece of business he'd concluded with him about a year before, mentioning in passing that this time there was another bank spending great effort to get his business, and finally stopped speaking in order to learn K.'s opinion on the matter.
And K. had indeed, at first, been closely following what the manufacturer was saying, he too was aware of how important the deal was, but unfortunately it did not last, he soon stopped listening, nodded at each of the manufacturer's louder exclamations for a short while, but eventually he stopped doing even that and did no more than stare at the bald head bent over the papers, asking himself when the manufacturer would finally realise that everything he was saying was useless.
When he did stop talking, K. really thought at first that this was so that he would have the chance to confess that he was incapable of listening.
Instead, seeing the anticipation on the manufacturer's face, obviously ready to counter any objections made, he was sorry to realise that the business discussion had to be continued.
So he bent his head as if he'd been given an order and began slowly to move his pencil over the papers, now and then he would stop and stare at one of the figures.
The manufacturer thought there must be some objection, perhaps his figures weren't really sound, perhaps they weren't the decisive issue, whatever he thought, the manufacturer covered the papers with his hand and began once again, moving very close to K., to explain what the deal was all about.
"It is difficult," said K., pursing his lips.
The only thing that could offer him any guidance were the papers, and the manufacturer had covered them from his view, so he just sank back against the arm of the chair.
Even when the door of the manager's office opened and revealed not very clearly, as if through a veil, the deputy director, he did no more than look up weakly.
K. thought no more about the matter, he merely watched the immediate effect of the deputy director's appearance and, for him, the effect was very pleasing; the manufacturer immediately jumped up from his seat and hurried over to meet the deputy director, although K. would have liked to make him ten times livelier as he feared the deputy director might disappear again.
The manufacturer said he was sorry to find the chief clerk so little inclined to do business, pointing to K. who, under the view of the deputy director, had bent back down over the papers.
Carefully and slowly turning his eyes upwards, he tried to learn what was taking place above him, took one of the papers from his desk without looking to see what it was, lay it on the flat of his hand and raised it slowly up as he rose up to the level of the two men himself.
He had no particular plan in mind as he did this, but merely felt this was how he would act if only he had finished preparing that great document that was to remove his burden entirely.
The deputy director had been paying all his attention to the conversation and did no more than glance at the paper, he did not read what was written on it at all as what was important for the chief clerk was not important for him, he took it from K.'s hand saying, "Thank you, I'm already familiar with everything", and lay it calmly back on the desk.
But the deputy director did not notice this at all, or if he did notice it it only raised his spirits, he frequently laughed out loud, one time he clearly embarrassed the manufacturer when he raised an objection in a witty way but drew him immediately back out of his embarrassment by commenting adversely on himself, and finally invited him into his office where they could bring the matter to its conclusion.
And I'm sure the chief clerk ..." - even as he said this he was actually speaking only to the manufacturer - "will be very glad to have us take it off his hands.
But he seems to be over-burdened today, there are even some people in the room outside who've been waiting there for hours for him."
K. still had enough control of himself to turn away from the deputy director and direct his friendly, albeit stiff, smile only at the manufacturer, he made no other retaliation, bent down slightly and supported himself with both hands on his desk like a clerk, and watched as the two gentlemen, still talking, took the papers from his desk and disappeared into the manager's office.
In the doorway, the manufacturer turned and said he wouldn't make his farewell with K. just yet, he would of course let the chief clerk know about the success of his discussions but he also had a little something to tell him about.
It did not enter his head to show anyone else into his office and only became vaguely aware of how nice it was that the people outside thought he was still negotiating with the manufacturer and, for this reason, he could not let anyone in to see him, not even the servitor.
He remained a long time sitting in this way, not knowing what it actually was that made him so anxious, only occasionally did he glance, slightly startled, over his shoulder at the door to the outer room where, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise.
No-one came, and that made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rinsed his face with cold water and, his head somewhat clearer, went back to his place by the window.
The decision to take his defence into his own hands now seemed more of a burden than he had originally assumed.
All the while he had left his defence up to the lawyer his trial had had little basic affect on him, he had observed it from afar as something that was scarcely able to reach him directly, when it suited him he looked to see how things stood but he was also able to draw his head back again whenever he wanted.
Now, in contrast, if he was to conduct his defence himself, he would have to devote himself entirely to the court - for the time being, at least - success would mean, later on, his complete and conclusive liberation, but if he was to achieve this he would have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger than he had been in so far.
If he ever felt tempted to doubt this, then his experience with the deputy director and the manufacturer that day would be quite enough to convince him of it.
How could he have sat there totally convinced of the need to do his own defence?
What would his life be like in the days ahead?
Would he find the way through it all to a happy conclusion?
Did a carefully worked out defence - and any other sort would have made no sense - did a carefully worked out defence not also mean he would need to shut himself off from everything else as much as he could?
Would he survive that?
And how was he to succeed in conducting all this at the bank?
It involved much more than just submitting some documents that he could probably prepare in a few days' leave, although it would have been great temerity to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it was a whole trial and there was no way of seeing how long it might last.
And was he supposed to be doing the bank's work at a time like this? He looked down at his desk.
Was he supposed to let people in to see him and go into negotiations with them at a time like this? While his trial trundled on, while the court officials upstairs in the attic room sat looking at the papers for this trial, should he be worrying about the business of the bank?
And is it likely that anyone in the bank, when judging his work, would take any account of his peculiar situation?
There were those who knew about his trial, although it was not quite clear who knew about it or how much.
But he hoped rumours had not reached as far as the deputy director, otherwise he would obviously soon find a way of making use of it to harm K., he would show neither comradeship nor humaneness.
It was true that he was well disposed towards K., and as soon as he heard about the trial he would probably try to do everything he could to make it easier for him, but he would certainly not devote himself to it. K. at one time had provided the counter-balance to what the deputy director said but the director was now coming more and more under his influence, and the deputy director would also exploit the weakened condition of the director to strengthen his own power.
Maybe considerations of this sort weakened his power of resistance, but it was still necessary not to deceive oneself and to see everything as clearly as it could be seen at that moment.
For no particular reason, just to avoiding returning to his desk for a while, he opened the window.
It was difficult to open and he had to turn the handle with both his hands.
K. nodded and looked uneasily at the manufacturer's briefcase, from which he would now probably take the papers and inform K. of the result of his negotiations with the deputy director.
However, the manufacturer saw where K. was looking, knocked on his briefcase and without opening it said, "You'll be wanting to hear how things turned out.
He's a charming man, your deputy director - he's got his dangers, though."
He laughed as he shook K.'s hand and wanted to make him laugh with him.
But to K., it once more seemed suspicious that the manufacturer did not want to show him the papers and saw nothing about his comments to laugh at.
"Yes," said K., raising his hand and holding the temple of his head, "headaches, worries in the family."
"Quite right," said the manufacturer, who was always in a hurry and could never listen to anyone for very long, "everyone has his cross to bear."
Before K. had had the time to answer, the manufacturer came up close to him, tapped his knuckle lightly on his chest and said quietly, "You've got a trial going on, haven't you?"
"There are so many people who have connections with the court!" said K. with lowered head, and he led the manufacturer over to his desk.
K. wanted to apologise for his behaviour in the conversation earlier that day, but the manufacturer would tolerate no interruption, shoved his briefcase up high in his armpit to show that he was in a hurry, and carried on.
He's a painter, Titorelli's just his artistic name, I don't even know what his real name is.
He's been coming to me in my office for years from time to time, and brings little pictures with him which I buy more or less just for the sake of charity as he's hardly more than a beggar.
Only, one time these visits became a bit too frequent, I began to tell him off for it, we started talking and I became interested how it was that he could earn a living just by painting, and then I learned to my amazement that his main source of income was painting portraits. 'I work for the court,' he said, 'what court?' said I. And that's when he told me about the court.
Ever since then I learn something new about the court every time he comes to visit, and so little by little I get to understand something of how it works.
Anyway, Titorelli talks a lot and I often have to push him away, not only because he's bound to be lying but also, most of all, because a businessman like me who's already close to breaking point under the weight of his own business worries can't pay too much attention to other people's.
Perhaps - this is what I've been thinking - perhaps Titorelli might be able to help you in some small way, he knows lots of judges and even if he can't have much influence himself he can give you some advice about how to get some influential people on your side.
If I ask him to he'll certainly do everything he possibly can.
Disappointed, K. took the letter and put it in his pocket.
Even at best, the advantage he might derive from this recommendation was incomparably smaller than the damage that lay in the fact of the manufacturer knowing about his trial, and that the painter was spreading the news about.
It was all he could mange to give the manufacturer, who was already on his way to the door, a few words of thanks.
"I'll go there," he said as he took his leave of the manufacturer at the door, "or, as I'm very busy at present, I'll write to him, perhaps he would like to come to me in my office some time."
But despite seeming calm on the outside he was actually very shocked; he had told the manufacturer he would write to Titorelli only to show him in some way that he valued his recommendations and would consider the opportunity to speak with Titorelli without delay, but if he had thought Titorelli could offer any worthwhile assistance he would not have delayed.
Was he really able to rely on his own understanding so little?
If it was possible that he might invite a questionable character into the bank with a clear letter, and ask advice from him about his trial, separated from the deputy director by no more than a door, was it not possible or even very likely that there were also other dangers he had failed to see or that he was even running towards?
And just now, just when he would have to act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubts of a sort he had never before known had presented themselves and affected his own vigilance!
The difficulties he had been feeling in carrying out his office work; were they now going to affect the trial too?
Now, at least, he found himself quite unable to understand how he could have intended to write to Titorelli and invite him into the bank.
He shook his head at the thought of it once more as the servitor came up beside him and drew his attention to the three gentlemen who were waiting on a bench in the ante-room.
"Mr. K., ..." one of them was saying, but K. had told the servitor to fetch his winter coat and said to the three of them, as the servitor helped him to put it on, "Please forgive me, gentlemen, I'm afraid I have no time to see you at present.
"That's agreed then, is it?" asked K., who had turned toward the servitor bringing him his hat.
So K. turned the collar of his coat up and buttoned it up high under his chin. Just then the deputy director came out of the adjoining room, smiled as he saw K. negotiating with the gentlemen in his winter coat, and asked, "Are you about to go out?"
The deputy director listened to them for a short while, he also looked at K. as he held his hat in his hand cleaning the dust off it here and there, and then he said, "Gentlemen, there is a very simple way to solve this.
And he opened the door leading to the ante-room of his own office.
But was K. not giving up more than he absolutely had to?
By running off to some unknown painter, with, as he had to admit, very little hope of any vague benefit, his renown was suffering damage that could not me repaired.
It would probably be much better to take off his winter coat again and, at the very least, try to win back the two gentlemen who were certainly still waiting in the next room.
If K. had not then glimpsed the deputy director in his office, looking for something from his bookshelves as if they were his own, he would probably even have made the attempt.
As K., somewhat agitated, approached the door the deputy director called out, "Oh, you've still not left!" He turned his face toward him - its many deep folds seemed to show strength rather than age - and immediately began once more to search.
"I'm looking for a copy of a contract," he said, "which this gentleman insists you must have. Could you help me look for it, do you think?"
K. made a step forward, but the deputy director said, "thank you, I've already found it," and with a big package of papers, which certainly must have included many more documents than just the copy of the contract, he turned and went back into his own office.
"I can't deal with him right now," K. said to himself, "but once my personal difficulties have been settled, then he'll certainly be the first to get the effect of it, and he certainly won't like it."
Slightly calmed by these thoughts, K. gave the servitor, who had already long been holding the door to the corridor open for him, the task of telling the director, when he was able, that K. was going out of the bank on a business matter. As he left the bank he felt almost happy at the thought of being able to devote more of himself to his own business for a while.
K. did no more that glance at any of these things, he wanted to get things over with here as soon as possible, to exchange just a few words to find out how things stood with the painter and go straight back to the bank.
Even if he had just some tiny success here it would still have a good effect on his work at the bank for that day.
On the third floor he had to slow down his pace, he was quite out of breath - the steps, just like the height of each floor, were much higher than they needed to be and he'd been told that the painter lived right up in the attic.
K. followed them slowly, caught up with one of the girls who had stumbled and been left behind by the others, and asked her as they went up side by side, "Is there a painter, Titorelli, who lives here?"
The girl, hardly thirteen years old and somewhat hunchbacked, jabbed him with her elbow and looked at him sideways.
Her youth and her bodily defects had done nothing to stop her being already quite depraved.
K. pretended not to notice her behaviour and asked, "Do you know Titorelli, the painter?"
K. thought it would be to his advantage quickly to find out something more about Titorelli. "I want to have him paint my portrait," he said.
"Paint your portrait?" she asked, opening her mouth too wide and lightly hitting K. with her hand as if he had said something extraordinarily surprising or clumsy, with both hands she lifted her skirt, which was already very short, and, as fast as she could, she ran off after the other girls whose indistinct shouts lost themselves in the heights.
The hunchbacked girl had clearly told them about K.'s intentions and they were waiting for him.
It was thanks to her that K. found the right direction without delay - he would have continued up the stairs straight in front of him, but she showed him that to reach Titorelli he would need to need to turn off to one side.
K. was no more than half way up the steps, accompanied by his retinue of girls, when, clearly the result of the noise of all those footsteps, the door opened slightly and in the crack a man who seemed to be dressed in just his nightshirt appeared.
"Oh!" he cried, when he saw the approaching crowd, and vanished.
The hunchbacked girl clapped her hands in glee and the other girls crowded in behind K. to push him faster forward.
The girls, on the other hand, he tried to keep away, he did not want to let any of them in however much they begged him and however much they tried to get in - if they could not get in with his permission they would try to force their way in against his will.
The only one to succeed was the hunchback when she slipped through under his outstretched arm, but the painter chased after her, grabbed her by the skirt, span her once round and set her down again by the door with the other girls who, unlike the first, had not dared to cross the doorstep while the painter had left his post.
K. did not know what he was to make of all this, as they all seemed to be having fun.
One behind the other, the girls by the door stretched their necks up high and called out various words to the painter which were meant in jest but which K. did not understand, and even the painter laughed as the hunchback whirled round in his hand.
Then he shut the door, bowed once more to K., offered him his hand and introduced himself, saying, "Titorelli, painter". K. pointed to the door, behind which the girls were whispering, and said, "You seem to be very popular in this building."
"Ach, those brats!" said the painter, trying in vain to fasten his nightshirt at the neck.
"Those kids are a real burden for me," he continued. The top button of his nightshirt came off and he gave up trying to fasten it, fetched a chair for K. and made him sit down on it.
"I painted one of them once - she's not here today - and ever since then they've been following me about.
It's hard to imagine what a pain that is. Suppose I come back home with a lady I'm going to paint, I open the door with my own key and find the hunchback there or something, by the table painting her lips red with my paintbrush, and meanwhile her little sisters will be keeping guard for her, moving about and causing chaos in every corner of the room.
"Not even just you," said the painter, as he went to the door and locked it.
The turning of the key in the lock reminded K. that he had not wanted to stay too long.
So he drew the manufacturer's letter out from his pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I learned about you from this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on his advice that I've come here".
If the manufacturer had not said very clearly that Titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man who was dependent on his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believe that Titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not remember him.
K. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer had explained to the painter in his letter that K. wanted nothing more with him than to find out more about his trial.
But now he had to give the painter some sort of answer and, glancing at the easel, said, "Are you working on a picture currently?"
"Yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging over the easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter.
What's more, it was remarkably similar to the picture in the lawyer's office, although this one showed a quite different judge, a heavy man with a full beard which was black and bushy and extended to the sides far up the man's cheeks. The lawyer's picture was also an oil painting, whereas this one had been made with pastel colours and was pale and unclear.
But everything else about the picture was similar, as this judge, too, was holding tightly to the arm of his throne and seemed ominously about to rise from it.
At first K. was about to say, "He certainly is a judge," but he held himself back for the time being and went closer to the picture as if he wanted to study it in detail.
That'll need some more work done on it, the painter told him, and taking a pastel crayon from a small table he added a few strokes to the edges of the figure but without making it any clearer as far as K. could make out.
But aren't those wings on her heels, and isn't she moving?"
"Yes, " said the painter, "but that judge isn't very high up and he's never sat on any throne like that."
"And he has himself painted in such a grand pose?
Only it's a pity that you can't make out the details of his costume and pose in this picture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people like this."
"That's what the judge wanted," said the painter, "it's meant to be for a woman."
The sight of the picture seemed to make him feel like working, he rolled up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons, and K. watched as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judge under their quivering tips and radiated out the to edges of the picture.
K. found the painter's work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally he reproached himself for staying so long without having done anything relevant to his own affair.
"What's the name of this judge?" he asked suddenly.
"I'm not allowed to tell you that," the painter answered. He was bent deeply over the picture and clearly neglecting his guest who, at first, he had received with such care.
"I take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said.
The painter immediately put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his hands together and looked at K. with a smile.
"Always straight out with the truth," he said. "You want to learn something about the court, like it says in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking about my pictures to get me on your side.
Oh, please!" he said sharply, repelling K.'s attempt to make some objection.
K. forewent the opportunity to excuse himself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from what he was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get too far above himself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he asked, "Is that a publicly acknowledged position?"
"And that's how it is with me," said the painter, and nodded with a frown. "I was talking about your case with the manufacturer yesterday, and he asked me if I wouldn't like to help you, and I answered: 'He can come and see me if he likes', and now I'm pleased to see you here so soon.
The air in the room had slowly become quite oppressive for him, he had several times looked in amazement at a small, iron stove in the corner that certainly could not have been lit, the heat of the room was inexplicable.
As he took off his winter overcoat and also unbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I must have warmth.
The unpleasantness of this was made all the stronger for K. when the painter invited him to sit on the bed while he himself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the easel.
The painter even seemed to misunderstand why K. remained at the edge of the bed and urged K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitated he went over to the bed himself and pressed K. deep down into the bedclothes and pillows.
Then he went back to his seat and at last he asked his first objective question, which made K. forget everything else.
"You're innocent, are you?" he asked.
To make the most of his pleasure he added, "I am totally innocent."
"So," said the painter, and he lowered his head and seemed to be thinking.
Suddenly he raised his head again and said, "Well if you're innocent it's all very simple."
"My being innocent does not make things simple," said K. Despite everything, he couldn't help smiling and slowly shook his head. "There are many fine details in which the court gets lost, but in the end it reaches into some place where originally there was nothing and pulls enormous guilt out of it."
"Yeah, yeah, sure," said the painter, as if K. had been disturbing his train of thought for no reason. "But you are innocent, aren't you?"
There was no counter-argument that could influence him, but although he had made up his mind it was not clear whether he was talking this way because of conviction or indifference.
"Yes," said K. to himself, forgetting that he had only gone there to investigate the painter.
One of the girls behind the door started up again, and asked, "Titorelli, is he going to go soon?"
But this was not enough to satisfy the girl and she asked, "You going to paint his picture?" And when the painter didn't answer she added, "Please don't paint him, he's an 'orrible bloke."
They probably did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "Down on the steps!" Only then it became quiet.
"I'm sorry about that," said the painter as he returned to K.
K. had hardly turned towards the door, he had left it completely up to the painter whether and how he would place him under his protection if he wanted to.
Even now, he made hardly any movement as the painter bent over him and, whispering into his ear in order not to be heard outside, said, "These girls belong to the court as well."
"How's that?" asked K., as he leant his head to one side and looked at the painter.
But the painter sat back down on his chair and, half in jest, half in explanation, "Well, everything belongs to the court."
"That is something I had never noticed until now," said K. curtly, this general comment of the painter's made his comment about the girls far less disturbing.
"You still don't seem to have much general idea of what the court's about", said the painter, who had stretched his legs wide apart and was tapping loudly on the floor with the tip of his foot. "But as you're innocent you won't need it anyway.
"Only impossible for reasons and proofs you take to the court yourself " said the painter, raising his forefinger as if K. had failed to notice a fine distinction.
K. now began to find it far easier to believe what the painter was saying, or rather it was largely in agreement with what he had also been told by others.
He had been noted at the bank for his talent in organising, here, where he was placed entirely on his own resources, would be a good opportunity to test that talent to its limits.
The painter observed the effect his explanation had had on K. and then, with a certain unease, said, "Does it not occur to you that the way I'm speaking is almost like a lawyer?
"How did you first come into contact with the judges, then?" asked K., he wanted first to gain the painter's trust before he took him into his service.
My father was court painter before me.
In the drawer there, for instance, I've got my father's notes, which I don't show to anyone.
"You are to be envied," said K., thinking of his position at the bank. "Your position is quite unassailable, then?"
"Yes, quite unassailable," said the painter, and he raised his shoulders in pride. "That's how I can even afford to help some poor man facing trial now and then."
"And how do you do that?" asked K., as if the painter had not just described him as a poor man.
It sometimes seemed to him as if the painter was using these comments to make a favourable outcome to the trial a precondition for his help, which of course would make the help itself unnecessary.
He did not want to do without the painter's help, that was what he had decided, and this help did not seem in any way less questionable than that of the lawyer.
The painter had pulled his seat closer to the bed and continued in a subdued voice: "I forgot to ask you; what sort of acquittal is it you want?
At first, K. was astonished at this orderly explanation, but then, just as quietly as the painter, he said, "I think you're contradicting yourself."
This smile made K. feel as if he were examining not the words of the painter but seeking out inconsistencies in the procedures of the court itself.
Nonetheless, he continued unabashed and said, "You remarked earlier that the court cannot be approached with reasoned proofs, you later restricted this to the open court, and now you go so far as to say that an innocent man needs no assistance in court.
When I was a boy I used to listen closely to my father when he told us about court cases at home, and the judges that came to his studio talked about the court, in our circles nobody talks about anything else; I hardly ever got the chance to go to court myself but always made use of it when I could, I've listened to countless trials at important stages in their development, I've followed them closely as far as they could be followed, and I have to say that I've never seen a single acquittal."
Not a single acquittal," said K., as if talking to himself and his hopes. "That confirms the impression I already have of the court.
The painter laughed. "No, you can't cite them in court," he said.
"Then there's no point in talking about them," said K., he wanted, for the time being, to accept anything the painter told him, even if he thought it unlikely or contradicted what he had been told by others.
He did not now have the time to examine the truth of everything the painter said or even to disprove it, he would have achieved as much as he could if the painter would help him in any way even if his help would not be decisive.
As a result, he said, "So let's pay no more attention to absolute acquittal, but you mentioned two other possibilities."
"Yes," said K., who until then had paid attention to nothing but the painter's explanations, but now that he had had the heat pointed out to him his brow began to sweat heavily. "It's almost unbearable."
The painter nodded as if he understood K.'s discomfort very well.
K. now realised that all this time he had been hoping the painter would suddenly go over to the window and pull it open.
He had prepared himself even for the fog that he would breathe in through his open mouth.
The thought that here he was entirely cut off from the air made him feel dizzy.
"Oh no," said the painter in defence of his window, "as it can't be opened this room retains the heat better than if the window were double glazed, even though it's only a single pane.
"It's really much too small for a studio here," said the painter, as if he wanted to anticipate an objection K. would make. "I had to arrange things as well as I could.
For instance when the judge I'm painting at present comes he always comes through the door by the bed, and I've even given him a key to this door so that he can wait for me here in the studio when I'm not home.
Although nowadays he usually comes early in the morning when I'm still asleep.
If you could hear the way I curse him as he climbs over my bed in the morning you'd lose all respect for judges.
All the time the painter was speaking, K. was considering whether he should take off his coat, but he finally realised that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable to stay here any longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on his knee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the conversation was over.
He had hardly done this when one of the girls called out, "Now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressing around the gaps in the planks to see the spectacle for themselves.
"I see," said K., only slightly amused by this, as he felt little better than he had before even though he now sat in his shirtsleeves.
With some irritation he asked, "What did you say the two other possibilities were?" He had already forgotten the terms used.
The text for an assertion of this sort was passed down to me from my father and it's quite unassailable.
So I'll start off with the one I'm currently painting, and put the assertion to him when he comes for his sitting this evening.
I might even have his signature already, in which case things develop a bit quicker than they would do otherwise.
When he has the document asserting the defendant's innocence, guaranteed by a number of other judges, the judge can acquit you without any worries, and although there are still several formalities to be gone through there's no doubt that that's what he'll do as a favour to me and several other acquaintances.
One day - no-one expects it - some judge or other picks up the documents and looks more closely at them, he notices that this particular case is still active, and orders the defendant's immediate arrest.
I've been talking here as if there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and re-arrest, that is quite possible and I do know of cases like that, but it's just as likely that the defendant goes home after he's been acquitted and finds somebody there waiting to re-arrest him.
Then, of course, his life as a free man is at an end."
Once again, the accused has to muster all his strength and mustn't give up."
You mean, do you, that the second arrest would have an adverse influence on the judge and the verdict he passes on the defendant?
"But this second acquittal will once again not be final," said K., shaking his head.
The painter had leant back and spread himself out in his chair, his nightshirt was wide open, he had pushed his hand inside and was stroking his breast and his sides.
The trial doesn't stop, but the defendant is almost as certain of avoiding conviction as if he'd been acquitted.
Compared with an apparent acquittal, deferment has the advantage that the defendant's future is less uncertain, he's safe from the shock of being suddenly re-arrested and doesn't need to fear the exertions and stress involved in getting an apparent acquittal just when everything else in his life would make it most difficult.
I don't mean by this that the defendant is never free, he's never free in the proper sense of the word with an apparent acquittal either.
Even while the painter was speaking those last words K. had laid his coat over his arm and had stood up. Immediately, from outside the door, there was a cry of 'He's standing up now!'.
Despite this affirmation the painter summed it all up once more, as if he wanted to give K. something to console him on his way home.
"Both have in common that they prevent the defendant being convicted," he said.
"But they also prevent his being properly acquitted," said K. quietly, as if ashamed to acknowledge it.
K. placed his hand on his winter overcoat but could not bring himself to put it on.
Most of all he would have liked to pack everything together and run out to the fresh air.
Not even the girls could induce him to put his coat on, even though they were already loudly telling each other that he was doing so.
The painter still had to interpret K.'s mood in some way, so he said, "I expect you've deliberately avoided deciding between my suggestions yet.
"I'll come back here again soon," said K., who had suddenly decided to put his frock coat on, threw his overcoat over his shoulder and hurried over to the door behind which the girls now began to scream.
K. thought he could even see the screaming girls through the door.
"Will you open this door for me," said K. pulling at the handle which, as he noticed from the resistance, was being held tightly by the girls on the other side.
"Do you want to be bothered by the girls?" asked the painter. "It's better if you use the other way out," he said, pointing to the door behind the bed.
K. did not want to be impolite, the painter really had taken his side and promised to help him more in the future, and because of K.'s forgetfulness there had been no mention of any payment for the painter's help, so K. could not turn him down now and allowed him to show him the picture, even though he was quivering with impatience to get out of the studio.
K. expressed himself in this curt way without any thought, so he was glad when the painter did not take this amiss and picked up a second painting from the floor.
"They are beautiful landscapes," he said, "I'll buy them both and hang them in my office."
The painter was fully exploiting this opportunity to sell off his old pictures.
"Wrap them all up!" he called out, interrupting the painter as he was speaking, "my servant will come to fetch them in the morning."
And, at last, he leant over the bed and unlocked the door.
Even without this invitation, K. had shown no compunction in already placing his foot in the middle of the bed covers, then he looked out through the open door and drew his foot back again.
"What is that?" he asked the painter.
"What are you so surprised at?" he asked, surprised in his turn. "Those are court offices.
It was not so much finding court offices even here that shocked K., he was mainly shocked at himself, at his own navety in court matters.
It seemed to him that one of the most basic rules governing how a defendant should behave was always to be prepared, never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right when the judge stood beside him to his left - and this was the very basic rule that he was continually violating.
There were benches set along each side of the corridor just as in the waiting area for the office he went to himself.
There was a man there, half sitting, half laying, his face was buried in his arm on the bench and he seemed to be sleeping; another man was standing in the half-dark at the end of the corridor.
K. staggered more than he walked, his handkerchief pressed over his mouth.
Once on the street he took the first cab he came across.
He now had to get rid of the servant, whose gold button continually caught his eye even if it caught no-one else's.
He would have liked to leave the pictures in the cab but feared there might be some occasion when he would have to let the painter see he still had them.
So he had the pictures taken to his office and locked them in the lowest drawer of his desk so that he could at least keep them safe from the deputy director's view for the next few days.
K. had at last made the decision to withdraw his defence from the lawyer.
It was impossible to remove his doubts as to whether this was the right decision, but this was outweighed by his belief in its necessity.
This decision, on the day he intended to go to see the lawyer, took a lot of the strength he needed for his work, he worked exceptionally slowly, he had to remain in his office a long time, and it was already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of the lawyer's front door.
Even before he rang he considered whether it might not be better to give the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, a personal conversation would certainly be very difficult.
Nonetheless, K. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by any other means it would be received in silence or with a few formulated words, and unless Leni could discover anything K. would never learn how the lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its consequences might be, in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion.
But sitting in front of him and taken by surprise by his dismissal, K. would be able easily to infer everything he wanted from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if he could not be induced to say very much.
It was not even out of the question that K. might, after all, be persuaded that it would be best to leave his defence to the lawyer and withdraw his dismissal.
"Leni could be a bit quicker," thought K. But he could at least be glad there was nobody else interfering as usually happened, be it the man in his nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him.
As K. pressed on the button for the second time he looked back at the other door, but this time it, too, remained closed.
Someone unlocked the door, but kept himself pressed against it as he called back inside, "It's him!", and only then did he open the door properly.
K. pushed against the door, as behind him he could already hear the key being hurriedly turned in the lock of the door to the other flat.
When the door in front of him finally opened, he stormed straight into the hallway. Through the corridor which led between the rooms he saw Leni, to whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed, still running away in her nightshirt .
He looked at her for a moment and then looked round at the person who had opened the door.
It was a small, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand.
"Do you work here?" asked K. "No," answered the man, "I don't belong here at all, the lawyer is only representing me, I'm here on legal business."
"Without your coat?" asked K., indicating the man's deficiency of dress with a gesture of his hand.
"Oh, do forgive me!" said the man, and he looked at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he had not known about his appearance until then.
He had set his legs slightly apart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back.
Merely by being in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantage over this thin little man.
"Oh God," he said and, shocked, raised one hand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you be thinking?"
K. indicated with his hat which way the man was to go and let him go ahead of him.
"Block. I'm a businessman," said the small man, twisting himself round as he thus introduced himself, although K. did not allow him to stop moving.
"Of course it is," was the man's reply, "why do you doubt it?"
K. thought Leni might have hidden in here, he let the businessman search in every corner, but the room was empty.
"Do you know him?" he asked, pointing upwards with his finger.
The businessman lifted the candle, blinked as he looked up and said, "It's a judge."
"An important judge?" asked K., and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he could observe what impression the picture had on him.
"I remember now," said the businessman as he lowered the candle, "that's what I've already been told."
"But why, why?" asked the businessman as he moved forwards towards the door, propelled by the hands of K.
"Hidden?" said the businessman, "No, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup for the lawyer."
"Good evening, Josef," she said with a glance sideways.
"Good evening," said K., pointing with one hand to a chair in a corner which the businessman was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it.
K. however went very close behind Leni's back, leant over her shoulder and asked, "Who is this man?" Leni put one hand around K. as she stirred the soup with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "He's a pitiful character, a poor businessman by the name of Block.
The businessman was sitting on the chair that K. had directed him to, he had extinguished the candle whose light was no longer needed and pressed on the wick with his fingers to stop the smoke.
"You were in your nightshirt," said K., putting his hand on her head and turning it back towards the stove.
"Is he your lover?" asked K. She was about to take hold of the pot of soup, but K. took both her hands and said, "Answer me!"
She put her arms around him and wanted to kiss him.
K., though, pushed her away and said, "I don't want you to kiss me now."
"Josef," said Leni, looking at K. imploringly but frankly in the eyes, "you're not going to be jealous of Mr. Block now, are you? Rudi," she then said, turning to the businessman, "help me out will you, I'm being suspected of something, you can see that, leave the candle alone."
It had looked as though Mr. Block had not been paying attention but he had been following closely.
"I don't even know why you might be jealous," he said ingenuously.
Leni laughed out loud and while K. was not paying attention took the opportunity of embracing him and whispering, "Leave him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is.
I've been helping him a little bit because he's an important client of the lawyer's, and no other reason.
She helped him off with his coat, took the hat off his head, ran with the things into the hallway to hang them up, then she ran back and saw to the soup.
"Do you want me to tell him you're here straight away or take him his soup first?"
He was in a bad mood, he had originally intended a detailed discussion of his business with Leni, especially the question of his giving the lawyer notice, but now he no longer wanted to because of the presence of the businessman.
Now he considered his affair too important to let this little businessman take part in it and perhaps change some of his decisions, and so he called Leni back even though she was already on her way to the lawyer.
"Bring him his soup first," he said, "I want him to get his strength up for the discussion with me, he'll need it."
"You're a client of the lawyer's too, aren't you," said the businessman quietly from his corner as if he were trying to find this out.
"What business is that of yours?" said K., and Leni said, "Will you be quiet. - I'll take him his soup first then, shall I?" And she poured the soup into a dish.
"What I've got to say to him will keep him awake," said K., who still wanted to intimate that he intended some important negotiations with the lawyer, he wanted Leni to ask him what it was and only then to ask her advice.
But instead, she just promptly carried out the order he had given her.
When she went over to him with the dish she deliberately brushed against him and whispered, "I'll tell him you're here as soon as he's eaten the soup so that I can get you back as soon as possible."
"Be a bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turned completely round once more in the doorway.
K. watched her as she went; the decision had finally been made that the lawyer was to be dismissed, it was probably better that he had not been able to discuss the matter any more with Leni beforehand; she hardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would certainly have advised him against it and perhaps would even have prevented him from dismissing the lawyer this time, he would have remained in doubt and unease and eventually have carried out his decision after a while anyway as this decision was something he could not avoid.
K. turned round, the businessman hardly noticed it as he was about to stand up.
"How many years has he been representing you so far, then?" asked K.
"I don't know how you mean," said the businessman, "he's been my business lawyer - I buy and sell cereals - he's been my business lawyer since I took the business over, and that's about twenty years now, but perhaps you mean my own trial and he's been representing me in that since it started, and that's been more than five years.
Yes, well over five years," he then added, pulling out an old briefcase, "I've got everything written down; I can tell you the exact dates if you like.
K. moved in closer to him. "So the lawyer takes on ordinary legal business, does he?" he asked.
"Oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered, "They even say he's more efficient in jurisprudence than he is in other matters." But then he seemed to regret saying this, and he laid a hand on K.'s shoulder and said, "Please don't betray me to him, will you."
K. patted his thigh to reassure him and said, "No, I don't betray people."
"I'm sure he won't do anything against such a faithful client as you," said K.
"Oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he gets cross it doesn't matter who it is, and anyway, I'm not really faithful to him."
"I've ..." said the businessman hesitantly, and in a tone as if he were confessing something dishonourable, "I've taken on other lawyers besides him."
"It is, here," said the businessman, who had had some difficulty breathing since making his confession but who now, after hearing K.'s comment, began to feel more trust for him.
One of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learn a lot about the outcome of a defendant's case by looking at his face, especially the shape of his lips.
He told us all later he thought he could see something in your lips that meant he'd be convicted himself."
"No," said K., and to slow the businessman down, who had been speaking too fast, he laid his hand on the businessman's to reassure him, "but I'd like just to ask you to speak a little more slowly, these are many very important things for me, and I can't follow exactly what you're saying."
"You must be glad your trial has already progressed so far, are you?" asked K., he did not wish to ask directly how the businessman's affairs stood, but received no clear answer anyway.
"Yes, I've been working at my trial for five years now," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no small achievement."
Then he was silent for a while.
K. listened to hear whether Leni was on her way back.
On the one hand he did not want her to come back too soon as he still had many questions to ask and did not want her to find him in this intimate discussion with the businessman, but on the other hand it irritated him that she stayed so long with the lawyer when K. was there, much longer than she needed to give him his soup.
"I still remember it exactly," the businessman began again, and K. immediately gave him his full attention, "when my case was as old as yours is now.
Now I'll find out everything, thought K., nodding vigorously as if he could thereby encourage the businessman to say everything worth knowing.
"That's very important for me," said K., "in my case he's still working on the first set of documents.
I see now that he's been neglecting me quite disgracefully."
"There can be lots of good reasons why the first documents still aren't ready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turned out later on that the ones he submitted for me were entirely worthless.
He explained it all to me at length, but refused to do anything I asked for, no-one has any influence on the way the trial proceeds, he said, to try and insist on it in any of the documents submitted - like I was asking - was simply unheard of and would do harm to both him and me.
Perhaps you've already heard how Dr. Huld talks about the petty lawyers, he probably made them sound very contemptible to you, and he's right, they are contemptible.
But when he talks about them and compares them with himself and his colleagues there's a small error running through what he says, and, just for your interest, I'll tell you about it.
When he talks about the lawyers he mixes with he sets them apart by calling them the 'great lawyers'.
That's wrong, anyone can call himself 'great' if he wants to, of course, but in this case only the usage of the court can make that distinction.
This one and his colleagues are only minor lawyers, and the difference in rank between them and the great lawyers, who I've only ever heard about and never seen, is incomparably greater than between the minor lawyers and the despised petty lawyers."
"You've never heard about them, then?" said the businessman. "There's hardly anyone who's been accused who doesn't spend a lot of time dreaming about the great lawyers once he's heard about them.
"Well look at you two sat huddled together!" called Leni as she came back with the dish and stood in the doorway.
They were indeed sat close together, if either of them turned his head even slightly it would have knocked against the other's, the businessman was not only very small but also sat hunched down, so that K. was also forced to bend down low if he wanted to hear everything.
"Not quite yet!" called out K., to turn Leni away, his hand, still resting on the businessman's hand, twitching with impatience.
"Carry on, then, carry on," she said.
She spoke to the businessman with affection but, at the same time, with condescension. K. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the man was of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he was willing to share it.
He watched her in irritation as Leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand - which he had been holding on to all this time - wiped his hand with her apron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax that had dripped from the candle onto his trousers.
"What's wrong with you today?" asked Leni, tapped him gently and carried on with what she had been doing.
"Yes, the petty lawyers," said the businessman, putting his hand to his brow as if thinking hard.
"Yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue with what he'd been saying.
"Maybe he doesn't want to speak about it in front of Leni," thought K., suppressing his impatience to hear the rest straight away, and stopped trying to press him.
"Have you told him I'm here?" he asked Leni.
"Course I have," she said, "he's waiting for you.
Leave Block alone now, you can talk to Block later, he'll still be here."
"You'll still be here?" he asked the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from him and not wanting Leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't there, he was full of secret resentment towards Leni today.
"He sleeps here?" exclaimed K., he had thought the businessman would just wait there for him while he quickly settled his business with the lawyer, and then they would leave together to discuss everything thoroughly and undisturbed.
"Fond of you?" thought K. at first, and only then it occurred to him, "Well, yes, I am fond of her." Nonetheless, what he said, forgetting all the rest, was, "He receives me because I am his client.
"He's really nasty today, isn't he?" Leni asked the businessman.
"Now it's me who's not here," thought K., and nearly lost his temper with the businessman when, with the same rudeness as Leni, he said, "The lawyer also has other reasons to receive him.
"He doesn't half talk!" she said, turning to face K. "You can't believe a word he says.
He's as talkative as he is sweet.
Maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him. At least, he only sees him when he's in the right mood.
Just think, there are times when I tell him Block's here and he doesn't receive him until three days later.
And if Block isn't on the spot when he's called then everything's lost and it all has to start all over again.
Sometimes, when he knows Block is still here, he'll even change his mind about letting him in to see him."
The latter nodded and, although he had spoken quite openly with K. earlier, seemed to be confused with shame as he said, "Yes, later on you become very dependent on your lawyer."
"He likes to sleep here really, he's often said so." She went over to a little door and shoved it open.
"You sleep in the maid's room?" asked K., as he went back to the businessman.
K. looked long at him; his first impression of the businessman had perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trial had already lasted a long time, but he had paid a heavy price for this experience.
"Bring him to bed, then!" he called out to Leni, who seemed to understand him.
For himself, he wanted to go to the lawyer and, by dismissing him, free himself from not only the lawyer but also from Leni and the businessman. But before he had reached the door the businessman spoke to him gently.
"Excuse me, sir," he said, and K. looked round crossly. "You've forgotten your promise," said the businessman, stretching his hand out to K. imploringly from where he sat.
"That is true," said K., as he glanced at Leni, who was watching him carefully, to check on her. "So listen; it's hardly a secret now anyway.
"He's sacking him!" yelled the businessman, and he jumped up from his chair and ran around the kitchen with his arms in the air.
He kept on shouting, "He's sacking his lawyer!"
Leni tried to rush at K. but the businessman got in her way so that she shoved him away with her fists.
Then, still with her hands balled into fists, she ran after K. who, however, had been given a long start.
He had almost closed the door behind himself, but Leni held the door open with her foot, grabbed his arm and tried to pull him back.
But he put such pressure on her wrist that, with a sigh, she was forced to release him.
"I've been waiting for you a very long time," said the lawyer from his bed. He had been reading something by the light of a candle but now he laid it onto the bedside table and put his glasses on, looking at K. sharply through them.
As he had not apologised the lawyer ignored what K. said, and replied, "I won't let you in this late again next time."
"Sit down," he said.
But the lawyer asked him, "Was she being importunate again?"
"Yes," said the lawyer, laughing as he did so, had a fit of coughing and then, once it had passed, began to laugh again.
"I'm sure you must have noticed how importunate she can be sometimes," he said, and patted K.'s hand which K. had rested on the bedside table and which he now snatched back.
It is a peculiarity of Leni's. I've long since forgiven her for it, and I wouldn't be talking of it now, if you hadn't locked the door just now.
She attaches herself to each of them, loves each of them, even seems to be loved by each of them; then she sometimes entertains me by telling me about them when I allow her to.
But all of them are attractive, even Block, pitiful worm that he is."
As the lawyer finished what he was saying, K. was fully in control of himself, he had even nodded conspicuously at his last few words in order to confirm to himself the view he had already formed; that the lawyer was trying to confuse him, as he always did, by making general and irrelevant observations, and thus distract him from the main question of what he was actually doing for K.'s trial.
The lawyer must have noticed that K. was offering him more resistance than before, as he became silent, giving K. the chance to speak himself, and then, as K. also remained silent, he asked, "Did you have a particular reason for coming to see me today?"
"Yes," said K., putting his hand up to slightly shade his eyes from the light of the candle so that he could see the lawyer better, "I wanted to tell you that I'm withdrawing my representation from you, with immediate effect."
"Do I understand you rightly?" asked the lawyer as he half raised himself in his bed and supported himself with one hand on the pillow.
He used the word 'we', as if he had no intention of letting K. go free, and as if, even if he could no longer represent him, he could still at least continue as his adviser.
"Nothing is being rushed," said K., standing slowly up and going behind his chair, "everything has been well thought out and probably even for too long.
"The circumstances are important enough," said the lawyer as he wrapped the bed cover around the top half of his body and then the blanket around his legs. "Your uncle is my friend and in the course of time I've become fond of you as well.
It was very unwelcome for K. to hear the old man speak in this touching way, as it forced him to explain himself more fully, which he would rather have avoided, and he was aware that it also confused him even though it could never make him reverse his decision.
"Thank you for feeling so friendly toward me," he said, "and I also realise how deeply involved you've been in my case, as deeply as possible for yourself and to bring as much advantage as possible to me.
"I am not impatient," said K., with some irritation and he stopped paying so much attention to his choice of words.
I could have expected the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the point of taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of its weight.
K. had pushed the chair away and stood erect, his hands in the pockets of his frock coat.
He was showing no regard for the dignity of his position, which on this point, must have been at its most sensitive.
And why did he do that?
He did seem to be very busy as a lawyer as well a rich man, neither the loss of income nor the loss of a client could have been of much importance to him in themselves.
And despite all that he held on tightly to K. Why?
Was it something personal for his uncle's sake, or did he really see K.'s case as one that was exceptional and hoped to be able to distinguish himself with it, either for K.'s sake or - and this possibility could never be excluded - for his friends at the court?
It could almost be supposed he was deliberately hiding his thoughts as he waited to see what effect his words would have.
But he clearly deemed K.'s silence to be favourable for himself and he continued,
This is what he said: some lawyers lead their clients on a thread until judgement is passed, but there are others who immediately lift their clients onto their shoulders and carry them all the way to the judgement and beyond.
From the way the lawyer was speaking, K. thought he could hear what he could expect if he gave in, the delays and excuses would begin again, reports of how the documents were progressing, how the mood of the court officials had improved, as well as all the enormous difficulties - in short all that he had heard so many times before would be brought out again even more fully, he would try to mislead K. with hopes that were never specified and to make him suffer with threats that were never clear.
He had to put a stop to that, so he said, "What will you undertake on my behalf if you continue to represent me?"
"Be glad to," said K., and did as the lawyer suggested; he was always ready to learn something new.
But to make sure of himself for any event he added, "but you do realise that you are no longer to be my lawyer, don't you?"
He lay back down in the bed, pulled the quilt up to his chin and turned to face the wall.
Then he rang.
Leni appeared almost the moment he had done so. She looked hurriedly at K. and the lawyer to try and find out what had happened; she seemed to be reassured by the sight of K. sitting calmly at the lawyer's bed.
She smiled and nodded to K., K. looked blankly back at her.
To the lawyer!" Then, probably because the lawyer had turned his face to the wall and was paying no attention, she slipped in behind K.'s chair.
From then on, she bothered him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or, albeit very tenderly and carefully, she would run her hands through his hair and over his cheeks.
K. eventually tried to stop her by taking hold of one hand, and after some resistance Leni let him keep hold of it.
Block came as soon as he was called, but he remained standing in the doorway and seemed to be wondering whether he should enter or not.
He raised his eyebrows and lowered his head as if listening to find out whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated.
K. could have encouraged to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not only with the lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himself motionless.
Block noticed that at least no-one was chasing him away, and, on tiptoe, he entered the room, his face was tense, his hands were clenched behind his back.
He left the door open in case he needed to go back again.
K. did not even glance at him, he looked instead only at the thick quilt under which the lawyer could not be seen as he had squeezed up very close to the wall.
Then his voice was heard: "Block here?" he asked.
Block had already crept some way into the room but this question seemed to give him first a shove in the breast and then another in the back, he seemed about to fall but remained standing, deeply bowed, and said, "At your service, sir."
"Wasn't I summoned?" asked Block, more to himself than the lawyer. He held his hands in front of himself as protection and would have been ready to run away any moment.
"You were summoned," said the lawyer, "but you have still come at a bad time." Then, after a pause he added, "You always come at a bad time."
Do you want to know what he said?"
The lawyer did not answer immediately, so Block repeated his request and lowered his head as if about to kneel down.
But then K. spoke to him: "What do you think you're doing?" he shouted.
Leni had wanted to stop him from calling out and so he took hold of her other hand.
It was not love that made him squeeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sighed frequently and tried to disengage her hands from him.
"And let there be no-one besides me," said the lawyer. Block fully understood what that meant, he glowered at K., shaking his head violently.
K. had been friendly and willing to discuss his own case with someone like this!
"I won't disturb you any more," said K., leaning back in his chair. "You can kneel down or creep on all fours, whatever you like.
But Block still had some sense of pride, at least where K. was concerned, and he went towards him waving his fists, shouting as loudly as he dared while the lawyer was there.
Especially here in front of the lawyer, where both of us, you and me, we're only tolerated because of his charity.
K. said nothing. He merely looked in amazement at this distracted being, his eyes completely still.
Could he not see the lawyer was deliberately humiliating him and had no other purpose today than to show off his power to K., and perhaps even thereby subjugate K.?
But if Block was incapable of seeing that, or if he so feared the lawyer that no such insight would even be of any use to him, how was it that he was either so sly or so bold as to lie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had other lawyers working on his behalf?
And how did he dare to attack K., who could betray his secret any time he liked?
But he dared even more than this, he went to the lawyer's bed and began there to make complaints about K.
"Dr. Huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way this man spoke to me?
You can count the length of his trial in hours, and he wants to tell me what to do when I've been involved in a legal case for five years.
He doesn't know anything, but he insults me, when I, as far as my weak ability allows, when I've made a close study of how to behave with the court, what we ought to do and what the court practices are."
"I will," said Block, as if speaking to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance to the side he kneeled down close beside the bed.
"I'm kneeling now Dr. Huld, sir," he said.
In the silence while he did so, Leni, as she freed herself from K.'s hands, said, "You're hurting me.
Block was very pleased at this and with lively, but silent, gestures he immediately urged her to intercede for him with the lawyer.
It was clear that he desperately needed to be told something by the lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make use of the information with his other lawyers.
Leni probably knew very well how the lawyer could be brought round, pointed to his hand and pursed her lips as if making a kiss.
Then Leni leant over the lawyer, as she stretched out, the attractive shape of her body could be seen, and, bent over close to his face, she stroked his long white hair.
That now forced him to give an answer. "I'm rather wary of telling him," said the lawyer, and his head could be seen shaking slightly, perhaps so that he would feel the pressure of Leni's hand better.
Block listened closely with his head lowered, as if by listening he were breaking an order.
K. had the feeling he was listening to a contrived dialogue that had been repeated many times, that would be repeated many times more, and that for Block alone it would never lose its freshness.
"What has his behaviour been like today?" asked the lawyer instead of an answer.
Before Leni said anything she looked down at Block and watched him a short while as he raised his hands towards her and rubbed them together imploringly.
Finally she gave a serious nod, turned back to the lawyer and said, "He's been quiet and industrious."
This was an elderly businessman, a man whose beard was long, and he was begging a young girl to speak on his behalf.
Even if there was some plan behind what he did, there was nothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his fellow man.
Even if he had done nothing earlier to make him want to leave then this scene would have done so.
So these were the lawyer's methods, which K. fortunately had not been exposed to for long, to let the client forget about the whole world and leave him with nothing but the hope of reaching the end of his trial by this deluded means.
He was no longer a client, he was the lawyer's dog.
If the lawyer had ordered him to crawl under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, then he would have done so with enthusiasm.
K. listened to all of this, testing it and thinking it over as if he had been given the task of closely observing everything spoken here, inform a higher office about it and write a report.
"And what has he been doing all day?" asked the lawyer.
"I kept him locked in the maid's room all day," said Leni, "so that he wouldn't stop me doing my work.
That's where he usually stays. From time to time I looked in through the spyhole to see was he was doing, and each time he was kneeling on the bed and reading the papers you gave him, propped up on the window sill.
It showed how obedient he is that he was even reading in those conditions."
"I'm pleased to hear it," said the lawyer. "But did he understand what he was reading?"
While this conversation was going on, Block continually moved his lips and was clearly formulating the answers he hoped Leni would give.
"Well I can't give you any certain answer to that of course," said Leni, "but I could see that he was reading thoroughly.
He spent all day reading the same page, running his finger along the lines.
Whenever I looked in on him he sighed as if this reading was a lot of work for him.
And I really don't think he understood anything of them.
Did he study without a pause?"
"Almost without a pause," answered Leni. "Just the once he asked me for a drink of water, so I gave him a glassful through the window.
Block glanced sideways at K., as if he were being praised and had to impress K. as well.
He now seemed more optimistic, he moved more freely and rocked back and forth on his knees.
This made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard the following words from the lawyer: "You speak well of him," said the lawyer, "but that's just what makes it difficult for me.
You see, the judge did not speak well of him at all, neither about Block nor about his case."
Block looked at her with such tension he seemed to think that although the judge's words had been spoken so long before she would be able to change them in his favour.
"In fact he became quite cross when I started to talk about Block to him. 'Don't talk to me about Block,' he said.
'You're letting him abuse you,' he said. 'I don't think his case is lost yet,' said I.
'You're letting him abuse you,' he repeated. 'I don't think so,' said I.
'Block works hard in his case and always knows where it stands. He practically lives with me so that he always knows what's happening.
You don't always find such enthusiasm as that. He's not very pleasant personally, I grant you, his manners are terrible and he's dirty, but as far as the trial's concerned he's quite immaculate.'
I said immaculate, but I was deliberately exaggerating. Then he said, 'Block is sly, that's all.
He's accumulated plenty of experience and knows how to delay proceedings. But there's more that he doesn't know than he does.
What do you think he'd say if he learned his trial still hasn't begun, if you told him they haven't even rung the bell to announce the start of proceedings?' Alright Block, alright," said the lawyer, as at these words Block had begun to raise himself on his trembling knees and clearly wanted to plead for some explanation.
He looked down with his tired eyes, half blankly and half at Block, who slowly sank back down on his knees under this gaze.
And you're destroying the trust he has for me.
Embarrassed, Block ran his fingers through the pile of the carpet, his anxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferior status towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself and turned the judges words round to examine them from all sides.
"Block," said Leni, as if reprimanding him, and, taking hold of the collar of his coat, pulled him up slightly higher. "Leave the carpet alone and listen to what the lawyer is saying."
At any other time he would have seen this job as an honour but now, when he was finding it hard even to maintain his current position in the bank, he accepted it only with reluctance.
Every hour that he could not be in the office was a cause of concern for him, he was no longer able to make use of his time in the office anything like as well as he had previously, he spent many hours merely pretending to do important work, but that only increased his anxiety about not being in the office.
Then he sometimes thought he saw the deputy director, who was always watching, come into K.'s office, sit at his desk, look through his papers, receive clients who had almost become old friends of K., and lure them away from him, perhaps he even discovered mistakes, mistakes that seemed to threaten K. from a thousand directions when he was at work now, and which he could no longer avoid.
So now, if he was ever asked to leave the office on business or even needed to make a short business trip, however much an honour it seemed - and tasks of this sort happened to have increased substantially recently - there was always the suspicion that they wanted to get him out of his office for a while and check his work, or at least the idea that they thought he was dispensable.
It would not have been difficult for him to turn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, if his fears had the slightest foundation, turning the jobs down would have been an acknowledgement of them.
For this reason, he never demurred from accepting them, and even when he was asked to go on a tiring business trip lasting two days he said nothing about having to go out in the rainy autumn weather when he had a severe chill, just in order to avoid the risk of not being asked to go.
When, with a raging headache, he arrived back from this trip he learned that he had been chosen to accompany the Italian business contact the following day.
The temptation for once to turn the job down was very great, especially as it had no direct connection with business, but there was no denying that social obligations towards this business contact were in themselves important enough, only not for K., who knew quite well that he needed some successes at work if he was to maintain his position there and that, if he failed in that, it would not help him even if this Italian somehow found him quite charming; he did not want to be removed from his workplace for even one day, as the fear of not being allowed back in was too great, he knew full well that the fear was exaggerated but it still made him anxious.
However, in this case it was almost impossible to think of an acceptable excuse, his knowledge of Italian was not great but still good enough; the deciding factor was that K. had earlier known a little about art history and this had become widely known around the bank in extremely exaggerated form, and that K. had been a member of the Society for the Preservation of City Monuments, albeit only for business reasons.
It was a very rainy and stormy morning when K., in a foul temper at the thought of the day ahead of him, arrived early at seven o'clock in the office so that he could at least do some work before his visitor would prevent him.
He had spent half the night studying a book of Italian grammar so that he would be somewhat prepared and was very tired; his desk was less attractive to him than the window where he had spent far too much time sitting of late, but he resisted the temptation and sat down to his work.
Unfortunately, just then the servitor came in and reported that the director had sent him to see whether the chief clerk was already in his office; if he was, then would he please be so kind as to come to his reception room as the gentleman from Italy was already there.
"I'll come straight away," said K. He put a small dictionary in his pocket, took a guide to the city's tourist sites under his arm that he had compiled for strangers, and went through the deputy director's office into that of the director.
He was glad he had come into the office so early and was able to be of service immediately, nobody could seriously have expected that of him.
The director gave him a friendly smile, he was clearly very glad that K. was there, he immediately introduced him to the Italian who shook K.'s hand vigorously and joked that somebody was an early riser.
K. did not quite understand whom he had in mind, it was moreover an odd expression to use and it took K. a little while to guess its meaning.
He replied with a few bland phrases which the Italian received once more with a laugh, passing his hand nervously and repeatedly over his blue-grey, bushy moustache. This moustache was obviously perfumed, it was almost tempting to come close to it and sniff.
When they had all sat down and begun a light preliminary conversation, K. was disconcerted to notice that he understood no more than fragments of what the Italian said.
When he spoke very calmly he understood almost everything, but that was very infrequent, mostly the words gushed from his mouth and he seemed to be enjoying himself so much his head shook.
When he was talking in this way his speech was usually wrapped up in some kind of dialect which seemed to K. to have nothing to do with Italian but which the director not only understood but also spoke, although K. ought to have foreseen this as the Italian came from the south of his country where the director had also spent several years.
Whatever the cause, K. realised that the possibility of communicating with the Italian had been largely taken from him, even his French was difficult to understand, and his moustache concealed the movements of his lips which might have offered some help in understanding what he said.
K. began to anticipate many difficulties, he gave up trying to understand what the Italian said - with the director there, who could understand him so easily, it would have been pointless effort - and for the time being did no more than scowl at the Italian as he relaxed sitting deep but comfortable in the armchair, as he frequently pulled at his short, sharply tailored jacket and at one time lifted his arms in the air and moved his hands freely to try and depict something that K. could not grasp, even though he was leaning forward and did not let the hands out of his sight. K. had nothing to occupy himself but mechanically watch the exchange between the two men and his tiredness finally made itself felt, to his alarm, although fortunately in good time, he once caught himself nearly getting up, turning round and leaving.
Eventually the Italian looked at the clock and jumped up. After taking his leave from the director he turned to K., pressing himself so close to him that K. had to push his chair back just so that he could move.
The director had, no doubt, seen the anxiety in K.'s eyes as he tried to cope with this dialect of Italian, he joined in with this conversation in a way that was so adroit and unobtrusive that he seemed to be adding no more than minor comments, whereas in fact he was swiftly and patiently breaking into what the Italian said so that K. could understand.
K. learned in this way that the Italian first had a few business matters to settle, that he unfortunately had only a little time at his disposal, that he certainly did not intend to rush round to see every monument in the city, that he would much rather - at least as long as K. would agree, it was entirely his decision - just see the cathedral and to do so thoroughly.
He was extremely pleased to be accompanied by someone who was so learned and so pleasant - by this he meant K., who was occupied not with listening to the Italian but the director - and asked if he would be so kind, if the time was suitable, to meet him in the cathedral in two hours' time at about ten o'clock.
He hoped he would certainly be able to be there at that time.
He thought he needed to apologise to K. for something and told him - they were standing intimately close together - he had thought at first he would accompany the Italian himself, but then - he gave no more precise reason than this - then he decided it would be better to send K. with him.
He should not be surprised if he could not understand the Italian at first, he would be able to very soon, and even if he really could not understand very much he said it was not so bad, as it was really not so important for the Italian to be understood.
And anyway, K.'s knowledge of Italian was surprisingly good, the director was sure he would get by very well.
He spent the time still remaining to him with a dictionary, copying out obscure words he would need to guide the Italian round the cathedral.
It was an extremely irksome task, servitors brought him the mail, bank staff came with various queries and, when they saw that K. was busy, stood by the door and did not go away until he had listened to them, the deputy director did not miss the opportunity to disturb K. and came in frequently, took the dictionary from his hand and flicked through its pages, clearly for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room opened even clients would appear from the half darkness and bow timidly to him - they wanted to attract his attention but were not sure whether he had seen them - all this activity was circling around K. with him at its centre while he compiled the list of words he would need, then looked them up in the dictionary, then wrote them out, then practised their pronunciation and finally tried to learn them by heart.
The good intentions he had had earlier, though, seemed to have left him completely, it was the Italian who had caused him all this effort and sometimes he became so angry with him that he buried the dictionary under some papers firmly intending to do no more preparation, but then he realised he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with the Italian without saying a word, so, with in an even greater rage, he pulled the dictionary back out again.
At exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, there was a telephone call for him, Leni wished him good morning and asked how he was, K. thanked her hurriedly and told her it was impossible for him to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral.
K. tried to explain it to her briefly, but he had hardly begun when Leni suddenly said, "They're harassing you."
One thing that K. could not bear was pity that he had not wanted or expected, he took his leave of her with two words, but as he put the receiver back in its place he said, half to himself and half to the girl on the other end of the line who could no longer hear him, "Yes, they're harassing me."
By now the time was late and there was almost a danger he would not be on time.
He took a taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment he had remembered the album that he had had no opportunity to give to the Italian earlier and so took it with him now.
He held it on his knees and drummed impatiently on it during the whole journey.
The square in front of the cathedral was quite empty, K. remembered how even as a small child he had noticed that nearly all the houses in this narrow square had the curtains at their windows closed most of the time, although today, with the weather like this, it was more understandable.
K. hurried along both the side naves but saw no-one but an old woman who, wrapped up in a warm shawl, was kneeling at a picture of the Virgin Mary and staring up at it.
Then, in the distance, he saw a church official who limped away through a doorway in the wall.
K. had arrived on time, it had struck ten just as he was entering the building, but the Italian still was not there.
As he was tired he wanted to sit down, he went back inside the cathedral, he found something like a small carpet on one of the steps, he moved it with his foot to a nearby pew, wrapped himself up tighter in his coat, put the collar up and sat down.
To pass the time he opened the album and flicked through the pages a little but soon had to give up as it became so dark that when he looked up he could hardly make out anything in the side nave next to him.
In the distance there was a large triangle of candles flickering on the main altar, K. was not certain whether he had seen them earlier.
When K. happened to turn round he also saw a tall, stout candle attached to a column not far behind him.
K. went over to a nearby side chapel to see what they could have hoped for, he went up a few steps to a low marble railing and leant over it to look at the altar picture by the light of his torch.
He was leaning on his sword that he had stuck into the naked ground in front of him where only a few blades of grass grew here and there.
It was astonishing to see how he stood there without going any closer.
Perhaps it was his job to stand guard.
It was a long time since K. had looked at any pictures and he studied the knight for a long time even though he had continually to blink as he found it difficult to bear the green light of his torch.
Then when he moved the light to the other parts of the picture he found an interment of Christ shown in the usual way, it was also a comparatively new painting.
He put his torch away and went back to his place.
There seemed to be no point in waiting for the Italian any longer, but outside it was certainly raining heavily, and as it was not so cold in the cathedral as K. had expected he decided to stay there for the time being.
K. walked up to the pulpit and examined it from all sides, its stonework had been sculpted with great care, it seemed as if the foliage had trapped a deep darkness between and behind its leaves and held it there prisoner, K. lay his hand in one of these gaps and cautiously felt the stone, until then he had been totally unaware of this pulpit's existence.
Then K. happened to notice one of the church staff standing behind the next row of pews, he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in his left hand and he was watching K. Now what does he want? thought K. Do I seem suspicious to him?
Does he want a tip?
But when the man in the cassock saw that K. had noticed him he raised his right hand, a pinch of snuff still held between two fingers, and pointed in some vague direction.
It was almost impossible to understand what this behaviour meant, K. waited a while longer but the man in the cassock did not stop gesturing with his hand and even augmented it by nodding his head. "Now what does he want?" asked K. quietly, he did not dare call out loud here; but then he drew out his purse and pushed his way through the nearest pews to reach the man.
He, however, immediately gestured to turn down this offer, shrugged his shoulders and limped away.
"This old man is like a child," thought K., "he doesn't have the sense for anything more than serving in a church.
Look at the way he stops when I stop, and how he waits to see whether I'll continue."
With a smile, K. followed the old man all the way up the side nave and almost as far as the main altar, all this time the old man continued to point at something but K. deliberately avoided looking round, he was only pointing in order to make it harder for K. to follow him.
Eventually, K. did stop following, he did not want to worry the old man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him away completely in case the Italian turned up after all.
When he entered the central nave to go back to where he had left the album, he noticed a small secondary pulpit on a column almost next to the stalls by the altar where the choir sat.
It certainly would have been impossible for the priest to take a full step back from the balustrade, and, although there was no decoration on it, the top of the pulpit curved in exceptionally low so that a man of average height would not be able stand upright and would have to remain bent forward over the balustrade.
But under the pulpit - K. grinned in astonishment - there really was a priest standing with his hand on the handrail ready to climb the steps and looking at K. Then he nodded very slightly, so that K. crossed himself and genuflected as he should have done earlier.
Maybe the man in the cassock had not been really so demented, and had meant to lead K.'s way to the preacher, which in this empty church would have been very necessary.
And there was also, somewhere in front of a picture of the Virgin Mary, an old woman who should have come to hear the sermon.
K. now considered whether he should leave as quickly as possible, if he did not do it now there would be no chance of doing so during the sermon and he would have to stay there for as long as it lasted, he had lost so much time when he should have been in his office, there had long been no need for him to wait for the Italian any longer, he looked at his watch, it was eleven.
How could he when he was just a stranger who wanted to look at the church?
That, basically, was all he was.
The priest - there was no doubt that he was a priest, a young man with a smooth, dark face - was clearly going up there just to put the lamp out after somebody had lit it by mistake.
But there had been no mistake, the priest seemed rather to check that the lamp was lit and turned it a little higher, then he slowly turned to face the front and leant down on the balustrade gripping its angular rail with both hands.
He stood there like that for a while and, without turning his head, looked around.
K. had moved back a long way and leant his elbows on the front pew.
Somewhere in the church - he could not have said exactly where - he could make out the man in the cassock hunched under his bent back and at peace, as if his work were completed.
But K. would have to disturb that silence, he had no intention of staying there; if it was the priest's duty to preach at a certain time regardless of the circumstances then he could, and he could do it without K.'s taking part, and K.'s presence would do nothing to augment the effect of it.
So K. began slowly to move, felt his way on tiptoe along the pew, arrived at the broad aisle and went along it without being disturbed, except for the sound of his steps, however light, which rang out on the stone floor and resounded from the vaulting, quiet but continuous at a repeating, regular pace.
K. felt slightly abandoned as, probably observed by the priest, he walked by himself between the empty pews, and the size of the cathedral seemed to be just at the limit of what a man could bear.
When he arrived back at where he had been sitting he did not hesitate but simply reached out for the album he had left there and took it with him.
He had nearly left the area covered by pews and was close to the empty space between himself and the exit when, for the first time, he heard the voice of the priest.
But the priest was not calling out to the congregation, his cry was quite unambiguous and there was no escape from it, he called "Josef K.!"
In theory he was still free, he could have carried on walking, through one of three dark little wooden doors not far in front of him and away from there.
It would simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but chose not to pay attention to it.
But if he once turned round he would be trapped, then he would have acknowledged that he had understood perfectly well, that he really was the Josef K. the priest had called to and that he was willing to follow.
If the priest had called out again K. would certainly have carried on out the door, but everything was silent as K. also waited, he turned his head slightly as he wanted to see what the priest was doing now.
He was merely standing in the pulpit as before, but it was obvious that he had seen K. turn his head.
He did so, and the priest beckoned him with his finger.
As everything could now be done openly he ran - because of curiosity and the wish to get it over with - with long flying leaps towards the pulpit.
At the front pews he stopped, but to the priest he still seemed too far away, he reached out his hand and pointed sharply down with his finger to a place immediately in front of the pulpit.
And K. did as he was told, standing in that place he had to bend his head a long way back just to see the priest.
"You are Josef K.," said the priest, and raised his hand from the balustrade to make a gesture whose meaning was unclear.
"Yes," said K., he considered how freely he had always given his name in the past, for some time now it had been a burden to him, now there were people who knew his name whom he had never seen before, it had been so nice first to introduce yourself and only then for people to know who you were.
"I see," said K., lowering his head. "What do you intend to do about your case next?" asked the priest.
"I still need to find help," said K., raising his head to see what the priest thought of this. "There are still certain possibilities I haven't yet made use of."
Especially in a court like this that seems to consist of nothing but woman-chasers.
Show the examining judge a woman in the distance and he'll run right over the desk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can."
The priest lowered his head down to the balustrade, only now did the roof over the pulpit seem to press him down.
And this was the moment when the man in the cassock chose to put out the candles on the main altar, one by one.
He shouted in anger, but it was also the scream of one who sees another fall and, shocked and without thinking, screams against his own will.
He had not given a sermon, he had only told K. a few things which, if he followed them closely, would probably cause him more harm than good.
But the priest certainly seemed to mean well, it might even be possible, if he would come down and cooperate with him, it might even be possible for him to obtain some acceptable piece of advice that could make all the difference, it might, for instance, be able to show him not so much to influence the proceedings but how to break free of them, how to evade them, how to live away from them.
K. had to admit that this was something he had had on his mind quite a lot of late.
If the priest knew of such a possibility he might, if K. asked him, let him know about it, even though he was part of the court himself and even though, when K. had criticised the court, he had held down his gentle nature and actually shouted at K.
"Now I can come down," said the priest, perhaps he regretted having shouted at K. As he took down the lamp from its hook he said, "to start off with I had to speak to you from a distance.
While he was still on one of the higher steps as he came down them the priest reached out his hand for K. to shake.
Even at close distance the priest did not lose a certain solemnity that seemed to be part of his character.
A man from the countryside comes up to the door and asks for entry.
But the doorkeeper says he can't let him in to the law right now.
The man thinks about this, and then he asks if he'll be able to go in later on. 'That's possible,' says the doorkeeper, 'but not now'.
The gateway to the law is open as it always is, and the doorkeeper has stepped to one side, so the man bends over to try and see in.
When the doorkeeper notices this he laughs and says, 'If you're tempted give it a try, try and go in even though I say you can't.
The man from the country had not expected difficulties like this, the law was supposed to be accessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks more closely at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, sees his big hooked nose, his long thin tartar-beard, and he decides it's better to wait until he has permission to enter.
He tries to be allowed in time and again and tires the doorkeeper with his requests.
The doorkeeper often questions him, asking about where he's from and many other things, but these are disinterested questions such as great men ask, and he always ends up by telling him he still can't let him in.
The man had come well equipped for his journey, and uses everything, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper.
He accepts everything, but as he does so he says, 'I'll only accept this so that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do'.
Over many years, the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break.
Over the first few years he curses his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he becomes old, he just grumbles to himself.
He becomes senile, and as he has come to know even the fleas in the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he has been studying him he even asks them to help him and change the doorkeeper's mind. Finally his eyes grow dim, and he no longer knows whether it's really getting darker or just his eyes that are deceiving him.
But he seems now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shine from the darkness behind the door. He doesn't have long to live now.
Just before he dies, he brings together all his experience from all this time into one question which he has still never put to the doorkeeper.
He beckons to him, as he's no longer able to raise his stiff body.
The doorkeeper has to bend over deeply as the difference in their sizes has changed very much to the disadvantage of the man.
'Everyone wants access to the law,' says the man, 'how come, over all these years, no-one but me has asked to be let in?' The doorkeeper can see the man's come to his end, his hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard, he shouts to him: 'Nobody else could have got in this way, as this entrance was meant only for you.
"So the doorkeeper cheated the man," said K. immediately, who had been captivated by the story.
"He didn't ask him before that," said the priest, "and don't forget he was only a doorkeeper, and as doorkeeper he did his duty."
"What makes you think he did his duty?" asked K., "He didn't.
It might have been his duty to keep everyone else away, but this man is who the door was intended for and he ought to have let him in."
At one place he says he can't allow him in now, and at the other he says this entrance was intended for him alone.
If one of the statements contradicted the other you would be right and the doorkeeper would have cheated the man from the country.
You could almost say the doorkeeper went beyond his duty in that he offered the man some prospect of being admitted in the future.
Throughout the story, his duty seems to have been merely to turn the man away, and there are many commentators who are surprised that the doorkeeper offered this hint at all, as he seems to love exactitude and keeps strict guard over his position.
He stays at his post for many years and doesn't close the gate until the very end, he's very conscious of the importance of his service, as he says, 'I'm powerful,' he has respect for his superiors, as he says, 'I'm only the lowliest of the doormen', he's not talkative, as through all these years the only questions he asks are 'disinterested', he's not corruptible, as when he's offered a gift he says, 'I'll only accept this so that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do,' as far as fulfilling his duty goes he can be neither ruffled nor begged, as it says about the man that, 'he tires the doorkeeper with his requests', even his external appearance suggests a pedantic character, the big hooked nose and the long, thin, black tartar-beard. How could any doorkeeper be more faithful to his duty?
But in the doorkeeper's character there are also other features which might be very useful for those who seek entry to the law, and when he hinted at some possibility in the future it always seemed to make it clear that he might even go beyond his duty.
There's no denying he's a little simple minded, and that makes him a little conceited.
Even if all he said about his power and the power of the other doorkeepers and how not even he could bear the sight of them - I say even if all these assertions are right, the way he makes them shows that he's too simple and arrogant to understand properly.
Whether they're right or not, you have to concede that his simplicity and arrogance, however little they show, do weaken his function of guarding the entrance, they are defects in the doorkeeper's character.
You also have to consider that the doorkeeper seems to be friendly by nature, he isn't always just an official.
He makes a joke right at the beginning, in that he invites the man to enter at the same time as maintaining the ban on his entering, and then he doesn't send him away but gives him, as it says in the text, a stool to sit on and lets him stay by the side of the door.
The patience with which he puts up with the man's requests through all these years, the little questioning sessions, accepting the gifts, his politeness when he puts up with the man cursing his fate even though it was the doorkeeper who caused that fate - all these things seem to want to arouse our sympathy.
And finally, he lets the man beckon him and he bends deep down to him so that he can put his last question.
"You know the story better than I do and you've known it for longer," said K. They were silent for a while. And then K. said, "So you think the man was not cheated, do you?"
They say the doorkeeper doesn't know the inside of the law, only the way into it where he just walks up and down.
They see his ideas of what's inside the law as rather childish, and suppose he's afraid himself of what he wants to make the man frightened of.
Yes, he's more afraid of it than the man, as the man wants nothing but to go inside the law, even after he's heard about the terrible doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeeper who doesn't want to go in, or at least we don't hear anything about it.
On the other hand, there are those who say he must have already been inside the law as he has been taken on into its service and that could only have been done inside.
That can be countered by supposing he could have been given the job of doorkeeper by somebody calling out from inside, and that he can't have gone very far inside as he couldn't bear the sight of the third doorkeeper.
Nor, through all those years, does the story say the doorkeeper told the man anything about the inside, other than his comment about the other doorkeepers.
He could have been forbidden to do so, but he hasn't said anything about that either.
All this seems to show he doesn't know anything about what the inside looks like or what it means, and that that's why he's being deceived.
But he's also being deceived by the man from the country as he's this man's subordinate and doesn't know it.
There's a lot to indicate that he treats the man as his subordinate, I expect you remember, but those who hold this view would say it's very clear that he really is his subordinate.
Above all, the free man is superior to the man who has to serve another.
Now, the man really is free, he can go wherever he wants, the only thing forbidden to him is entry into the law and, what's more, there's only one man forbidding him to do so - the doorkeeper.
If he takes the stool and sits down beside the door and stays there all his life he does this of his own free will, there's nothing in the story to say he was forced to do it.
On the other hand, the doorkeeper is kept to his post by his employment, he's not allowed to go away from it and it seems he's not allowed to go inside either, not even if he wanted to.
Also, although he's in the service of the law he's only there for this one entrance, therefore he's there only in the service of this one man who the door's intended for.
This is another way in which he's his subordinate.
We can take it that he's been performing this somewhat empty service for many years, through the whole of a man's life, as it says that a man will come, that means someone old enough to be a man. That means the doorkeeper will have to wait a long time before his function is fulfilled, he will have to wait for as long as the man liked, who came to the door of his own free will.
Even the end of the doorkeeper's service is determined by when the man's life ends, so the doorkeeper remains his subordinate right to the end.
And it's pointed out repeatedly that the doorkeeper seems to know nothing of any of this, although this is not seen as anything remarkable, as those who hold this view see the doorkeeper as deluded in a way that's far worse, a way that's to do with his service.
At the end, speaking about the entrance he says, 'Now I'll go and close it', although at the beginning of the story it says the door to the law is open as it always is, but if it's always open - always - that means it's open independently of the lifespan of the man it's intended for, and not even the doorkeeper will be able to close it.
There are various opinions about this, some say the doorkeeper was only answering a question or showing his devotion to duty or, just when the man was in his last moments, the doorkeeper wanted to cause him regret and sorrow.
There are many who agree that he wouldn't be able to close the door.
They even believe, at the end at least, the doorkeeper is aware, deep down, that he's the man's subordinate, as the man sees the light that shines out of the entry to the law whereas the doorkeeper would probably have his back to it and says nothing at all to show there's been any change."
I said the man had been cheated.
If the doorkeeper understands clearly, then there could be some doubt about it, but if the doorkeeper has been deceived then the man is bound to believe the same thing.
That would mean the doorkeeper is not a cheat but so simple-minded that he ought to be dismissed from his job immediately; if the doorkeeper is mistaken it will do him no harm but the man will be harmed immensely."
However he might seem to us he is still in the service of the law, so he belongs to the law, so he's beyond what man has a right to judge.
In this case we can't believe the doorkeeper is the man's subordinate.
Even if he has to stay at the entrance into the law his service makes him incomparably more than if he lived freely in the world.
The man has come to the law for the first time and the doorkeeper is already there.
He's been given his position by the law, to doubt his worth would be to doubt the law."
"I can't say I'm in complete agreement with this view," said K. shaking his head, "as if you accept it you'll have to accept that everything said by the doorkeeper is true.
K. said that as if it were his final word but it was not his conclusion.
The simple story had lost its shape, he wanted to shake it off, and the priest who now felt quite compassionate allowed this and accepted K.'s remarks without comment, even though his view was certainly very different from K.'s.
In silence, they carried on walking for some time, K. stayed close beside the priest without knowing where he was.
The lamp in his hand had long since gone out.
Once, just in front of him, he thought he could see the statue of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it, although it quickly disappeared back into the darkness.
So that he would not remain entirely dependent on the priest, K. asked him, "We're now near the main entrance, are we?"
Do you already want to go?" K. had not thought of going until then, but he immediately said,
"Alright," said the priest offering him his hand, "go then."
"You're the prison chaplain," said K., and went closer to the priest, it was not so important for him to go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could very well stay where he was.
The evening before K.'s thirty-first birthday - it was about nine o'clock in the evening, the time when the streets were quiet - two men came to where he lived.
He had not been notified they would be coming, but K. sat in a chair near the door, dressed in black as they were, and slowly put on new gloves which stretched tightly over his fingers and behaved as if he were expecting visitors.
"You've come for me then, have you?" he asked.
The gentlemen nodded, one of them indicated the other with the top hand now in his hand.
K. told them he had been expecting a different visitor.
"Theatre?" asked one of the gentlemen, turning to the other for assistance and pulling in the corners of his mouth.
The other made a gesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggling with some organism causing him trouble.
"You're not properly prepared to answer questions," said K. and went to fetch his hat.
As soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen wanted to take K.'s arms, but K. said "Wait till we're in the street, I'm not ill." But they waited only until the front door before they took his arms in a way that K. had never experienced before.
They kept their shoulders close behind his, did not turn their arms in but twisted them around the entire length of K.'s arms and took hold of his hands with a grasp that was formal, experienced and could not be resisted.
Whenever they passed under a lamp K. tried to see his companions more clearly, as far as was possible when they were pressed so close together, as in the dim light of his room this had been hardly possible.
"Maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double chins.
When K. noticed that, he stopped, which meant the others had to stop too; they were at the edge of an open square, devoid of people but decorated with flower beds.
"Why did they send you, of all people!" he cried out, more a shout than a question.
"I'll soon have no need of much strength, I'll use all of it now," he thought.
It was not certain that it was her, although the similarity was, of course, great.
But it did not matter to K. whether it was certainly her anyway, he just became suddenly aware that there was no point in his resistance.
There would be nothing heroic about it if he resisted, if he now caused trouble for these gentlemen, if in defending himself he sought to enjoy his last glimmer of life.
Now they permitted him to decided which direction they took, and he decided to take the direction that followed the young woman in front of them, not so much because he wanted to catch up with her, nor even because he wanted to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that he would not forget the reproach she represented for him.
"The only thing I can do now," he said to himself, and his thought was confirmed by the equal length of his own steps with the steps of the two others, "the only thing I can do now is keep my common sense and do what's needed right till the end.
Meanwhile, the young woman had turned off into a side street, but K. could do without her now and let his companions lead him.
All three of them now, in complete agreement, went over a bridge in the light of the moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each little movement made by K. as he moved slightly towards the edge and directed the group in that direction as a single unit.
"I didn't actually want to stop here," he said to his companions, shamed by their compliance with his wishes.
One of them with a bushy moustache, his hand on the grip of his sword, seemed to have some purpose in approaching the group, which was hardly unsuspicious.
The two gentlemen stopped, the policeman seemed about to open his mouth, and then K. drove his group forcefully forward.
Several times he looked back cautiously to see if the policeman was following; but when they had a corner between themselves and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen, despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him.
After exchanging a few courtesies about who was to carry out the next tasks - the gentlemen did not seem to have been allocated specific functions - one of them went to K. and took his coat, his waistcoat, and finally his shirt off him.
Then he carefully folded the things up as if they would still be needed, even if not in the near future.
He did not want to expose K. to the chilly night air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and walked up and down with him a little way while the other gentleman looked round the quarry for a suitable place.
When he had found it he made a sign and the other gentleman escorted him there.
The gentlemen sat K. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settled his head down on the top of it.
Despite all the effort they went to, and despite all the co-operation shown by K., his demeanour seemed very forced and hard to believe.
So one of the gentlemen asked the other to grant him a short time while he put K. in position by himself, but even that did nothing to make it better.
Then one of the gentlemen opened his frock coat and from a sheath hanging on a belt stretched across his waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edged butcher's knife which he held up in the light to test its sharpness.
K. now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as it passed from hand to hand above him and thrust it into himself.
But he did not do it, instead he twisted his neck, which was still free, and looked around.
He was not able to show his full worth, was not able to take all the work from the official bodies, he lacked the rest of the strength he needed and this final shortcoming was the fault of whoever had denied it to him.
As he looked round, he saw the top floor of the building next to the quarry.
He saw how a light flickered on and the two halves of a window opened out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and the distance, leant suddenly far out from it and stretched his arms out even further.
Was he alone?
Where was the judge he'd never seen?
Where was the high court he had never reached?
He raised both hands and spread out all his fingers.
But the hands of one of the gentleman were laid on K.'s throat, while the other pushed the knife deep into his heart and twisted it there, twice.
As his eyesight failed, K. saw the two gentlemen cheek by cheek, close in front of his face, watching the result. "Like a dog!" he said, it was as if the shame of it should outlive him.
One morning, when Gregor Samsa woke from troubled dreams, he found himself transformed in his bed into a horrible vermin.
He lay on his armour-like back, and if he lifted his head a little he could see his brown belly, slightly domed and divided by arches into stiff sections. The bedding was hardly able to cover it and seemed ready to slide off any moment.
His many legs, pitifully thin compared with the size of the rest of him, waved about helplessly as he looked.
"What's happened to me?" he thought.
His room, a proper human room although a little too small, lay peacefully between its four familiar walls. A collection of textile samples lay spread out on the table - Samsa was a travelling salesman - and above it there hung a picture that he had recently cut out of an illustrated magazine and housed in a nice, gilded frame.
It showed a lady fitted out with a fur hat and fur boa who sat upright, raising a heavy fur muff that covered the whole of her lower arm towards the viewer.
"How about if I sleep a little bit longer and forget all this nonsense", he thought, but that was something he was unable to do because he was used to sleeping on his right, and in his present state couldn't get into that position.
However hard he threw himself onto his right, he always rolled back to where he was.
He must have tried it a hundred times, shut his eyes so that he wouldn't have to look at the floundering legs, and only stopped when he began to feel a mild, dull pain there that he had never felt before.
"Oh, God", he thought, "what a strenuous career it is that I've chosen!
He felt a slight itch up on his belly; pushed himself slowly up on his back towards the headboard so that he could lift his head better; found where the itch was, and saw that it was covered with lots of little white spots which he didn't know what to make of; and when he tried to feel the place with one of his legs he drew it quickly back because as soon as he touched it he was overcome by a cold shudder.
He slid back into his former position.
"Getting up early all the time", he thought, "it makes you stupid.
He'd fall right off his desk!
First of all though, I've got to get up, my train leaves at five." And he looked over at the alarm clock, ticking on the chest of drawers.
"God in Heaven!" he thought.
True, he had not slept peacefully, but probably all the more deeply because of that.
What should he do now?
The next train went at seven; if he were to catch that he would have to rush like mad and the collection of samples was still not packed, and he did not at all feel particularly fresh and lively.
And even if he did catch the train he would not avoid his boss's anger as the office assistant would have been there to see the five o'clock train go, he would have put in his report about Gregor's not being there a long time ago.
The office assistant was the boss's man, spineless, and with no understanding.
What about if he reported sick?
His boss would certainly come round with the doctor from the medical insurance company, accuse his parents of having a lazy son, and accept the doctor's recommendation not to make any claim as the doctor believed that no-one was ever ill but that many were workshy.
And what's more, would he have been entirely wrong in this case?
He was still hurriedly thinking all this through, unable to decide to get out of the bed, when the clock struck quarter to seven. There was a cautious knock at the door near his head.
"Gregor", somebody called - it was his mother - "it's quarter to seven.
Gregor was shocked when he heard his own voice answering, it could hardly be recognised as the voice he had had before. As if from deep inside him, there was a painful and uncontrollable squeaking mixed in with it, the words could be made out at first but then there was a sort of echo which made them unclear, leaving the hearer unsure whether he had heard properly or not.
Gregor had wanted to give a full answer and explain everything, but in the circumstances contented himself with saying: "Yes, mother, yes, thank-you, I'm getting up now."
The change in Gregor's voice probably could not be noticed outside through the wooden door, as his mother was satisfied with this explanation and shuffled away.
But this short conversation made the other members of the family aware that Gregor, against their expectations was still at home, and soon his father came knocking at one of the side doors, gently, but with his fist.
"Gregor, Gregor", he called, "what's wrong?"
And after a short while he called again with a warning deepness in his voice:
At the other side door his sister came plaintively: "Gregor?
Gregor answered to both sides: "I'm ready, now", making an effort to remove all the strangeness from his voice by enunciating very carefully and putting long pauses between each, individual word.
His father went back to his breakfast, but his sister whispered: "Gregor, open the door, I beg of you."
Gregor, however, had no thought of opening the door, and instead congratulated himself for his cautious habit, acquired from his travelling, of locking all doors at night even when he was at home.
The first thing he wanted to do was to get up in peace without being disturbed, to get dressed, and most of all to have his breakfast. Only then would he consider what to do next, as he was well aware that he would not bring his thoughts to any sensible conclusions by lying in bed.
He remembered that he had often felt a slight pain in bed, perhaps caused by lying awkwardly, but that had always turned out to be pure imagination and he wondered how his imaginings would slowly resolve themselves today.
He did not have the slightest doubt that the change in his voice was nothing more than the first sign of a serious cold, which was an occupational hazard for travelling salesmen.
It was a simple matter to throw off the covers; he only had to blow himself up a little and they fell off by themselves.
But it became difficult after that, especially as he was so exceptionally broad.
He would have used his arms and his hands to push himself up; but instead of them he only had all those little legs continuously moving in different directions, and which he was moreover unable to control.
If he wanted to bend one of them, then that was the first one that would stretch itself out; and if he finally managed to do what he wanted with that leg, all the others seemed to be set free and would move about painfully.
The first thing he wanted to do was get the lower part of his body out of the bed, but he had never seen this lower part, and could not imagine what it looked like; it turned out to be too hard to move; it went so slowly; and finally, almost in a frenzy, when he carelessly shoved himself forwards with all the force he could gather, he chose the wrong direction, hit hard against the lower bedpost, and learned from the burning pain he felt that the lower part of his body might well, at present, be the most sensitive.
So then he tried to get the top part of his body out of the bed first, carefully turning his head to the side.
This he managed quite easily, and despite its breadth and its weight, the bulk of his body eventually followed slowly in the direction of the head.
But when he had at last got his head out of the bed and into the fresh air it occurred to him that if he let himself fall it would be a miracle if his head were not injured, so he became afraid to carry on pushing himself forward the same way.
And he could not knock himself out now at any price; better to stay in bed than lose consciousness.
It took just as much effort to get back to where he had been earlier, but when he lay there sighing, and was once more watching his legs as they struggled against each other even harder than before, if that was possible, he could think of no way of bringing peace and order to this chaos. He told himself once more that it was not possible for him to stay in bed and that the most sensible thing to do would be to get free of it in whatever way he could at whatever sacrifice.
At the same time, though, he did not forget to remind himself that calm consideration was much better than rushing to desperate conclusions.
At times like this he would direct his eyes to the window and look out as clearly as he could, but unfortunately, even the other side of the narrow street was enveloped in morning fog and the view had little confidence or cheer to offer him.
"Seven o'clock, already", he said to himself when the clock struck again, "seven o'clock, and there's still a fog like this." And he lay there quietly a while longer, breathing lightly as if he perhaps expected the total stillness to bring things back to their real and natural state.
But then he said to himself: "Before it strikes quarter past seven I'll definitely have to have got properly out of bed.
And so he set himself to the task of swinging the entire length of his body out of the bed all at the same time.
If he succeeded in falling out of bed in this way and kept his head raised as he did so he could probably avoid injuring it.
His main concern was for the loud noise he was bound to make, and which even through all the doors would probably raise concern if not alarm.
When Gregor was already sticking half way out of the bed - the new method was more of a game than an effort, all he had to do was rock back and forth - it occurred to him how simple everything would be if somebody came to help him.
Two strong people - he had his father and the maid in mind - would have been more than enough; they would only have to push their arms under the dome of his back, peel him away from the bed, bend down with the load and then be patient and careful as he swang over onto the floor, where, hopefully, the little legs would find a use.
Should he really call for help though, even apart from the fact that all the doors were locked?
Despite all the difficulty he was in, he could not suppress a smile at this thought.
After a while he had already moved so far across that it would have been hard for him to keep his balance if he rocked too hard. The time was now ten past seven and he would have to make a final decision very soon.
"That'll be someone from work", he said to himself, and froze very still, although his little legs only became all the more lively as they danced around.
Gregor only needed to hear the visitor's first words of greeting and he knew who it was - the chief clerk himself.
Were all employees, every one of them, louts, was there not one of them who was faithful and devoted who would go so mad with pangs of conscience that he couldn't get out of bed if he didn't spend at least a couple of hours in the morning on company business?
And more because these thoughts had made him upset than through any proper decision, he swang himself with all his force out of the bed.
His fall was softened a little by the carpet, and Gregor's back was also more elastic than he had thought, which made the sound muffled and not too noticeable.
He had not held his head carefully enough, though, and hit it as he fell; annoyed and in pain, he turned it and rubbed it against the carpet.
But as if in gruff reply to this question, the chief clerk's firm footsteps in his highly polished boots could now be heard in the adjoining room.
From the room on his right, Gregor's sister whispered to him to let him know: "Gregor, the chief clerk is here."
"Yes, I know", said Gregor to himself; but without daring to raise his voice loud enough for his sister to hear him.
"Gregor", said his father now from the room to his left, "the chief clerk has come round and wants to know why you didn't leave on the early train.
And anyway, he wants to speak to you personally.
I'm sure he'll be good enough to forgive the untidiness of your room."
"He isn't well", said his mother to the chief clerk, while his father continued to speak through the door. "He isn't well, please believe me.
It nearly makes me cross the way he never goes out in the evenings; he's been in town for a week now but stayed home every evening.
His idea of relaxation is working with his fretsaw.
He's made a little frame, for instance, it only took him two or three evenings, you'll be amazed how nice it is; it's hanging up in his room; you'll see it as soon as Gregor opens the door.
Anyway, I'm glad you're here; we wouldn't have been able to get Gregor to open the door by ourselves; he's so stubborn; and I'm sure he isn't well, he said this morning that he is, but he isn't."
"I'll be there in a moment", said Gregor slowly and thoughtfully, but without moving so that he would not miss any word of the conversation.
"Can the chief clerk come in to see you now then?", asked his father impatiently, knocking at the door again.
In the room on his right there followed a painful silence; in the room on his left his sister began to cry.
So why did his sister not go and join the others?
And why was she crying?
Was it because he had not got up, and had not let the chief clerk in, because he was in danger of losing his job and if that happened his boss would once more pursue their parents with the same demands as before?
Gregor was still there and had not the slightest intention of abandoning his family.
For the time being he just lay there on the carpet, and no-one who knew the condition he was in would seriously have expected him to let the chief clerk in.
The chief clerk now raised his voice, "Mr. Samsa", he called to him, "what is wrong?
And while Gregor gushed out these words, hardly knowing what he was saying, he made his way over to the chest of drawers - this was easily done, probably because of the practise he had already had in bed - where he now tried to get himself upright.
He really did want to open the door, really did want to let them see him and to speak with the chief clerk; the others were being so insistent, and he was curious to learn what they would say when they caught sight of him.
If they were shocked then it would no longer be Gregor's responsibility and he could rest.
If, however, they took everything calmly he would still have no reason to be upset, and if he hurried he really could be at the station for eight o'clock.
The first few times he tried to climb up on the smooth chest of drawers he just slid down again, but he finally gave himself one last swing and stood there upright; the lower part of his body was in serious pain but he no longer gave any attention to it.
Now he let himself fall against the back of a nearby chair and held tightly to the edges of it with his little legs.
By now he had also calmed down, and kept quiet so that he could listen to what the chief clerk was saying.
"Did you understand a word of all that?" the chief clerk asked his parents, "surely he's not trying to make fools of us".
"Oh, God!" called his mother, who was already in tears, "he could be seriously ill and we're making him suffer.
Grete!" she then cried.
"Mother?" his sister called from the other side.
"That was the voice of an animal", said the chief clerk, with a calmness that was in contrast with his mother's screams.
Anna!" his father called into the kitchen through the entrance hall, clapping his hands, "get a locksmith here, now!"
And the two girls, their skirts swishing, immediately ran out through the hall, wrenching open the front door of the flat as they went. How had his sister managed to get dressed so quickly?
So they couldn't understand his words any more, although they seemed clear enough to him, clearer than before - perhaps his ears had become used to the sound.
The first response to his situation had been confident and wise, and that made him feel better.
He felt that he had been drawn back in among people, and from the doctor and the locksmith he expected great and surprising achievements - although he did not really distinguish one from the other.
Whatever was said next would be crucial, so, in order to make his voice as clear as possible, he coughed a little, but taking care to do this not too loudly as even this might well sound different from the way that a human coughs and he was no longer sure he could judge this for himself.
Perhaps his parents were sat at the table whispering with the chief clerk, or perhaps they were all pressed against the door and listening.
Gregor slowly pushed his way over to the door with the chair. Once there he let go of it and threw himself onto the door, holding himself upright against it using the adhesive on the tips of his legs.
He rested there a little while to recover from the effort involved and then set himself to the task of turning the key in the lock with his mouth.
He seemed, unfortunately, to have no proper teeth - how was he, then, to grasp the key? - but the lack of teeth was, of course, made up for with a very strong jaw; using the jaw, he really was able to start the key turning, ignoring the fact that he must have been causing some kind of damage as a brown fluid came from his mouth, flowed over the key and dripped onto the floor.
Gregor was greatly encouraged by this; but they all should have been calling to him, his father and his mother too: "Well done, Gregor", they should have cried, "keep at it, keep hold of the lock!"
And with the idea that they were all excitedly following his efforts, he bit on the key with all his strength, paying no attention to the pain he was causing himself.
As the key turned round he turned around the lock with it, only holding himself upright with his mouth, and hung onto the key or pushed it down again with the whole weight of his body as needed.
The clear sound of the lock as it snapped back was Gregor's sign that he could break his concentration, and as he regained his breath he said to himself: "So, I didn't need the locksmith after all". Then he lay his head on the handle of the door to open it completely.
Because he had to open the door in this way, it was already wide open before he could be seen.
He had first to slowly turn himself around one of the double doors, and he had to do it very carefully if he did not want to fall flat on his back before entering the room.
He was still occupied with this difficult movement, unable to pay attention to anything else, when he heard the chief clerk exclaim a loud "Oh!", which sounded like the soughing of the wind. Now he also saw him - he was the nearest to the door - his hand pressed against his open mouth and slowly retreating as if driven by a steady and invisible force.
Gregor's mother, her hair still dishevelled from bed despite the chief clerk's being there, looked at his father. Then she unfolded her arms, took two steps forward towards Gregor and sank down onto the floor into her skirts that spread themselves out around her as her head disappeared down onto her breast.
His father looked hostile, and clenched his fists as if wanting to knock Gregor back into his room. Then he looked uncertainly round the living room, covered his eyes with his hands and wept so that his powerful chest shook.
So Gregor did not go into the room, but leant against the inside of the other door which was still held bolted in place. In this way only half of his body could be seen, along with his head above it which he leant over to one side as he peered out at the others.
The washing up from breakfast lay on the table; there was so much of it because, for Gregor's father, breakfast was the most important meal of the day and he would stretch it out for several hours as he sat reading a number of different newspapers.
On the wall exactly opposite there was photograph of Gregor when he was a lieutenant in the army, his sword in his hand and a carefree smile on his face as he called forth respect for his uniform and bearing.
The door to the entrance hall was open and as the front door of the flat was also open he could see onto the landing and the stairs where they began their way down below.
"Now, then", said Gregor, well aware that he was the only one to have kept calm, "I'll get dressed straight away now, pack up my samples and set off.
You can see", he said to the chief clerk, "that I'm not stubborn and I like to do my job; being a commercial traveller is arduous but without travelling I couldn't earn my living.
It's quite possible for someone to be temporarily unable to work, but that's just the right time to remember what's been achieved in the past and consider that later on, once the difficulty has been removed, he will certainly work with all the more diligence and concentration.
But you, sir, you have a better overview than the rest of the staff, in fact, if I can say this in confidence, a better overview than the boss himself - it's very easy for a businessman like him to make mistakes about his employees and judge them more harshly than he should.
But the chief clerk had turned away as soon as Gregor had started to speak, and, with protruding lips, only stared back at him over his trembling shoulders as he left.
He did not keep still for a moment while Gregor was speaking, but moved steadily towards the door without taking his eyes off him. He moved very gradually, as if there had been some secret prohibition on leaving the room.
It was only when he had reached the entrance hall that he made a sudden movement, drew his foot from the living room, and rushed forward in a panic.
In the hall, he stretched his right hand far out towards the stairway as if out there, there were some supernatural force waiting to save him.
Gregor realised that it was out of the question to let the chief clerk go away in this mood if his position in the firm was not to be put into extreme danger.
That was something his parents did not understand very well; over the years, they had become convinced that this job would provide for Gregor for his entire life, and besides, they had so much to worry about at present that they had lost sight of any thought for the future.
The chief clerk had to be held back, calmed down, convinced and finally won over; the future of Gregor and his family depended on it!
If only his sister were here!
She was clever; she was already in tears while Gregor was still lying peacefully on his back.
And the chief clerk was a lover of women, surely she could persuade him; she would close the front door in the entrance hall and talk him out of his shocked state.
But his sister was not there, Gregor would have to do the job himself.
And without considering that he still was not familiar with how well he could move about in his present state, or that his speech still might not - or probably would not - be understood, he let go of the door; pushed himself through the opening; tried to reach the chief clerk on the landing who, ridiculously, was holding on to the banister with both hands; but Gregor fell immediately over and, with a little scream as he sought something to hold onto, landed on his numerous little legs.
Hardly had that happened than, for the first time that day, he began to feel alright with his body; the little legs had the solid ground under them; to his pleasure, they did exactly as he told them; they were even making the effort to carry him where he wanted to go; and he was soon believing that all his sorrows would soon be finally at an end.
His mother was not far away in front of him and seemed, at first, quite engrossed in herself, but then she suddenly jumped up with her arms outstretched and her fingers spread shouting: "Help, for pity's sake, Help!" The way she held her head suggested she wanted to see Gregor better, but the unthinking way she was hurrying backwards showed that she did not; she had forgotten that the table was behind her with all the breakfast things on it; when she reached the table she sat quickly down on it without knowing what she was doing; without even seeming to notice that the coffee pot had been knocked over and a gush of coffee was pouring down onto the carpet.
"Mother, mother", said Gregor gently, looking up at her.
He had completely forgotten the chief clerk for the moment, but could not help himself snapping in the air with his jaws at the sight of the flow of coffee.
That set his mother screaming anew, she fled from the table and into the arms of his father as he rushed towards her.
Gregor, though, had no time to spare for his parents now; the chief clerk had already reached the stairs; with his chin on the banister, he looked back for the last time.
Gregor made a run for him; he wanted to be sure of reaching him; the chief clerk must have expected something, as he leapt down several steps at once and disappeared; his shouts resounding all around the staircase.
The flight of the chief clerk seemed, unfortunately, to put Gregor's father into a panic as well. Until then he had been relatively self controlled, but now, instead of running after the chief clerk himself, or at least not impeding Gregor as he ran after him, Gregor's father seized the chief clerk's stick in his right hand (the chief clerk had left it behind on a chair, along with his hat and overcoat), picked up a large newspaper from the table with his left, and used them to drive Gregor back into his room, stamping his foot at him as he went.
Gregor's appeals to his father were of no help, his appeals were simply not understood, however much he humbly turned his head his father merely stamped his foot all the harder.
Across the room, despite the chilly weather, Gregor's mother had pulled open a window, leant far out of it and pressed her hands to her face.
Nothing would stop Gregor's father as he drove him back, making hissing noises at him like a wild man.
If Gregor had only been allowed to turn round he would have been back in his room straight away, but he was afraid that if he took the time to do that his father would become impatient, and there was the threat of a lethal blow to his back or head from the stick in his father's hand any moment.
Eventually, though, Gregor realised that he had no choice as he saw, to his disgust, that he was quite incapable of going backwards in a straight line; so he began, as quickly as possible and with frequent anxious glances at his father, to turn himself round.
It went very slowly, but perhaps his father was able to see his good intentions as he did nothing to hinder him, in fact now and then he used the tip of his stick to give directions from a distance as to which way to turn.
If only his father would stop that unbearable hissing!
When he had nearly finished turning round, still listening to that hissing, he made a mistake and turned himself back a little the way he had just come.
He was pleased when he finally had his head in front of the doorway, but then saw that it was too narrow, and his body was too broad to get through it without further difficulty.
In his present mood, it obviously did not occur to his father to open the other of the double doors so that Gregor would have enough space to get through.
He was merely fixed on the idea that Gregor should be got back into his room as quickly as possible.
Nor would he ever have allowed Gregor the time to get himself upright as preparation for getting through the doorway.
What he did, making more noise than ever, was to drive Gregor forwards all the harder as if there had been nothing in the way; it sounded to Gregor as if there was now more than one father behind him; it was not a pleasant experience, and Gregor pushed himself into the doorway without regard for what might happen.
One side of his body lifted itself, he lay at an angle in the doorway, one flank scraped on the white door and was painfully injured, leaving vile brown flecks on it, soon he was stuck fast and would not have been able to move at all by himself, the little legs along one side hung quivering in the air while those on the other side were pressed painfully against the ground. Then his father gave him a hefty shove from behind which released him from where he was held and sent him flying, and heavily bleeding, deep into his room.
It was not until it was getting dark that evening that Gregor awoke from his deep and coma-like sleep.
He would have woken soon afterwards anyway even if he hadn't been disturbed, as he had had enough sleep and felt fully rested. But he had the impression that some hurried steps and the sound of the door leading into the front room being carefully shut had woken him.
He pushed himself over to the door, feeling his way clumsily with his antennae - of which he was now beginning to learn the value - in order to see what had been happening there.
The whole of his left side seemed like one, painfully stretched scar, and he limped badly on his two rows of legs.
It was only when he had reached the door that he realised what it actually was that had drawn him over to it; it was the smell of something to eat.
He was so pleased he almost laughed, as he was even hungrier than he had been that morning, and immediately dipped his head into the milk, nearly covering his eyes with it.
But he soon drew his head back again in disappointment; not only did the pain in his tender left side make it difficult to eat the food - he was only able to eat if his whole body worked together as a snuffling whole - but the milk did not taste at all nice. Milk like this was normally his favourite drink, and his sister had certainly left it there for him because of that, but he turned, almost against his own will, away from the dish and crawled back into the centre of the room.
His father at this time would normally be sat with his evening paper, reading it out in a loud voice to Gregor's mother, and sometimes to his sister, but there was now not a sound to be heard.
Gregor's sister would often write and tell him about this reading, but maybe his father had lost the habit in recent times.
"What a quiet life it is the family lead", said Gregor to himself, and, gazing into the darkness, felt a great pride that he was able to provide a life like that in such a nice home for his sister and parents.
That was something that Gregor did not want to think about too much, so he started to move about, crawling up and down the room.
The previous morning while the doors were locked everyone had wanted to get in there to him, but now, now that he had opened up one of the doors and the other had clearly been unlocked some time during the day, no-one came, and the keys were in the other sides.
It was not until late at night that the gaslight in the living room was put out, and now it was easy to see that his parents and sister had stayed awake all that time, as they all could be distinctly heard as they went away together on tip-toe.
It was clear that no-one would come into Gregor's room any more until morning; that gave him plenty of time to think undisturbed about how he would have to re-arrange his life.
Hardly aware of what he was doing other than a slight feeling of shame, he hurried under the couch. It pressed down on his back a little, and he was no longer able to lift his head, but he nonetheless felt immediately at ease and his only regret was that his body was too broad to get it all underneath.
He spent the whole night there. Some of the time he passed in a light sleep, although he frequently woke from it in alarm because of his hunger, and some of the time was spent in worries and vague hopes which, however, always led to the same conclusion: for the time being he must remain calm, he must show patience and the greatest consideration so that his family could bear the unpleasantness that he, in his present condition, was forced to impose on them.
Gregor soon had the opportunity to test the strength of his decisions, as early the next morning, almost before the night had ended, his sister, nearly fully dressed, opened the door from the front room and looked anxiously in.
She did not see him straight away, but when she did notice him under the couch - he had to be somewhere, for God's sake, he couldn't have flown away - she was so shocked that she lost control of herself and slammed the door shut again from outside.
But she seemed to regret her behaviour, as she opened the door again straight away and came in on tip-toe as if entering the room of someone seriously ill or even of a stranger.
Gregor had pushed his head forward, right to the edge of the couch, and watched her.
Would she notice that he had left the milk as it was, realise that it was not from any lack of hunger and bring him in some other food that was more suitable?
If she didn't do it herself he would rather go hungry than draw her attention to it, although he did feel a terrible urge to rush forward from under the couch, throw himself at his sister's feet and beg her for something good to eat.
However, his sister noticed the full dish immediately and looked at it and the few drops of milk splashed around it with some surprise. She immediately picked it up - using a rag, not her bare hands - and carried it out.
Gregor was extremely curious as to what she would bring in its place, imagining the wildest possibilities, but he never could have guessed what his sister, in her goodness, actually did bring.
In order to test his taste, she brought him a whole selection of things, all spread out on an old newspaper.
As well as all that she had poured some water into the dish, which had probably been permanently set aside for Gregor's use, and placed it beside them.
Then, out of consideration for Gregor's feelings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of her, she hurried out again and even turned the key in the lock so that Gregor would know he could make things as comfortable for himself as he liked.
Gregor's little legs whirred, at last he could eat.
What's more, his injuries must already have completely healed as he found no difficulty in moving. This amazed him, as more than a month earlier he had cut his finger slightly with a knife, he thought of how his finger had still hurt the day before yesterday.
"Am I less sensitive than I used to be, then?", he thought, and was already sucking greedily at the cheese which had immediately, almost compellingly, attracted him much more than the other foods on the newspaper.
Quickly one after another, his eyes watering with pleasure, he consumed the cheese, the vegetables and the sauce; the fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn't like at all, and even dragged the things he did want to eat a little way away from them because he couldn't stand the smell.
Long after he had finished eating and lay lethargic in the same place, his sister slowly turned the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should withdraw.
He was immediately startled, although he had been half asleep, and he hurried back under the couch.
But he needed great self-control to stay there even for the short time that his sister was in the room, as eating so much food had rounded out his body a little and he could hardly breathe in that narrow space.
Half suffocating, he watched with bulging eyes as his sister unselfconsciously took a broom and swept up the left-overs, mixing them in with the food he had not even touched at all as if it could not be used any more. She quickly dropped it all into a bin, closed it with its wooden lid, and carried everything out.
She had hardly turned her back before Gregor came out again from under the couch and stretched himself.
This was how Gregor received his food each day now, once in the morning while his parents and the maid were still asleep, and the second time after everyone had eaten their meal at midday as his parents would sleep for a little while then as well, and Gregor's sister would send the maid away on some errand.
Gregor's father and mother certainly did not want him to starve either, but perhaps it would have been more than they could stand to have any more experience of his feeding than being told about it, and perhaps his sister wanted to spare them what distress she could as they were indeed suffering enough.
It was impossible for Gregor to find out what they had told the doctor and the locksmith that first morning to get them out of the flat. As nobody could understand him, nobody, not even his sister, thought that he could understand them, so he had to be content to hear his sister's sighs and appeals to the saints as she moved about his room.
It was only later, when she had become a little more used to everything - there was, of course, no question of her ever becoming fully used to the situation - that Gregor would sometimes catch a friendly comment, or at least a comment that could be construed as friendly.
"He's enjoyed his dinner today", she might say when he had diligently cleared away all the food left for him, or if he left most of it, which slowly became more and more frequent, she would often say, sadly, "now everything's just been left there again".
Although Gregor wasn't able to hear any news directly he did listen to much of what was said in the next rooms, and whenever he heard anyone speaking he would scurry straight to the appropriate door and press his whole body against it.
It was not very clear how much she knew of what had happened but she left within a quarter of an hour, tearfully thanking Gregor's mother for her dismissal as if she had done her an enormous service. She even swore emphatically not to tell anyone the slightest about what had happened, even though no-one had asked that of her.
Now Gregor's sister also had to help his mother with the cooking; although that was not so much bother as no-one ate very much.
His sister would sometimes ask his father whether he would like a beer, hoping for the chance to go and fetch it herself. When his father then said nothing she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that she could send the housekeeper for it, but then his father would close the matter with a big, loud "No", and no more would be said.
Even before the first day had come to an end, his father had explained to Gregor's mother and sister what their finances and prospects were.
Now and then he stood up from the table and took some receipt or document from the little cash box he had saved from his business when it had collapsed five years earlier.
Gregor heard how he opened the complicated lock and then closed it again after he had taken the item he wanted.
What he heard his father say was some of the first good news that Gregor heard since he had first been incarcerated in his room.
He had thought that nothing at all remained from his father's business, at least he had never told him anything different, and Gregor had never asked him about it anyway.
So then he started working especially hard, with a fiery vigour that raised him from a junior salesman to a travelling representative almost overnight, bringing with it the chance to earn money in quite different ways. Gregor converted his success at work straight into cash that he could lay on the table at home for the benefit of his astonished and delighted family.
They had been good times and they had never come again, at least not with the same splendour, even though Gregor had later earned so much that he was in a position to bear the costs of the whole family, and did bear them.
They had even got used to it, both Gregor and the family, they took the money with gratitude and he was glad to provide it, although there was no longer much warm affection given in return.
Gregor only remained close to his sister now. Unlike him, she was very fond of music and a gifted and expressive violinist, it was his secret plan to send her to the conservatory next year even though it would cause great expense that would have to be made up for in some other way.
During Gregor's short periods in town, conversation with his sister would often turn to the conservatory but it was only ever mentioned as a lovely dream that could never be realised. Their parents did not like to hear this innocent talk, but Gregor thought about it quite hard and decided he would let them know what he planned with a grand announcement of it on Christmas day.
That was the sort of totally pointless thing that went through his mind in his present state, pressed upright against the door and listening.
There were times when he simply became too tired to continue listening, when his head would fall wearily against the door and he would pull it up again with a start, as even the slightest noise he caused would be heard next door and they would all go silent.
"What's that he's doing now", his father would say after a while, clearly having gone over to the door, and only then would the interrupted conversation slowly be taken up again.
When explaining things, his father repeated himself several times, partly because it was a long time since he had been occupied with these matters himself and partly because Gregor's mother did not understand everything the first time. From these repeated explanations Gregor learned, to his pleasure, that despite all their misfortunes there was still some money available from the old days.
Behind the door, Gregor nodded with enthusiasm in his pleasure at this unexpected thrift and caution.
He could actually have used this surplus money to reduce his father's debt to his boss, and the day when he could have freed himself from that job would have come much closer, but now it was certainly better the way his father had done things.
His father was healthy but old, and lacking in self confidence. During the five years that he had not been working - the first holiday in a life that had been full of strain and no success - he had put on a lot of weight and become very slow and clumsy.
Would Gregor's elderly mother now have to go and earn money? She suffered from asthma and it was a strain for her just to move about the home, every other day would be spent struggling for breath on the sofa by the open window.
Would his sister have to go and earn money? She was still a child of seventeen, her life up till then had been very enviable, consisting of wearing nice clothes, sleeping late, helping out in the business, joining in with a few modest pleasures and most of all playing the violin.
Whenever they began to talk of the need to earn money, Gregor would always first let go of the door and then throw himself onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he became quite hot with shame and regret.
Or he might go to all the effort of pushing a chair to the window, climbing up onto the sill and, propped up in the chair, leaning on the window to stare out of it. He had used to feel a great sense of freedom from doing this, but doing it now was obviously something more remembered than experienced, as what he actually saw in this way was becoming less distinct every day, even things that were quite near; he had used to curse the ever-present view of the hospital across the street, but now he could not see it at all, and if he had not known that he lived in Charlottenstrasse, which was a quiet street despite being in the middle of the city, he could have thought that he was looking out the window at a barren waste where the grey sky and the grey earth mingled inseparably.
His observant sister only needed to notice the chair twice before she would always push it back to its exact position by the window after she had tidied up the room, and even left the inner pane of the window open from then on.
If Gregor had only been able to speak to his sister and thank her for all that she had to do for him it would have been easier for him to bear it; but as it was it caused him pain.
His sister, naturally, tried as far as possible to pretend there was nothing burdensome about it, and the longer it went on, of course, the better she was able to do so, but as time went by Gregor was also able to see through it all so much better.
It had even become very unpleasant for him, now, whenever she entered the room.
No sooner had she come in than she would quickly close the door as a precaution so that no-one would have to suffer the view into Gregor's room, then she would go straight to the window and pull it hurriedly open almost as if she were suffocating. Even if it was cold, she would stay at the window breathing deeply for a little while.
She would alarm Gregor twice a day with this running about and noise making; he would stay under the couch shivering the whole while, knowing full well that she would certainly have liked to spare him this ordeal, but it was impossible for her to be in the same room with him with the windows closed.
One day, about a month after Gregor's transformation when his sister no longer had any particular reason to be shocked at his appearance, she came into the room a little earlier than usual and found him still staring out the window, motionless, and just where he would be most horrible.
In itself, his sister's not coming into the room would have been no surprise for Gregor as it would have been difficult for her to immediately open the window while he was still there, but not only did she not come in, she went straight back and closed the door behind her, a stranger would have thought he had threatened her and tried to bite her.
Gregor went straight to hide himself under the couch, of course, but he had to wait until midday before his sister came back and she seemed much more uneasy than usual.
It made him realise that she still found his appearance unbearable and would continue to do so, she probably even had to overcome the urge to flee when she saw the little bit of him that protruded from under the couch.
One day, in order to spare her even this sight, he spent four hours carrying the bedsheet over to the couch on his back and arranged it so that he was completely covered and his sister would not be able to see him even if she bent down.
If she did not think this sheet was necessary then all she had to do was take it off again, as it was clear enough that it was no pleasure for Gregor to cut himself off so completely. She left the sheet where it was.
For the first fourteen days, Gregor's parents could not bring themselves to come into the room to see him. He would often hear them say how they appreciated all the new work his sister was doing even though, before, they had seen her as a girl who was somewhat useless and frequently been annoyed with her.
But now the two of them, father and mother, would often both wait outside the door of Gregor's room while his sister tidied up in there, and as soon as she went out again she would have to tell them exactly how everything looked, what Gregor had eaten, how he had behaved this time and whether, perhaps, any slight improvement could be seen.
His mother also wanted to go in and visit Gregor relatively soon but his father and sister at first persuaded her against it. Gregor listened very closely to all this, and approved fully.
Later, though, she had to be held back by force, which made her call out: "Let me go and see Gregor, he is my unfortunate son!
Can't you understand I have to see him?", and Gregor would think to himself that maybe it would be better if his mother came in, not every day of course, but one day a week, perhaps; she could understand everything much better than his sister who, for all her courage, was still just a child after all, and really might not have had an adult's appreciation of the burdensome job she had taken on.
Gregor's wish to see his mother was soon realised.
Out of consideration for his parents, Gregor wanted to avoid being seen at the window during the day, the few square meters of the floor did not give him much room to crawl about, it was hard to just lie quietly through the night, his food soon stopped giving him any pleasure at all, and so, to entertain himself, he got into the habit of crawling up and down the walls and ceiling.
He was especially fond of hanging from the ceiling; it was quite different from lying on the floor; he could breathe more freely; his body had a light swing to it; and up there, relaxed and almost happy, it might happen that he would surprise even himself by letting go of the ceiling and landing on the floor with a crash.
But now, of course, he had far better control of his body than before and, even with a fall as great as that, caused himself no damage.
Very soon his sister noticed Gregor's new way of entertaining himself - he had, after all, left traces of the adhesive from his feet as he crawled about - and got it into her head to make it as easy as possible for him by removing the furniture that got in his way, especially the chest of drawers and the desk.
Now, this was not something that she would be able to do by herself; she did not dare to ask for help from her father; the sixteen year old maid had carried on bravely since the cook had left but she certainly would not have helped in this, she had even asked to be allowed to keep the kitchen locked at all times and never to have to open the door unless it was especially important; so his sister had no choice but to choose some time when Gregor's father was not there and fetch his mother to help her.
As she approached the room, Gregor could hear his mother express her joy, but once at the door she went silent.
First, of course, his sister came in and looked round to see that everything in the room was alright; and only then did she let her mother enter.
Gregor also refrained, this time, from spying out from under the sheet; he gave up the chance to see his mother until later and was simply glad that she had come. "You can come in, he can't be seen", said his sister, obviously leading her in by the hand.
The old chest of drawers was too heavy for a pair of feeble women to be heaving about, but Gregor listened as they pushed it from its place, his sister always taking on the heaviest part of the work for herself and ignoring her mother's warnings that she would strain herself.
After labouring at it for fifteen minutes or more his mother said it would be better to leave the chest where it was, for one thing it was too heavy for them to get the job finished before Gregor's father got home and leaving it in the middle of the room it would be in his way even more, and for another thing it wasn't even sure that taking the furniture away would really be any help to him.
She thought just the opposite; the sight of the bare walls saddened her right to her heart; and why wouldn't Gregor feel the same way about it, he'd been used to this furniture in his room for a long time and it would make him feel abandoned to be in an empty room like that. Then, quietly, almost whispering as if wanting Gregor (whose whereabouts she did not know) to hear not even the tone of her voice, as she was convinced that he did not understand her words, she added "and by taking the furniture away, won't it seem like we're showing that we've given up all hope of improvement and we're abandoning him to cope for himself?
I think it'd be best to leave the room exactly the way it was before so that when Gregor comes back to us again he'll find everything unchanged and he'll be able to forget the time in between all the easier".
Hearing these words from his mother made Gregor realise that the lack of any direct human communication, along with the monotonous life led by the family during these two months, must have made him confused - he could think of no other way of explaining to himself why he had seriously wanted his room emptied out.
Had he really wanted to transform his room into a cave, a warm room fitted out with the nice furniture he had inherited? That would have let him crawl around unimpeded in any direction, but it would also have let him quickly forget his past when he had still been human.
He had come very close to forgetting, and it had only been the voice of his mother, unheard for so long, that had shaken him out of it.
Nothing should be removed; everything had to stay; he could not do without the good influence the furniture had on his condition; and if the furniture made it difficult for him to crawl about mindlessly that was not a loss but a great advantage.
His sister, unfortunately, did not agree; she had become used to the idea, not without reason, that she was Gregor's spokesman to his parents about the things that concerned him. This meant that his mother's advice now was sufficient reason for her to insist on removing not only the chest of drawers and the desk, as she had thought at first, but all the furniture apart from the all-important couch.
It was more than childish perversity, of course, or the unexpected confidence she had recently acquired, that made her insist; she had indeed noticed that Gregor needed a lot of room to crawl about in, whereas the furniture, as far as anyone could see, was of no use to him at all.
Girls of that age, though, do become enthusiastic about things and feel they must get their way whenever they can. Perhaps this was what tempted Grete to make Gregor's situation seem even more shocking than it was so that she could do even more for him.
So she refused to let her mother dissuade her. Gregor's mother already looked uneasy in his room, she soon stopped speaking and helped Gregor's sister to get the chest of drawers out with what strength she had.
The chest of drawers was something that Gregor could do without if he had to, but the writing desk had to stay.
Hardly had the two women pushed the chest of drawers, groaning, out of the room than Gregor poked his head out from under the couch to see what he could do about it.
He meant to be as careful and considerate as he could, but, unfortunately, it was his mother who came back first while Grete in the next room had her arms round the chest, pushing and pulling at it from side to side by herself without, of course, moving it an inch.
His mother was not used to the sight of Gregor, he might have made her ill, so Gregor hurried backwards to the far end of the couch. In his startlement, though, he was not able to prevent the sheet at its front from moving a little.
It was enough to attract his mother's attention.
Gregor kept trying to assure himself that nothing unusual was happening, it was just a few pieces of furniture being moved after all, but he soon had to admit that the women going to and fro, their little calls to each other, the scraping of the furniture on the floor, all these things made him feel as if he were being assailed from all sides. With his head and legs pulled in against him and his body pressed to the floor, he was forced to admit to himself that he could not stand all of this much longer.
They were emptying his room out; taking away everything that was dear to him; they had already taken out the chest containing his fretsaw and other tools; now they threatened to remove the writing desk with its place clearly worn into the floor, the desk where he had done his homework as a business trainee, at high school, even while he had been at infant school - he really could not wait any longer to see whether the two women's intentions were good. He had nearly forgotten they were there anyway, as they were now too tired to say anything while they worked and he could only hear their feet as they stepped heavily on the floor.
So, while the women were leant against the desk in the other room catching their breath, he sallied out, changed direction four times not knowing what he should save first before his attention was suddenly caught by the picture on the wall - which was already denuded of everything else that had been on it - of the lady dressed in copious fur. He hurried up onto the picture and pressed himself against its glass, it held him firmly and felt good on his hot belly.
He turned his head to face the door into the living room so that he could watch the women when they came back.
They had not allowed themselves a long rest and came back quite soon; Grete had put her arm around her mother and was nearly carrying her.
Perhaps only because her mother was there, she remained calm, bent her face to her so that she would not look round and said, albeit hurriedly and with a tremor in her voice: "Come on, let's go back in the living room for a while?" Gregor could see what Grete had in mind, she wanted to take her mother somewhere safe and then chase him down from the wall.
Well, she could certainly try it!
He sat unyielding on his picture.
But Grete's words had made her mother quite worried, she stepped to one side, saw the enormous brown patch against the flowers of the wallpaper, and before she even realised it was Gregor that she saw screamed: "Oh God, oh God!" Arms outstretched, she fell onto the couch as if she had given up everything and stayed there immobile.
"Gregor!" shouted his sister, glowering at him and shaking her fist.
That was the first word she had spoken to him directly since his transformation.
She ran into the other room to fetch some kind of smelling salts to bring her mother out of her faint; Gregor wanted to help too - he could save his picture later, although he stuck fast to the glass and had to pull himself off by force; then he, too, ran into the next room as if he could advise his sister like in the old days; but he had to just stand behind her doing nothing; she was looking into various bottles, he startled her when she turned round; a bottle fell to the ground and broke; a splinter cut Gregor's face, some kind of caustic medicine splashed all over him; now, without delaying any longer, Grete took hold of all the bottles she could and ran with them in to her mother; she slammed the door shut with her foot.
So now Gregor was shut out from his mother, who, because of him, might be near to death; he could not open the door if he did not want to chase his sister away, and she had to stay with his mother; there was nothing for him to do but wait; and, oppressed with anxiety and self-reproach, he began to crawl about, he crawled over everything, walls, furniture, ceiling, and finally in his confusion as the whole room began to spin around him he fell down into the middle of the dinner table.
The maid, of course, had locked herself in her kitchen so that Grete would have to go and answer it. His father had arrived home.
"What's happened?" were his first words; Grete's appearance must have made everything clear to him.
She answered him with subdued voice, and openly pressed her face into his chest: "Mother's fainted, but she's better now. Gregor got out."
"Just as I expected", said his father, "just as I always said, but you women wouldn't listen, would you." It was clear to Gregor that Grete had not said enough and that his father took it to mean that something bad had happened, that he was responsible for some act of violence.
That meant Gregor would now have to try to calm his father, as he did not have the time to explain things to him even if that had been possible.
So he fled to the door of his room and pressed himself against it so that his father, when he came in from the hall, could see straight away that Gregor had the best intentions and would go back into his room without delay, that it would not be necessary to drive him back but that they had only to open the door and he would disappear.
His father, though, was not in the mood to notice subtleties like that; "Ah!", he shouted as he came in, sounding as if he were both angry and glad at the same time.
Gregor drew his head back from the door and lifted it towards his father.
He really had not imagined his father the way he stood there now; of late, with his new habit of crawling about, he had neglected to pay attention to what was going on the rest of the flat the way he had done before. He really ought to have expected things to have changed, but still, still, was that really his father?
The same tired man as used to be laying there entombed in his bed when Gregor came back from his business trips, who would receive him sitting in the armchair in his nightgown when he came back in the evenings; who was hardly even able to stand up but, as a sign of his pleasure, would just raise his arms and who, on the couple of times a year when they went for a walk together on a Sunday or public holiday wrapped up tightly in his overcoat between Gregor and his mother, would always labour his way forward a little more slowly than them, who were already walking slowly for his sake; who would place his stick down carefully and, if he wanted to say something would invariably stop and gather his companions around him.
He was standing up straight enough now; dressed in a smart blue uniform with gold buttons, the sort worn by the employees at the banking institute; above the high, stiff collar of the coat his strong double-chin emerged; under the bushy eyebrows, his piercing, dark eyes looked out fresh and alert; his normally unkempt white hair was combed down painfully close to his scalp.
He took his cap, with its gold monogram from, probably, some bank, and threw it in an arc right across the room onto the sofa, put his hands in his trouser pockets, pushing back the bottom of his long uniform coat, and, with look of determination, walked towards Gregor.
He probably did not even know himself what he had in mind, but nonetheless lifted his feet unusually high.
Gregor was amazed at the enormous size of the soles of his boots, but wasted no time with that - he knew full well, right from the first day of his new life, that his father thought it necessary to always be extremely strict with him.
And so he ran up to his father, stopped when his father stopped, scurried forwards again when he moved, even slightly.
Gregor remained all this time on the floor, largely because he feared his father might see it as especially provoking if he fled onto the wall or ceiling.
Whatever he did, Gregor had to admit that he certainly would not be able to keep up this running about for long, as for each step his father took he had to carry out countless movements.
He became noticeably short of breath, even in his earlier life his lungs had not been very reliable.
Now, as he lurched about in his efforts to muster all the strength he could for running he could hardly keep his eyes open; his thoughts became too slow for him to think of any other way of saving himself than running; he almost forgot that the walls were there for him to use although, here, they were concealed behind carefully carved furniture full of notches and protrusions - then, right beside him, lightly tossed, something flew down and rolled in front of him.
It was an apple; then another one immediately flew at him; Gregor froze in shock; there was no longer any point in running as his father had decided to bombard him.
He had filled his pockets with fruit from the bowl on the sideboard and now, without even taking the time for careful aim, threw one apple after another.
Another one however, immediately following it, hit squarely and lodged in his back; Gregor wanted to drag himself away, as if he could remove the surprising, the incredible pain by changing his position; but he felt as if nailed to the spot and spread himself out, all his senses in confusion.
The last thing he saw was the door of his room being pulled open, his sister was screaming, his mother ran out in front of her in her blouse (as his sister had taken off some of her clothes after she had fainted to make it easier for her to breathe), she ran to his father, her skirts unfastened and sliding one after another to the ground, stumbling over the skirts she pushed herself to his father, her arms around him, uniting herself with him totally - now Gregor lost his ability to see anything - her hands behind his father's head begging him to spare Gregor's life.
He had suffered it there for more than a month, and his condition seemed serious enough to remind even his father that Gregor, despite his current sad and revolting form, was a family member who could not be treated as an enemy. On the contrary, as a family there was a duty to swallow any revulsion for him and to be patient, just to be patient.
He had been reduced to the condition of an ancient invalid and it took him long, long minutes to crawl across his room - crawling over the ceiling was out of the question - but this deterioration in his condition was fully (in his opinion) made up for by the door to the living room being left open every evening. He got into the habit of closely watching it for one or two hours before it was opened and then, lying in the darkness of his room where he could not be seen from the living room, he could watch the family in the light of the dinner table and listen to their conversation - with everyone's permission, in a way, and thus quite differently from before.
They no longer held the lively conversations of earlier times, of course, the ones that Gregor always thought about with longing when he was tired and getting into the damp bed in some small hotel room.
Soon after dinner, his father would go to sleep in his chair; his mother and sister would urge each other to be quiet; his mother, bent deeply under the lamp, would sew fancy underwear for a fashion shop; his sister, who had taken a sales job, learned shorthand and French in the evenings so that she might be able to get a better position later on.
Sometimes his father would wake up and say to Gregor's mother "you're doing so much sewing again today!", as if he did not know that he had been dozing - and then he would go back to sleep again while mother and sister would exchange a tired grin.
With a kind of stubbornness, Gregor's father refused to take his uniform off even at home; while his nightgown hung unused on its peg Gregor's father would slumber where he was, fully dressed, as if always ready to serve and expecting to hear the voice of his superior even here.
The uniform had not been new to start with, but as a result of this it slowly became even shabbier despite the efforts of Gregor's mother and sister to look after it. Gregor would often spend the whole evening looking at all the stains on this coat, with its gold buttons always kept polished and shiny, while the old man in it would sleep, highly uncomfortable but peaceful.
As soon as it struck ten, Gregor's mother would speak gently to his father to wake him and try to persuade him to go to bed, as he couldn't sleep properly where he was and he really had to get his sleep if he was to be up at six to get to work.
But since he had been in work he had become more obstinate and would always insist on staying longer at the table, even though he regularly fell asleep and it was then harder than ever to persuade him to exchange the chair for his bed.
Then, however much mother and sister would importune him with little reproaches and warnings he would keep slowly shaking his head for a quarter of an hour with his eyes closed and refusing to get up.
Gregor's mother would tug at his sleeve, whisper endearments into his ear, Gregor's sister would leave her work to help her mother, but nothing would have any effect on him.
He would just sink deeper into his chair.
Only when the two women took him under the arms he would abruptly open his eyes, look at them one after the other and say: "What a life!
This is what peace I get in my old age!" And supported by the two women he would lift himself up carefully as if he were carrying the greatest load himself, let the women take him to the door, send them off and carry on by himself while Gregor's mother would throw down her needle and his sister her pen so that they could run after his father and continue being of help to him.
The household budget became even smaller; so now the maid was dismissed; an enormous, thick-boned charwoman with white hair that flapped around her head came every morning and evening to do the heaviest work; everything else was looked after by Gregor's mother on top of the large amount of sewing work she did.
Gregor even learned, listening to the evening conversation about what price they had hoped for, that several items of jewellery belonging to the family had been sold, even though both mother and sister had been very fond of wearing them at functions and celebrations.
They carried out absolutely everything that the world expects from poor people, Gregor's father brought bank employees their breakfast, his mother sacrificed herself by washing clothes for strangers, his sister ran back and forth behind her desk at the behest of the customers, but they just did not have the strength to do any more.
And the injury in Gregor's back began to hurt as much as when it was new. After they had come back from taking his father to bed Gregor's mother and sister would now leave their work where it was and sit close together, cheek to cheek; his mother would point to Gregor's room and say "Close that door, Grete", and then, when he was in the dark again, they would sit in the next room and their tears would mingle, or they would simply sit there staring dry-eyed at the table.
Sometimes he would think of taking over the family's affairs, just like before, the next time the door was opened; he had long forgotten about his boss and the chief clerk, but they would appear again in his thoughts, the salesmen and the apprentices, that stupid teaboy, two or three friends from other businesses, one of the chambermaids from a provincial hotel, a tender memory that appeared and disappeared again, a cashier from a hat shop for whom his attention had been serious but too slow, - all of them appeared to him, mixed together with strangers and others he had forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family they were all of them inaccessible, and he was glad when they disappeared.
Other times he was not at all in the mood to look after his family, he was filled with simple rage about the lack of attention he was shown, and although he could think of nothing he would have wanted, he made plans of how he could get into the pantry where he could take all the things he was entitled to, even if he was not hungry.
Gregor's sister no longer thought about how she could please him but would hurriedly push some food or other into his room with her foot before she rushed out to work in the morning and at midday, and in the evening she would sweep it away again with the broom, indifferent as to whether it had been eaten or - more often than not - had been left totally untouched.
She still cleared up the room in the evening, but now she could not have been any quicker about it.
At first, Gregor went into one of the worst of these places when his sister arrived as a reproach to her, but he could have stayed there for weeks without his sister doing anything about it; she could see the dirt as well as he could but she had simply decided to leave him to it.
At the same time she became touchy in a way that was quite new for her and which everyone in the family understood - cleaning up Gregor's room was for her and her alone.
Gregor's mother did once thoroughly clean his room, and needed to use several bucketfuls of water to do it - although that much dampness also made Gregor ill and he lay flat on the couch, bitter and immobile.
But his mother was to be punished still more for what she had done, as hardly had his sister arrived home in the evening than she noticed the change in Gregor's room and, highly aggrieved, ran back into the living room where, despite her mothers raised and imploring hands, she broke into convulsive tears. Her father, of course, was startled out of his chair and the two parents looked on astonished and helpless; then they, too, became agitated; Gregor's father, standing to the right of his mother, accused her of not leaving the cleaning of Gregor's room to his sister; from her left, Gregor's sister screamed at her that she was never to clean Gregor's room again; while his mother tried to draw his father, who was beside himself with anger, into the bedroom; his sister, quaking with tears, thumped on the table with her small fists; and Gregor hissed in anger that no-one had even thought of closing the door to save him the sight of this and all its noise.
Gregor's sister was exhausted from going out to work, and looking after Gregor as she had done before was even more work for her, but even so his mother ought certainly not to have taken her place. Gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neglected.
This elderly widow, with a robust bone structure that made her able to withstand the hardest of things in her long life, wasn't really repelled by Gregor.
Just by chance one day, rather than any real curiosity, she opened the door to Gregor's room and found herself face to face with him. He was taken totally by surprise, no-one was chasing him but he began to rush to and fro while she just stood there in amazement with her hands crossed in front of her.
From then on she never failed to open the door slightly every evening and morning and look briefly in on him.
At first she would call to him as she did so with words that she probably considered friendly, such as "come on then, you old dung-beetle!", or "look at the old dung-beetle there!"
Gregor never responded to being spoken to in that way, but just remained where he was without moving as if the door had never even been opened.
If only they had told this charwoman to clean up his room every day instead of letting her disturb him for no reason whenever she felt like it!
One day, early in the morning while a heavy rain struck the windowpanes, perhaps indicating that spring was coming, she began to speak to him in that way once again. Gregor was so resentful of it that he started to move toward her, he was slow and infirm, but it was like a kind of attack.
Instead of being afraid, the charwoman just lifted up one of the chairs from near the door and stood there with her mouth open, clearly intending not to close her mouth until the chair in her hand had been slammed down into Gregor's back. "Aren't you coming any closer, then?", she asked when Gregor turned round again, and she calmly put the chair back in the corner.
Only if he happened to find himself next to the food that had been prepared for him he might take some of it into his mouth to play with it, leave it there a few hours and then, more often than not, spit it out again.
At first he thought it was distress at the state of his room that stopped him eating, but he had soon got used to the changes made there.
The charwoman was always in a hurry, and anything she couldn't use for the time being she would just chuck in there. He, fortunately, would usually see no more than the object and the hand that held it.
The woman most likely meant to fetch the things back out again when she had time and the opportunity, or to throw everything out in one go, but what actually happened was that they were left where they landed when they had first been thrown unless Gregor made his way through the junk and moved it somewhere else. At first he moved it because, with no other room free where he could crawl about, he was forced to, but later on he came to enjoy it although moving about in that the way left him sad and tired to death and he would remain immobile for hours afterwards.
The gentlemen who rented the room would sometimes take their evening meal at home in the living room that was used by everyone, and so the door to this room was often kept closed in the evening. But Gregor found it easy to give up having the door open, he had, after all, often failed to make use of it when it was open and, without the family having noticed it, lain in his room in its darkest corner.
They sat up at the table where, formerly, Gregor had taken his meals with his father and mother, they unfolded the serviettes and picked up their knives and forks.
Gregor's mother immediately appeared in the doorway with a dish of meat and soon behind her came his sister with a dish piled high with potatoes.
It was to his satisfaction, and Gregor's mother and sister, who had been looking on anxiously, began to breathe again and smiled.
Nonetheless, Gregor's father came into the living room before he went into the kitchen, bowed once with his cap in his hand and did his round of the table.
Someone must have heard them in the kitchen, as Gregor's father called out: "Is the playing perhaps unpleasant for the gentlemen?
"Oh yes, we'd love to", called back Gregor's father as if he had been the violin player himself.
Gregor's father soon appeared with the music stand, his mother with the music and his sister with the violin.
She calmly prepared everything for her to begin playing; his parents, who had never rented a room out before and therefore showed an exaggerated courtesy towards the three gentlemen, did not even dare to sit on their own chairs; his father leant against the door with his right hand pushed in between two buttons on his uniform coat; his mother, though, was offered a seat by one of the gentlemen and sat - leaving the chair where the gentleman happened to have placed it - out of the way in a corner.
His sister began to play; father and mother paid close attention, one on each side, to the movements of her hands.
Drawn in by the playing, Gregor had dared to come forward a little and already had his head in the living room.
Before, he had taken great pride in how considerate he was but now it hardly occurred to him that he had become so thoughtless about the others.
What's more, there was now all the more reason to keep himself hidden as he was covered in the dust that lay everywhere in his room and flew up at the slightest movement; he carried threads, hairs, and remains of food about on his back and sides; he was much too indifferent to everything now to lay on his back and wipe himself on the carpet like he had used to do several times a day.
And despite this condition, he was not too shy to move forward a little onto the immaculate floor of the living room.
Gregor crawled a little further forward, keeping his head close to the ground so that he could meet her eyes if the chance came.
Was he an animal if music could captivate him so?
It seemed to him that he was being shown the way to the unknown nourishment he had been yearning for.
He was determined to make his way forward to his sister and tug at her skirt to show her she might come into his room with her violin, as no-one appreciated her playing here as much as he would.
He never wanted to let her out of his room, not while he lived, anyway; his shocking appearance should, for once, be of some use to him; he wanted to be at every door of his room at once to hiss and spit at the attackers; his sister should not be forced to stay with him, though, but stay of her own free will; she would sit beside him on the couch with her ear bent down to him while he told her how he had always intended to send her to the conservatory, how he would have told everyone about it last Christmas - had Christmas really come and gone already? - if this misfortune hadn't got in the way, and refuse to let anyone dissuade him from it.
On hearing all this, his sister would break out in tears of emotion, and Gregor would climb up to her shoulder and kiss her neck, which, since she had been going out to work, she had kept free without any necklace or collar.
"Mr. Samsa!", shouted the middle gentleman to Gregor's father, pointing, without wasting any more words, with his forefinger at Gregor as he slowly moved forward.
The violin went silent, the middle of the three gentlemen first smiled at his two friends, shaking his head, and then looked back at Gregor.
His father seemed to think it more important to calm the three gentlemen before driving Gregor out, even though they were not at all upset and seemed to think Gregor was more entertaining than the violin playing had been.
He rushed up to them with his arms spread out and attempted to drive them back into their room at the same time as trying to block their view of Gregor with his body.
Now they did become a little annoyed, and it was not clear whether it was his father's behaviour that annoyed them or the dawning realisation that they had had a neighbour like Gregor in the next room without knowing it.
They asked Gregor's father for explanations, raised their arms like he had, tugged excitedly at their beards and moved back towards their room only very slowly.
Meanwhile Gregor's sister had overcome the despair she had fallen into when her playing was suddenly interrupted. She had let her hands drop and let violin and bow hang limply for a while but continued to look at the music as if still playing, but then she suddenly pulled herself together, lay the instrument on her mother's lap who still sat laboriously struggling for breath where she was, and ran into the next room which, under pressure from her father, the three gentlemen were more quickly moving toward.
Under his sister's experienced hand, the pillows and covers on the beds flew up and were put into order and she had already finished making the beds and slipped out again before the three gentlemen had reached the room.
Gregor's father seemed so obsessed with what he was doing that he forgot all the respect he owed to his tenants.
He urged them and pressed them until, when he was already at the door of the room, the middle of the three gentlemen shouted like thunder and stamped his foot and thereby brought Gregor's father to a halt. "I declare here and now", he said, raising his hand and glancing at Gregor's mother and sister to gain their attention too, "that with regard to the repugnant conditions that prevail in this flat and with this family" - here he looked briefly but decisively at the floor - "I give immediate notice on my room.
And indeed, his two friends joined in with the words: "And we also give immediate notice."
With that, he took hold of the door handle and slammed the door.
Gregor's father staggered back to his seat, feeling his way with his hands, and fell into it; it looked as if he was stretching himself out for his usual evening nap but from the uncontrolled way his head kept nodding it could be seen that he was not sleeping at all.
His disappointment at the failure of his plan, and perhaps also because he was weak from hunger, made it impossible for him to move.
He was sure that everyone would turn on him any moment, and he waited.
He was not even startled out of this state when the violin on his mother's lap fell from her trembling fingers and landed loudly on the floor.
"Father, Mother", said his sister, hitting the table with her hand as introduction, "we can't carry on like this.
"She's absolutely right", said Gregor's father to himself.
His mother, who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a deranged expression in her eyes.
Gregor's sister rushed to his mother and put her hand on her forehead.
He sat upright, played with his uniform cap between the plates left by the three gentlemen after their meal, and occasionally looked down at Gregor as he lay there immobile. "We have to try and get rid of it", said Gregor's sister, now speaking only to her father, as her mother was too occupied with coughing to listen, "it'll be the death of both of you, I can see it coming.
And she broke out so heavily in tears that they flowed down the face of her mother, and she wiped them away with mechanical hand movements. "My child", said her father with sympathy and obvious understanding, "what are we to do?"
His sister just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the helplessness and tears that had taken hold of her, displacing her earlier certainty.
"If he could just understand us", said his father almost as a question; his sister shook her hand vigorously through her tears as a sign that of that there was no question.
"If he could just understand us", repeated Gregor's father, closing his eyes in acceptance of his sister's certainty that that was quite impossible, "then perhaps we could come to some kind of arrangement with him.
"It's got to go", shouted his sister, "that's the only way, Father.
If it were Gregor he would have seen long ago that it's not possible for human beings to live with an animal like that and he would have gone of his own free will.
In her alarm, which was totally beyond Gregor's comprehension, his sister even abandoned his mother as she pushed herself vigorously out of her chair as if more willing to sacrifice her own mother than stay anywhere near Gregor. She rushed over to behind her father, who had become excited merely because she was and stood up half raising his hands in front of Gregor's sister as if to protect her.
But Gregor had had no intention of frightening anyone, least of all his sister.
All he had done was begin to turn round so that he could go back into his room, although that was in itself quite startling as his pain-wracked condition meant that turning round required a great deal of effort and he was using his head to help himself do it, repeatedly raising it and striking it against the floor.
They seemed to have realised his good intention and had only been alarmed briefly.
His mother lay in her chair with her legs stretched out and pressed against each other, her eyes nearly closed with exhaustion; his sister sat next to his father with her arms around his neck.
As soon as he had finally finished turning round he began to move straight ahead.
He was amazed at the great distance that separated him from his room, and could not understand how he had covered that distance in his weak state a little while before and almost without noticing it.
He concentrated on crawling as fast as he could and hardly noticed that there was not a word, not any cry, from his family to distract him.
He did not turn his head until he had reached the doorway. He did not turn it all the way round as he felt his neck becoming stiff, but it was nonetheless enough to see that nothing behind him had changed, only his sister had stood up.
With his last glance he saw that his mother had now fallen completely asleep.
He was hardly inside his room before the door was hurriedly shut, bolted and locked.
The sudden noise behind Gregor so startled him that his little legs collapsed under him.
It was his sister who had been in so much of a rush.
She had been standing there waiting and sprung forward lightly, Gregor had not heard her coming at all, and as she turned the key in the lock she said loudly to her parents "At last!".
"What now, then?", Gregor asked himself as he looked round in the darkness.
He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move at all.
It is true that his entire body was aching, but the pain seemed to be slowly getting weaker and weaker and would finally disappear altogether.
He could already hardly feel the decayed apple in his back or the inflamed area around it, which was entirely covered in white dust.
He thought back of his family with emotion and love.
If it was possible, he felt that he must go away even more strongly than his sister.
He remained in this state of empty and peaceful rumination until he heard the clock tower strike three in the morning.
Then, without his willing it, his head sank down completely, and his last breath flowed weakly from his nostrils.
When the cleaner came in early in the morning - they'd often asked her not to keep slamming the doors but with her strength and in her hurry she still did, so that everyone in the flat knew when she'd arrived and from then on it was impossible to sleep in peace - she made her usual brief look in on Gregor and at first found nothing special.
She thought he was laying there so still on purpose, playing the martyr; she attributed all possible understanding to him.
She happened to be holding the long broom in her hand, so she tried to tickle Gregor with it from the doorway.
When she had no success with that she tried to make a nuisance of herself and poked at him a little, and only when she found she could shove him across the floor with no resistance at all did she start to pay attention.
She soon realised what had really happened, opened her eyes wide, whistled to herself, but did not waste time to yank open the bedroom doors and shout loudly into the darkness of the bedrooms: "Come and 'ave a look at this, it's dead, just lying there, stone dead!"
Mr. and Mrs. Samsa sat upright there in their marriage bed and had to make an effort to get over the shock caused by the cleaner before they could grasp what she was saying.
But then, each from his own side, they hurried out of bed. Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his shoulders, Mrs. Samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is how they went into Gregor's room.
On the way they opened the door to the living room where Grete had been sleeping since the three gentlemen had moved in; she was fully dressed as if she had never been asleep, and the paleness of her face seemed to confirm this.
"Dead?", asked Mrs. Samsa, looking at the charwoman enquiringly, even though she could have checked for herself and could have known it even without checking.
"That's what I said", replied the cleaner, and to prove it she gave Gregor's body another shove with the broom, sending it sideways across the floor.
Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if she wanted to hold back the broom, but did not complete it.
"Now then", said Mr. Samsa, "let's give thanks to God for that". He crossed himself, and the three women followed his example.
Grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said:
"Just look how thin he was.
Gregor's body was indeed completely dried up and flat, they had not seen it until then, but now he was not lifted up on his little legs, nor did he do anything to make them look away.
"Grete, come with us in here for a little while", said Mrs. Samsa with a pained smile, and Grete followed her parents into the bedroom but not without looking back at the body.
"Where is our breakfast?", the middle gentleman asked the cleaner irritably. She just put her finger on her lips and made a quick and silent sign to the men that they might like to come into Gregor's room.
Then the door of the bedroom opened and Mr. Samsa appeared in his uniform with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other.
All of them had been crying a little; Grete now and then pressed her face against her father's arm.
"What do you mean?", asked the middle of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smiled sweetly.
"I mean just what I said", answered Mr. Samsa, and, with his two companions, went in a straight line towards the man.
At first, he stood there still, looking at the ground as if the contents of his head were rearranging themselves into new positions.
"Alright, we'll go then", he said, and looked up at Mr. Samsa as if he had been suddenly overcome with humility and wanted permission again from Mr. Samsa for his decision.
Mr. Samsa merely opened his eyes wide and briefly nodded to him several times.
At that, and without delay, the man actually did take long strides into the front hallway; his two friends had stopped rubbing their hands some time before and had been listening to what was being said.
Mr. Samsa and the two women followed them out onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust the men's intentions and as they leaned over the landing they saw how the three gentlemen made slow but steady progress down the many steps. As they turned the corner on each floor they disappeared and would reappear a few moments later; the further down they went, the more that the Samsa family lost interest in them; when a butcher's boy, proud of posture with his tray on his head, passed them on his way up and came nearer than they were, Mr. Samsa and the women came away from the landing and went, as if relieved, back into the flat.
So they sat at the table and wrote three letters of excusal, Mr. Samsa to his employers, Mrs. Samsa to her contractor and Grete to her principal.
The cleaner came in while they were writing to tell them she was going, she'd finished her work for that morning.
The charwoman stood in the doorway with a smile on her face as if she had some tremendous good news to report, but would only do it if she was clearly asked to.
The almost vertical little ostrich feather on her hat, which had been a source of irritation to Mr. Samsa all the time she had been working for them, swayed gently in all directions.
"Yes", she answered, and broke into a friendly laugh that made her unable to speak straight away, "well then, that thing in there, you needn't worry about how you're going to get rid of it.
Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down over their letters as if intent on continuing with what they were writing; Mr. Samsa saw that the cleaner wanted to start describing everything in detail but, with outstretched hand, he made it quite clear that she was not to.
So, as she was prevented from telling them all about it, she suddenly remembered what a hurry she was in and, clearly peeved, called out "Cheerio then, everyone", turned round sharply and left, slamming the door terribly as she went.
"Tonight she gets sacked", said Mr. Samsa, but he received no reply from either his wife or his daughter as the charwoman seemed to have destroyed the peace they had only just gained.
Mr. Samsa twisted round in his chair to look at them and sat there watching for a while.
Then he called out: "Come here, then.
The two women immediately did as he said, hurrying over to him where they kissed him and hugged him and then they quickly finished their letters.
All the time, Grete was becoming livelier. With all the worry they had been having of late her cheeks had become pale, but, while they were talking, Mr. and Mrs. Samsa were struck, almost simultaneously, with the thought of how their daughter was blossoming into a well built and beautiful young lady.
They became quieter. Just from each other's glance and almost without knowing it they agreed that it would soon be time to find a good man for her.
And, as if in confirmation of their new dreams and good intentions, as soon as they reached their destination Grete was the first to get up and stretch out her young body.
I say at once there are fewer difficulties in holding hereditary states, and those long accustomed to the family of their prince, than new ones; for it is sufficient only not to transgress the customs of his ancestors, and to deal prudently with circumstances as they arise, for a prince of average powers to maintain himself in his state, unless he be deprived of it by some extraordinary and excessive force; and if he should be so deprived of it, whenever anything sinister happens to the usurper, he will regain it.
We have in Italy, for example, the Duke of Ferrara, who could not have withstood the attacks of the Venetians in '84, nor those of Pope Julius in '10, unless he had been long established in his dominions.
For the hereditary prince has less cause and less necessity to offend; hence it happens that he will be more loved; and unless extraordinary vices cause him to be hated, it is reasonable to expect that his subjects will be naturally well disposed towards him; and in the antiquity and duration of his rule the memories and motives that make for change are lost, for one change always leaves the toothing for another.
This follows also on another natural and common necessity, which always causes a new prince to burden those who have submitted to him with his soldiery and with infinite other hardships which he must put upon his new acquisition.
Thus to cause France to lose Milan the first time it was enough for the Duke Lodovico to raise insurrections on the borders; but to cause him to lose it a second time it was necessary to bring the whole world against him, and that his armies should be defeated and driven out of Italy; which followed from the causes above mentioned.
The general reasons for the first have been discussed; it remains to name those for the second, and to see what resources he had, and what any one in his situation would have had for maintaining himself more securely in his acquisition than did the King of France.
He who has annexed them, if he wishes to hold them, has only to bear in mind two considerations: the one, that the family of their former lord is extinguished; the other, that neither their laws nor their taxes are altered, so that in a very short time they will become entirely one body with the old principality.
But when states are acquired in a country differing in language, customs, or laws, there are difficulties, and good fortune and great energy are needed to hold them, and one of the greatest and most real helps would be that he who has acquired them should go and reside there. This would make his position more secure and durable, as it has made that of the Turk in Greece, who, notwithstanding all the other measures taken by him for holding that state, if he had not settled there, would not have been able to keep it.
A prince does not spend much on colonies, for with little or no expense he can send them out and keep them there, and he offends a minority only of the citizens from whom he takes lands and houses to give them to the new inhabitants; and those whom he offends, remaining poor and scattered, are never able to injure him; whilst the rest being uninjured are easily kept quiet, and at the same time are anxious not to err for fear it should happen to them as it has to those who have been despoiled.
Upon this, one has to remark that men ought either to be well treated or crushed, because they can avenge themselves of lighter injuries, of more serious ones they cannot; therefore the injury that is to be done to a man ought to be of such a kind that one does not stand in fear of revenge.
Again, the prince who holds a country differing in the above respects ought to make himself the head and defender of his less powerful neighbours, and to weaken the more powerful amongst them, taking care that no foreigner as powerful as himself shall, by any accident, get a footing there; for it will always happen that such a one will be introduced by those who are discontented, either through excess of ambition or through fear, as one has seen already.
So that in respect to those subject states he has not to take any trouble to gain them over to himself, for the whole of them quickly rally to the state which he has acquired there.
He has only to take care that they do not get hold of too much power and too much authority, and then with his own forces, and with their goodwill, he can easily keep down the more powerful of them, so as to remain entirely master in the country.
And he who does not properly manage this business will soon lose what he has acquired, and whilst he does hold it he will have endless difficulties and troubles.
This it happens in affairs of state, for when the evils that arise have been foreseen (which it is only given to a wise man to see), they can be quickly redressed, but when, through not having been foreseen, they have been permitted to grow in a way that every one can see them, there is no longer a remedy.
But let us turn to France and inquire whether she has done any of the things mentioned. I will speak of Louis (and not of Charles) as the one whose conduct is the better to be observed, he having held possession of Italy for the longest period; and you will see that he has done the opposite to those things which ought to be done to retain a state composed of divers elements.
King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of the Venetians, who desired to obtain half the state of Lombardy by his intervention.
I will not blame the course taken by the king, because, wishing to get a foothold in Italy, and having no friends thereseeing rather that every door was shut to him owing to the conduct of Charleshe was forced to accept those friendships which he could get, and he would have succeeded very quickly in his design if in other matters he had not made some mistakes.
The king, however, having acquired Lombardy, regained at once the authority which Charles had lost: Genoa yielded; the Florentines became his friends; the Marquess of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, the Bentivogli, my lady of Forli, the Lords of Faenza, of Pesaro, of Rimini, of Camerino, of Piombino, the Lucchese, the Pisans, the Sieneseeverybody made advances to him to become his friend.
Let any one now consider with what little difficulty the king could have maintained his position in Italy had he observed the rules above laid down, and kept all his friends secure and protected; for although they were numerous they were both weak and timid, some afraid of the Church, some of the Venetians, and thus they would always have been forced to stand in with him, and by their means he could easily have made himself secure against those who remained powerful.
But he was no sooner in Milan than he did the contrary by assisting Pope Alexander to occupy the Romagna.
It never occurred to him that by this action he was weakening himself, depriving himself of friends and of those who had thrown themselves into his lap, whilst he aggrandized the Church by adding much temporal power to the spiritual, thus giving it greater authority.
And having committed this prime error, he was obliged to follow it up, so much so that, to put an end to the ambition of Alexander, and to prevent his becoming the master of Tuscany, he was himself forced to come into Italy.
And as if it were not enough to have aggrandized the Church, and deprived himself of friends, he, wishing to have the kingdom of Naples, divides it with the King of Spain, and where he was the prime arbiter in Italy he takes an associate, so that the ambitious of that country and the malcontents of his own should have somewhere to shelter; and whereas he could have left in the kingdom his own pensioner as king, he drove him out, to put one there who was able to drive him, Louis, out in turn.
Therefore, if France could have attacked Naples with her own forces she ought to have done so; if she could not, then she ought not to have divided it.
And if the partition which she made with the Venetians in Lombardy was justified by the excuse that by it she got a foothold in Italy, this other partition merited blame, for it had not the excuse of that necessity.
Therefore Louis made these five errors: he destroyed the minor powers, he increased the strength of one of the greater powers in Italy, he brought in a foreign power, he did not settle in the country, he did not send colonies.
Which errors, had he lived, were not enough to injure him had he not made a sixth by taking away their dominions from the Venetians; because, had he not aggrandized the Church, nor brought Spain into Italy, it would have been very reasonable and necessary to humble them; but having first taken these steps, he ought never to have consented to their ruin, for they, being powerful, would always have kept off others from designs on Lombardy, to which the Venetians would never have consented except to become masters themselves there; also because the others would not wish to take Lombardy from France in order to give it to the Venetians, and to run counter to both they would not have had the courage.
And if another should allege the pledge which the king had given to the Pope that he would assist him in the enterprise, in exchange for the dissolution of his marriage and for the cap to Rouen, to that I reply what I shall write later on concerning the faith of princes, and how it ought to be kept.
And on these matters I spoke at Nantes with Rouen, when Valentino, as Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander, was usually called, occupied the Romagna, and on Cardinal Rouen observing to me that the Italians did not understand war, I replied to him that the French did not understand statecraft, meaning that otherwise they would not have allowed the Church to reach such greatness. And in fact is has been seen that the greatness of the Church and of Spain in Italy has been caused by France, and her ruin may be attributed to them.
From this a general rule is drawn which never or rarely fails: that he who is the cause of another becoming powerful is ruined; because that predominancy has been brought about either by astuteness or else by force, and both are distrusted by him who has been raised to power.
I answer that the principalities of which one has record are found to be governed in two different ways; either by a prince, with a body of servants, who assist him to govern the kingdom as ministers by his favour and permission; or by a prince and barons, who hold that dignity by antiquity of blood and not by the grace of the prince.
Those states that are governed by a prince and his servants hold their prince in more consideration, because in all the country there is no one who is recognized as superior to him, and if they yield obedience to another they do it as to a minister and official, and they do not bear him any particular affection.
The entire monarchy of the Turk is governed by one lord, the others are his servants; and, dividing his kingdom into sanjaks, he sends there different administrators, and shifts and changes them as he chooses.
But the King of France is placed in the midst of an ancient body of lords, acknowledged by their own subjects, and beloved by them; they have their own prerogatives, nor can the king take these away except at his peril.
Therefore, he who considers both of these states will recognize great difficulties in seizing the state of the Turk, but, once it is conquered, great ease in holding it.
The causes of the difficulties in seizing the kingdom of the Turk are that the usurper cannot be called in by the princes of the kingdom, nor can he hope to be assisted in his designs by the revolt of those whom the lord has around him.
This arises from the reasons given above; for his ministers, being all slaves and bondmen, can only be corrupted with great difficulty, and one can expect little advantage from them when they have been corrupted, as they cannot carry the people with them, for the reasons assigned.
Hence, he who attacks the Turk must bear in mind that he will find him united, and he will have to rely more on his own strength than on the revolt of others; but, if once the Turk has been conquered, and routed in the field in such a way that he cannot replace his armies, there is nothing to fear but the family of this prince, and, this being exterminated, there remains no one to fear, the others having no credit with the people; and as the conqueror did not rely on them before his victory, so he ought not to fear them after it.
And if his successors had been united they would have enjoyed it securely and at their ease, for there were no tumults raised in the kingdom except those they provoked themselves.
And when fighting afterwards amongst themselves, each one was able to attach to himself his own parts of the country, according to the authority he had assumed there; and the family of the former lord being exterminated, none other than the Romans were acknowledged.
Because such a government, being created by the prince, knows that it cannot stand without his friendship and interest, and does it utmost to support him; and therefore he who would keep a city accustomed to freedom will hold it more easily by the means of its own citizens than in any other way.
And he who becomes master of a city accustomed to freedom and does not destroy it, may expect to be destroyed by it, for in rebellion it has always the watchword of liberty and its ancient privileges as a rallying point, which neither time nor benefits will ever cause it to forget.
And whatever you may do or provide against, they never forget that name or their privileges unless they are disunited or dispersed, but at every chance they immediately rally to them, as Pisa after the hundred years she had been held in bondage by the Florentines.
But when cities or countries are accustomed to live under a prince, and his family is exterminated, they, being on the one hand accustomed to obey and on the other hand not having the old prince, cannot agree in making one from amongst themselves, and they do not know how to govern themselves.
A wise man ought always to follow the paths beaten by great men, and to imitate those who have been supreme, so that if his ability does not equal theirs, at least it will savour of it. Let him act like the clever archers who, designing to hit the mark which yet appears too far distant, and knowing the limits to which the strength of their bow attains, take aim much higher than the mark, not to reach by their strength or arrow to so great a height, but to be able with the aid of so high an aim to hit the mark they wish to reach.
Nevertheless, he who has relied least on fortune is established the strongest.
And although one may not discuss Moses, he having been a mere executor of the will of God, yet he ought to be admired, if only for that favour which made him worthy to speak with God.
But in considering Cyrus and others who have acquired or founded kingdoms, all will be found admirable; and if their particular deeds and conduct shall be considered, they will not be found inferior to those of Moses, although he had so great a preceptor.
It was necessary, therefore, to Moses that he should find the people of Israel in Egypt enslaved and oppressed by the Egyptians, in order that they should be disposed to follow him so as to be delivered out of bondage.
It was necessary that Romulus should not remain in Alba, and that he should be abandoned at his birth, in order that he should become King of Rome and founder of the fatherland.
Theseus could not have shown his ability had he not found the Athenians dispersed.
If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus had been unarmed they could not have enforced their constitutions for longas happened in our time to Fra Girolamo Savonarola, who was ruined with his new order of things immediately the multitude believed in him no longer, and he had no means of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the unbelievers to believe.
This man rose from a private station to be Prince of Syracuse, nor did he, either, owe anything to fortune but opportunity; for the Syracusans, being oppressed, chose him for their captain, afterwards he was rewarded by being made their prince.
He was of so great ability, even as a private citizen, that one who writes of him says he wanted nothing but a kingdom to be a king.
This man abolished the old soldiery, organized the new, gave up old alliances, made new ones; and as he had his own soldiers and allies, on such foundations he was able to build any edifice: thus, whilst he had endured much trouble in acquiring, he had but little in keeping.
Such are those to whom some state is given either for money or by the favour of him who bestows it; as happened to many in Greece, in the cities of Ionia and of the Hellespont, where princes were made by Darius, in order that they might hold the cities both for his security and his glory; as also were those emperors who, by the corruption of the soldiers, from being citizens came to empire.
Francesco, by proper means and with great ability, from being a private person rose to be Duke of Milan, and that which he had acquired with a thousand anxieties he kept with little trouble.
On the other hand, Cesare Borgia, called by the people Duke Valentino, acquired his state during the ascendancy of his father, and on its decline he lost it, notwithstanding that he had taken every measure and done all that ought to be done by a wise and able man to fix firmly his roots in the states which the arms and fortunes of others had bestowed on him.
Because, as is stated above, he who has not first laid his foundations may be able with great ability to lay them afterwards, but they will be laid with trouble to the architect and danger to the building.
If, therefore, all the steps taken by the duke be considered, it will be seen that he laid solid foundations for his future power, and I do not consider it superfluous to discuss them, because I do not know what better precepts to give a new prince than the example of his actions; and if his dispositions were of no avail, that was not his fault, but the extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune.
Alexander the Sixth, in wishing to aggrandize the duke, his son, had many immediate and prospective difficulties.
Firstly, he did not see his way to make him master of any state that was not a state of the Church; and if he was willing to rob the Church he knew that the Duke of Milan and the Venetians would not consent, because Faenza and Rimini were already under the protection of the Venetians.
Besides this, he saw the arms of Italy, especially those by which he might have been assisted, in hands that would fear the aggrandizement of the Pope, namely, the Orsini and the Colonnesi and their following.
This was easy for him to do, because he found the Venetians, moved by other reasons, inclined to bring back the French into Italy; he would not only not oppose this, but he would render it more easy by dissolving the former marriage of King Louis.
The duke, therefore, having acquired the Romagna and beaten the Colonnesi, while wishing to hold that and to advance further, was hindered by two things: the one, his forces did not appear loyal to him, the other, the goodwill of France: that is to say, he feared that the forces of the Orsini, which he was using, would not stand to him, that not only might they hinder him from winning more, but might themselves seize what he had won, and that the king might also do the same.
Of the Orsini he had a warning when, after taking Faenza and attacking Bologna, he saw them go very unwillingly to that attack. And as to the king, he learned his mind when he himself, after taking the Duchy of Urbino, attacked Tuscany, and the king made him desist from that undertaking; hence the duke decided to depend no more upon the arms and the luck of others.
For the first thing he weakened the Orsini and Colonnesi parties in Rome, by gaining to himself all their adherents who were gentlemen, making them his gentlemen, giving them good pay, and, according to their rank, honouring them with office and command in such a way that in a few months all attachment to the factions was destroyed and turned entirely to the duke.
After this he awaited an opportunity to crush the Orsini, having scattered the adherents of the Colonna house.
This came to him soon and he used it well; for the Orsini, perceiving at length that the aggrandizement of the duke and the Church was ruin to them, called a meeting of the Magione in Perugia.
From this sprung the rebellion at Urbino and the tumults in the Romagna, with endless dangers to the duke, all of which he overcame with the help of the French.
Having restored his authority, not to leave it at risk by trusting either to the French or other outside forces, he had recourse to his wiles, and he knew so well how to conceal his mind that, by the mediation of Signor Pagolowhom the duke did not fail to secure with all kinds of attention, giving him money, apparel, and horsesthe Orsini were reconciled, so that their simplicity brought them into his power at Sinigalia.
Having exterminated the leaders, and turned their partisans into his friends, the duke laid sufficiently good foundations to his power, having all the Romagna and the Duchy of Urbino; and the people now beginning to appreciate their prosperity, he gained them all over to himself.
When the duke occupied the Romagna he found it under the rule of weak masters, who rather plundered their subjects than ruled them, and gave them more cause for disunion than for union, so that the country was full of robbery, quarrels, and every kind of violence; and so, wishing to bring back peace and obedience to authority, he considered it necessary to give it a good governor.
Thereupon he promoted Messer Ramiro d'Orco, a swift and cruel man, to whom he gave the fullest power.
This man in a short time restored peace and unity with the greatest success.
Afterwards the duke considered that it was not advisable to confer such excessive authority, for he had no doubt but that he would become odious, so he set up a court of judgment in the country, under a most excellent president, wherein all cities had their advocates.
And because he knew that the past severity had caused some hatred against himself, so, to clear himself in the minds of the people, and gain them entirely to himself, he desired to show that, if any cruelty had been practised, it had not originated with him, but in the natural sternness of the minister.
Under this pretence he took Ramiro, and one morning caused him to be executed and left on the piazza at Cesena with the block and a bloody knife at his side.
But let us return whence we started. I say that the duke, finding himself now sufficiently powerful and partly secured from immediate dangers by having armed himself in his own way, and having in a great measure crushed those forces in his vicinity that could injure him if he wished to proceed with his conquest, had next to consider France, for he knew that the king, who too late was aware of his mistake, would not support him.
And from this time he began to seek new alliances and to temporize with France in the expedition which she was making towards the kingdom of Naples against the Spaniards who were besieging Gaeta.
It was his intention to secure himself against them, and this he would have quickly accomplished had Alexander lived.
Such was his line of action as to present affairs.
But as to the future he had to fear, in the first place, that a new successor to the Church might not be friendly to him and might seek to take from him that which Alexander had given him, so he decided to act in four ways. Firstly, by exterminating the families of those lords whom he had despoiled, so as to take away that pretext from the Pope.
Fourthly, by acquiring so much power before the Pope should die that he could by his own measures resist the first shock.
Of these four things, at the death of Alexander, he had accomplished three.
For he had killed as many of the dispossessed lords as he could lay hands on, and few had escaped; he had won over the Roman gentlemen, and he had the most numerous party in the college.
And as to any fresh acquisition, he intended to become master of Tuscany, for he already possessed Perugia and Piombino, and Pisa was under his protection.
And as he had no longer to study France (for the French were already driven out of the kingdom of Naples by the Spaniards, and in this way both were compelled to buy his goodwill), he pounced down upon Pisa. After this, Lucca and Siena yielded at once, partly through hatred and partly through fear of the Florentines; and the Florentines would have had no remedy had he continued to prosper, as he was prospering the year that Alexander died, for he had acquired so much power and reputation that he would have stood by himself, and no longer have depended on the luck and the forces of others, but solely on his own power and ability.
But Alexander died five years after he had first drawn the sword.
Yet there were in the duke such boldness and ability, and he knew so well how men are to be won or lost, and so firm were the foundations which in so short a time he had laid, that if he had not had those armies on his back, or if he had been in good health, he would have overcome all difficulties.
And it is seen that his foundations were good, for the Romagna awaited him for more than a month. In Rome, although but half alive, he remained secure; and whilst the Baglioni, the Vitelli, and the Orsini might come to Rome, they could not effect anything against him.
If he could not have made Pope him whom he wished, at least the one whom he did not wish would not have been elected.
But if he had been in sound health at the death of Alexander, everything would have been different to him.
On the day that Julius the Second was elected, he told me that he had thought of everything that might occur at the death of his father, and had provided a remedy for all, except that he had never anticipated that, when the death did happen, he himself would be on the point to die.
Because he, having a lofty spirit and far-reaching aims, could not have regulated his conduct otherwise, and only the shortness of the life of Alexander and his own sickness frustrated his designs.
Therefore, he who considers it necessary to secure himself in his new principality, to win friends, to overcome either by force or fraud, to make himself beloved and feared by the people, to be followed and revered by the soldiers, to exterminate those who have power or reason to hurt him, to change the old order of things for new, to be severe and gracious, magnanimous and liberal, to destroy a disloyal soldiery and to create new, to maintain friendship with kings and princes in such a way that they must help him with zeal and offend with caution, cannot find a more lively example than the actions of this man.
Only can he be blamed for the election of Julius the Second, in whom he made a bad choice, because, as is said, not being able to elect a Pope to his own mind, he could have hindered any other from being elected Pope; and he ought never to have consented to the election of any cardinal whom he had injured or who had cause to fear him if they became pontiffs.
Those whom he had injured, amongst others, were San Pietro ad Vincula, Colonna, San Giorgio, and Ascanio.
The rest, in becoming Pope, had to fear him, Rouen and the Spaniards excepted; the latter from their relationship and obligations, the former from his influence, the kingdom of France having relations with him.
Therefore, above everything, the duke ought to have created a Spaniard Pope, and, failing him, he ought to have consented to Rouen and not San Pietro ad Vincula.
Therefore, the duke erred in his choice, and it was the cause of his ultimate ruin.
These methods are when, either by some wicked or nefarious ways, one ascends to the principality, or when by the favour of his fellow-citizens a private person becomes the prince of his country.
This man, the son of a potter, through all the changes in his fortunes always led an infamous life.
Nevertheless, he accompanied his infamies with so much ability of mind and body that, having devoted himself to the military profession, he rose through its ranks to be Praetor of Syracuse.
Being established in that position, and having deliberately resolved to make himself prince and to seize by violence, without obligation to others, that which had been conceded to him by assent, he came to an understanding for this purpose with Amilcar, the Carthaginian, who, with his army, was fighting in Sicily.
One morning he assembled the people and the senate of Syracuse, as if he had to discuss with them things relating to the Republic, and at a given signal the soldiers killed all the senators and the richest of the people; these dead, he seized and held the princedom of that city without any civil commotion.
And although he was twice routed by the Carthaginians, and ultimately besieged, yet not only was he able to defend his city, but leaving part of his men for its defence, with the others he attacked Africa, and in a short time raised the siege of Syracuse. The Carthaginians, reduced to extreme necessity, were compelled to come to terms with Agathocles, and, leaving Sicily to him, had to be content with the possession of Africa.
Therefore, he who considers the actions and the genius of this man will see nothing, or little, which can be attributed to fortune, inasmuch as he attained pre-eminence, as is shown above, not by the favour of any one, but step by step in the military profession, which steps were gained with a thousand troubles and perils, and were afterwards boldly held by him with many hazardous dangers.
Still, if the courage of Agathocles in entering into and extricating himself from dangers be considered, together with his greatness of mind in enduring and overcoming hardships, it cannot be seen why he should be esteemed less than the most notable captain.
Nevertheless, his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with infinite wickedness do not permit him to be celebrated among the most excellent men.
What he achieved cannot be attributed either to fortune or genius.
In our times, during the rule of Alexander the Sixth, Oliverotto da Fermo, having been left an orphan many years before, was brought up by his maternal uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, and in the early days of his youth sent to fight under Pagolo Vitelli, that, being trained under his discipline, he might attain some high position in the military profession.
After Pagolo died, he fought under his brother Vitellozzo, and in a very short time, being endowed with wit and a vigorous body and mind, he became the first man in his profession.
But it appearing a paltry thing to serve under others, he resolved, with the aid of some citizens of Fermo, to whom the slavery of their country was dearer than its liberty, and with the help of the Vitelleschi, to seize Fermo. So he wrote to Giovanni Fogliani that, having been away from home for many years, he wished to visit him and his city, and in some measure to look upon his patrimony; and although he had not laboured to acquire anything except honour, yet, in order that the citizens should see he had not spent his time in vain, he desired to come honourably, so would be accompanied by one hundred horsemen, his friends and retainers; and he entreated Giovanni to arrange that he should be received honourably by the Fermians, all of which would be not only to his honour, but also to that of Giovanni himself, who had brought him up.
Giovanni, therefore, did not fail in any attentions due to his nephew, and he caused him to be honourably received by the Fermians, and he lodged him in his own house, where, having passed some days, and having arranged what was necessary for his wicked designs, Oliverotto gave a solemn banquet to which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and the chiefs of Fermo.
When the viands and all the other entertainments that are usual in such banquets were finished, Oliverotto artfully began certain grave discourses, speaking of the greatness of Pope Alexander and his son Cesare, and of their enterprises, to which discourse Giovanni and others answered; but he rose at once, saying that such matters ought to be discussed in a more private place, and he betook himself to a chamber, whither Giovanni and the rest of the citizens went in after him.
After these murders Oliverotto, mounted on horseback, rode up and down the town and besieged the chief magistrate in the palace, so that in fear the people were forced to obey him, and to form a government, of which he made himself the prince.
He killed all the malcontents who were able to injure him, and strengthened himself with new civil and military ordinances, in such a way that, in the year during which he held the principality, not only was he secure in the city of Fermo, but he had become formidable to all his neighbours.
And his destruction would have been as difficult as that of Agathocles if he had not allowed himself to be overreached by Cesare Borgia, who took him with the Orsini and Vitelli at Sinigalia, as was stated above. Thus one year after he had committed this parricide, he was strangled, together with Vitellozzo, whom he had made his leader in valour and wickedness.
Some may wonder how it can happen that Agathocles, and his like, after infinite treacheries and cruelties, should live for long secure in his country, and defend himself from external enemies, and never be conspired against by his own citizens; seeing that many others, by means of cruelty, have never been able even in peaceful times to hold the state, still less in the doubtful times of war.
Those who practise the first system are able, by aid of God or man, to mitigate in some degree their rule, as Agathocles did.
He who does otherwise, either from timidity or evil advice, is always compelled to keep the knife in his hand; neither can he rely on his subjects, nor can they attach themselves to him, owing to their continued and repeated wrongs.
And above all things, a prince ought to live amongst his people in such a way that no unexpected circumstances, whether of good or evil, shall make him change; because if the necessity for this comes in troubled times, you are too late for harsh measures; and mild ones will not help you, for they will be considered as forced from you, and no one will be under any obligation to you for them.
But coming to the other pointwhere a leading citizen becomes the prince of his country, not by wickedness or any intolerable violence, but by the favour of his fellow citizensthis may be called a civil principality: nor is genius or fortune altogether necessary to attain to it, but rather a happy shrewdness.
A principality is created either by the people or by the nobles, accordingly as one or other of them has the opportunity; for the nobles, seeing they cannot withstand the people, begin to cry up the reputation of one of themselves, and they make him a prince, so that under his shadow they can give vent to their ambitions.
The people, finding they cannot resist the nobles, also cry up the reputation of one of themselves, and make him a prince so as to be defended by his authority.
He who obtains sovereignty by the assistance of the nobles maintains himself with more difficulty than he who comes to it by the aid of the people, because the former finds himself with many around him who consider themselves his equals, and because of this he can neither rule nor manage them to his liking.
But he who reaches sovereignty by popular favour finds himself alone, and has none around him, or few, who are not prepared to obey him.
It is to be added also that a prince can never secure himself against a hostile people, because of their being too many, whilst from the nobles he can secure himself, as they are few in number.
The worst that a prince may expect from a hostile people is to be abandoned by them; but from hostile nobles he has not only to fear abandonment, but also that they will rise against him; for they, being in these affairs more far-seeing and astute, always come forward in time to save themselves, and to obtain favours from him whom they expect to prevail.
Further, the prince is compelled to live always with the same people, but he can do well without the same nobles, being able to make and unmake them daily, and to give or take away authority when it pleases him.
Therefore, one who becomes a prince through the favour of the people ought to keep them friendly, and this he can easily do seeing they only ask not to be oppressed by him.
But one who, in opposition to the people, becomes a prince by the favour of the nobles, ought, above everything, to seek to win the people over to himself, and this he may easily do if he takes them under his protection.
Because men, when they receive good from him of whom they were expecting evil, are bound more closely to their benefactor; thus the people quickly become more devoted to him than if he had been raised to the principality by their favours; and the prince can win their affections in many ways, but as these vary according to the circumstances one cannot give fixed rules, so I omit them; but, I repeat, it is necessary for a prince to have the people friendly, otherwise he has no security in adversity.
Nabis, Prince of the Spartans, sustained the attack of all Greece, and of a victorious Roman army, and against them he defended his country and his government; and for the overcoming of this peril it was only necessary for him to make himself secure against a few, but this would not have been sufficient had the people been hostile.
And do not let any one impugn this statement with the trite proverb that "He who builds on the people, builds on the mud," for this is true when a private citizen makes a foundation there, and persuades himself that the people will free him when he is oppressed by his enemies or by the magistrates; wherein he would find himself very often deceived, as happened to the Gracchi in Rome and to Messer Giorgio Scali in Florence.
But granted a prince who has established himself as above, who can command, and is a man of courage, undismayed in adversity, who does not fail in other qualifications, and who, by his resolution and energy, keeps the whole people encouragedsuch a one will never find himself deceived in them, and it will be shown that he has laid his foundations well.
For such a prince cannot rely upon what he observes in quiet times, when citizens have need of the state, because then every one agrees with him; they all promise, and when death is far distant they all wish to die for him; but in troubled times, when the state has need of its citizens, then he finds but few.
Therefore a wise prince ought to adopt such a course that his citizens will always in every sort and kind of circumstance have need of the state and of him, and then he will always find them faithful.
It is necessary to consider another point in examining the character of these principalities: that is, whether a prince has such power that, in case of need, he can support himself with his own resources, or whether he has always need of the assistance of others.
And whoever shall fortify his town well, and shall have managed the other concerns of his subjects in the way stated above, and to be often repeated, will never be attacked without great caution, for men are always adverse to enterprises where difficulties can be seen, and it will be seen not to be an easy thing to attack one who has his town well fortified, and is not hated by his people.
Therefore, a prince who has a strong city, and had not made himself odious, will not be attacked, or if any one should attack he will only be driven off with disgrace; again, because that the affairs of this world are so changeable, it is almost impossible to keep an army a whole year in the field without being interfered with.
Further, the enemy would naturally on his arrival at once burn and ruin the country at the time when the spirits of the people are still hot and ready for the defence; and, therefore, so much the less ought the prince to hesitate; because after a time, when spirits have cooled, the damage is already done, the ills are incurred, and there is no longer any remedy; and therefore they are so much the more ready to unite with their prince, he appearing to be under obligations to them now that their houses have been burnt and their possessions ruined in his defence.
Therefore, if everything is well considered, it will not be difficult for a wise prince to keep the minds of his citizens steadfast from first to last, when he does not fail to support and defend them.
But being upheld by powers, to which the human mind cannot reach, I shall speak no more of them, because, being exalted and maintained by God, it would be the act of a presumptuous and rash man to discuss them.
And the short life of a pope is also a cause of weakness; for in the ten years, which is the average life of a pope, he can with difficulty lower one of the factions; and if, so to speak, one people should almost destroy the Colonnesi, another would arise hostile to the Orsini, who would support their opponents, and yet would not have time to ruin the Orsini.
Alexander the Sixth arose afterwards, who of all the pontiffs that have ever been showed how a pope with both money and arms was able to prevail; and through the instrumentality of the Duke Valentino, and by reason of the entry of the French, he brought about all those things which I have discussed above in the actions of the duke.
And although his intention was not to aggrandize the Church, but the duke, nevertheless, what he did contributed to the greatness of the Church, which, after his death and the ruin of the duke, became the heir to all his labours.
Pope Julius came afterwards and found the Church strong, possessing all the Romagna, the barons of Rome reduced to impotence, and, through the chastisements of Alexander, the factions wiped out; he also found the way open to accumulate money in a manner such as had never been practised before Alexander's time.
Such things Julius not only followed, but improved upon, and he intended to gain Bologna, to ruin the Venetians, and to drive the French out of Italy. All of these enterprises prospered with him, and so much the more to his credit, inasmuch as he did everything to strengthen the Church and not any private person.
He kept also the Orsini and Colonnesi factions within the bounds in which he found them; and although there was among them some mind to make disturbance, nevertheless he held two things firm: the one, the greatness of the Church, with which he terrified them; and the other, not allowing them to have their own cardinals, who caused the disorders among them.
For these reasons his Holiness Pope Leo found the pontificate most powerful, and it is to be hoped that, if others made it great in arms, he will make it still greater and more venerated by his goodness and infinite other virtues.
We have seen above how necessary it is for a prince to have his foundations well laid, otherwise it follows of necessity he will go to ruin.
I say, therefore, that the arms with which a prince defends his state are either his own, or they are mercenaries, auxiliaries, or mixed.
Mercenaries and auxiliaries are useless and dangerous; and if one holds his state based on these arms, he will stand neither firm nor safe; for they are disunited, ambitious, and without discipline, unfaithful, valiant before friends, cowardly before enemies; they have neither the fear of God nor fidelity to men, and destruction is deferred only so long as the attack is; for in peace one is robbed by them, and in war by the enemy.
They are ready enough to be your soldiers whilst you do not make war, but if war comes they take themselves off or run from the foe; which I should have little trouble to prove, for the ruin of Italy has been caused by nothing else than by resting all her hopes for many years on mercenaries, and although they formerly made some display and appeared valiant amongst themselves, yet when the foreigners came they showed what they were.
Thus it was that Charles, King of France, was allowed to seize Italy with chalk in hand; and he who told us that our sins were the cause of it told the truth, but they were not the sins he imagined, but those which I have related.
After the death of Epaminondas, Philip of Macedon was made captain of their soldiers by the Thebans, and after victory he took away their liberty.
Duke Filippo being dead, the Milanese enlisted Francesco Sforza against the Venetians, and he, having overcome the enemy at Caravaggio, allied himself with them to crush the Milanese, his masters.
His father, Sforza, having been engaged by Queen Johanna of Naples, left her unprotected, so that she was forced to throw herself into the arms of the King of Aragon, in order to save her kingdom.
Francesco turned his ambition to Lombardy; Braccio against the Church and the kingdom of Naples.
The Florentines appointed as their captain Pagolo Vitelli, a most prudent man, who from a private position had risen to the greatest renown.
If this man had taken Pisa, nobody can deny that it would have been proper for the Florentines to keep in with him, for if he became the soldier of their enemies they had no means of resisting, and if they held to him they must obey him.
From the school of this man sprang, among others, Braccio and Sforza, who in their time were the arbiters of Italy.
After these came all the other captains who till now have directed the arms of Italy; and the end of all their valour has been, that she has been overrun by Charles, robbed by Louis, ravaged by Ferdinand, and insulted by the Switzers.
Auxiliaries, which are the other useless arm, are employed when a prince is called in with his forces to aid and defend, as was done by Pope Julius in the most recent times; for he, having, in the enterprise against Ferrara, had poor proof of his mercenaries, turned to auxiliaries, and stipulated with Ferdinand, King of Spain, for his assistance with men and arms.
And although ancient histories may be full of examples, I do not wish to leave this recent one of Pope Julius the Second, the peril of which cannot fail to be perceived; for he, wishing to get Ferrara, threw himself entirely into the hands of the foreigner.
But his good fortune brought about a third event, so that he did not reap the fruit of his rash choice; because, having his auxiliaries routed at Ravenna, and the Switzers having risen and driven out the conquerors (against all expectation, both his and others), it so came to pass that he did not become prisoner to his enemies, they having fled, nor to his auxiliaries, he having conquered by other arms than theirs.
The Emperor of Constantinople, to oppose his neighbours, sent ten thousand Turks into Greece, who, on the war being finished, were not willing to quit; this was the beginning of the servitude of Greece to the infidels.
The wise prince, therefore, has always avoided these arms and turned to his own; and has been willing rather to lose with them than to conquer with the others, not deeming that a real victory which is gained with the arms of others.
I shall never hesitate to cite Cesare Borgia and his actions.
This duke entered the Romagna with auxiliaries, taking there only French soldiers, and with them he captured Imola and Forli; but afterwards, such forces not appearing to him reliable, he turned to mercenaries, discerning less danger in them, and enlisted the Orsini and Vitelli; whom presently, on handling and finding them doubtful, unfaithful, and dangerous, he destroyed and turned to his own men.
And the difference between one and the other of these forces can easily be seen when one considers the difference there was in the reputation of the duke, when he had the French, when he had the Orsini and Vitelli, and when he relied on his own soldiers, on whose fidelity he could always count and found it ever increasing; he was never esteemed more highly than when every one saw that he was complete master of his own forces.
I was not intending to go beyond Italian and recent examples, but I am unwilling to leave out Hiero, the Syracusan, he being one of those I have named above.
This man, as I have said, made head of the army by the Syracusans, soon found out that a mercenary soldiery, constituted like our Italian condottieri, was of no use; and it appearing to him that he could neither keep them not let them go, he had them all cut to pieces, and afterwards made war with his own forces and not with aliens.
David offered himself to Saul to fight with Goliath, the Philistine champion, and, to give him courage, Saul armed him with his own weapons; which David rejected as soon as he had them on his back, saying he could make no use of them, and that he wished to meet the enemy with his sling and his knife.
Charles the Seventh, the father of King Louis the Eleventh, having by good fortune and valour liberated France from the English, recognized the necessity of being armed with forces of his own, and he established in his kingdom ordinances concerning men-at-arms and infantry.
Afterwards his son, King Louis, abolished the infantry and began to enlist the Switzers, which mistake, followed by others, is, as is now seen, a source of peril to that kingdom; because, having raised the reputation of the Switzers, he has entirely diminished the value of his own arms, for he has destroyed the infantry altogether; and his men-at-arms he has subordinated to others, for, being as they are so accustomed to fight along with Switzers, it does not appear that they can now conquer without them.
But the scanty wisdom of man, on entering into an affair which looks well at first, cannot discern the poison that is hidden in it, as I have said above of hectic fevers.
Therefore, if he who rules a principality cannot recognize evils until they are upon him, he is not truly wise; and this insight is given to few.
And the way to make ready one's own forces will be easily found if the rules suggested by me shall be reflected upon, and if one will consider how Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, and many republics and princes have armed and organized themselves, to which rules I entirely commit myself.
A prince ought to have no other aim or thought, nor select anything else for his study, than war and its rules and discipline; for this is the sole art that belongs to him who rules, and it is of such force that it not only upholds those who are born princes, but it often enables men to rise from a private station to that rank.
Because there is nothing proportionate between the armed and the unarmed; and it is not reasonable that he who is armed should yield obedience willingly to him who is unarmed, or that the unarmed man should be secure among armed servants.
And therefore a prince who does not understand the art of war, over and above the other misfortunes already mentioned, cannot be respected by his soldiers, nor can he rely on them.
He ought never, therefore, to have out of his thoughts this subject of war, and in peace he should addict himself more to its exercise than in war; this he can do in two ways, the one by action, the other by study.
As regards action, he ought above all things to keep his men well organized and drilled, to follow incessantly the chase, by which he accustoms his body to hardships, and learns something of the nature of localities, and gets to find out how the mountains rise, how the valleys open out, how the plains lie, and to understand the nature of rivers and marshes, and in all this to take the greatest care.
Firstly, he learns to know his country, and is better able to undertake its defence; afterwards, by means of the knowledge and observation of that locality, he understands with ease any other which it may be necessary for him to study hereafter; because the hills, valleys, and plains, and rivers and marshes that are, for instance, in Tuscany, have a certain resemblance to those of other countries, so that with a knowledge of the aspect of one country one can easily arrive at a knowledge of others.
And the prince that lacks this skill lacks the essential which it is desirable that a captain should possess, for it teaches him to surprise his enemy, to select quarters, to lead armies, to array the battle, to besiege towns to advantage.
Philopoemen, Prince of the Achaeans, among other praises which writers have bestowed on him, is commended because in time of peace he never had anything in his mind but the rules of war; and when he was in the country with friends, he often stopped and reasoned with them: "If the enemy should be upon that hill, and we should find ourselves here with our army, with whom would be the advantage?
And he would set forth to them, as he went, all the chances that could befall an army; he would listen to their opinion and state his, confirming it with reasons, so that by these continual discussions there could never arise, in time of war, any unexpected circumstances that he could not deal with.
And whoever reads the life of Cyrus, written by Xenophon, will recognize afterwards in the life of Scipio how that imitation was his glory, and how in chastity, affability, humanity, and liberality Scipio conformed to those things which have been written of Cyrus by Xenophon.
A wise prince ought to observe some such rules, and never in peaceful times stand idle, but increase his resources with industry in such a way that they may be available to him in adversity, so that if fortune chances it may find him prepared to resist her blows.
Hence it is necessary for a prince wishing to hold his own to know how to do wrong, and to make use of it or not according to necessity.
And again, he need not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without which the state can only be saved with difficulty, for if everything is considered carefully, it will be found that something which looks like virtue, if followed, would be his ruin; whilst something else, which looks like vice, yet followed brings him security and prosperity.
Therefore, any one wishing to maintain among men the name of liberal is obliged to avoid no attribute of magnificence; so that a prince thus inclined will consume in such acts all his property, and will be compelled in the end, if he wish to maintain the name of liberal, to unduly weigh down his people, and tax them, and do everything he can to get money.
This will soon make him odious to his subjects, and becoming poor he will be little valued by any one; thus, with his liberality, having offended many and rewarded few, he is affected by the very first trouble and imperilled by whatever may be the first danger; recognizing this himself, and wishing to draw back from it, he runs at once into the reproach of being miserly.
Therefore, a prince, not being able to exercise this virtue of liberality in such a way that it is recognized, except to his cost, if he is wise he ought not to fear the reputation of being mean, for in time he will come to be more considered than if liberal, seeing that with his economy his revenues are enough, that he can defend himself against all attacks, and is able to engage in enterprises without burdening his people; thus it comes to pass that he exercises liberality towards all from whom he does not take, who are numberless, and meanness towards those to whom he does not give, who are few.
Pope Julius the Second was assisted in reaching the papacy by a reputation for liberality, yet he did not strive afterwards to keep it up, when he made war on the King of France; and he made many wars without imposing any extraordinary tax on his subjects, for he supplied his additional expenses out of his long thriftiness.
The present King of Spain would not have undertaken or conquered in so many enterprises if he had been reputed liberal.
A prince, therefore, provided that he has not to rob his subjects, that he can defend himself, that he does not become poor and abject, that he is not forced to become rapacious, ought to hold of little account a reputation for being mean, for it is one of those vices which will enable him to govern.
In the first case this liberality is dangerous, in the second it is very necessary to be considered liberal; and Caesar was one of those who wished to become pre-eminent in Rome; but if he had survived after becoming so, and had not moderated his expenses, he would have destroyed his government.
And if any one should reply: Many have been princes, and have done great things with armies, who have been considered very liberal, I reply: Either a prince spends that which is his own or his subjects' or else that of others. In the first case he ought to be sparing, in the second he ought not to neglect any opportunity for liberality.
And to the prince who goes forth with his army, supporting it by pillage, sack, and extortion, handling that which belongs to others, this liberality is necessary, otherwise he would not be followed by soldiers.
Coming now to the other qualities mentioned above, I say that every prince ought to desire to be considered clement and not cruel. Nevertheless he ought to take care not to misuse this clemency.
Cesare Borgia was considered cruel; notwithstanding, his cruelty reconciled the Romagna, unified it, and restored it to peace and loyalty.
And if this be rightly considered, he will be seen to have been much more merciful than the Florentine people, who, to avoid a reputation for cruelty, permitted Pistoia to be destroyed.
Therefore a prince, so long as he keeps his subjects united and loyal, ought not to mind the reproach of cruelty; because with a few examples he will be more merciful than those who, through too much mercy, allow disorders to arise, from which follow murders or robberies; for these are wont to injure the whole people, whilst those executions which originate with a prince offend the individual only.
And of all princes, it is impossible for the new prince to avoid the imputation of cruelty, owing to new states being full of dangers. Hence Virgil, through the mouth of Dido, excuses the inhumanity of her reign owing to its being new, saying:
Nevertheless he ought to be slow to believe and to act, nor should he himself show fear, but proceed in a temperate manner with prudence and humanity, so that too much confidence may not make him incautious and too much distrust render him intolerable.
Nevertheless a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that, if he does not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can endure very well being feared whilst he is not hated, which will always be as long as he abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects and from their women.
But when it is necessary for him to proceed against the life of someone, he must do it on proper justification and for manifest cause, but above all things he must keep his hands off the property of others, because men more quickly forget the death of their father than the loss of their patrimony.
Besides, pretexts for taking away the property are never wanting; for he who has once begun to live by robbery will always find pretexts for seizing what belongs to others; but reasons for taking life, on the contrary, are more difficult to find and sooner lapse.
But when a prince is with his army, and has under control a multitude of soldiers, then it is quite necessary for him to disregard the reputation of cruelty, for without it he would never hold his army united or disposed to its duties.
Among the wonderful deeds of Hannibal this one is enumerated: that having led an enormous army, composed of many various races of men, to fight in foreign lands, no dissensions arose either among them or against the prince, whether in his bad or in his good fortune.
This arose from nothing else than his inhuman cruelty, which, with his boundless valour, made him revered and terrible in the sight of his soldiers, but without that cruelty, his other virtues were not sufficient to produce this effect.
And short-sighted writers admire his deeds from one point of view and from another condemn the principal cause of them.
That it is true his other virtues would not have been sufficient for him may be proved by the case of Scipio, that most excellent man, not only of his own times but within the memory of man, against whom, nevertheless, his army rebelled in Spain; this arose from nothing but his too great forbearance, which gave his soldiers more license than is consistent with military discipline.
For this he was upbraided in the Senate by Fabius Maximus, and called the corrupter of the Roman soldiery.
The Locrians were laid waste by a legate of Scipio, yet they were not avenged by him, nor was the insolence of the legate punished, owing entirely to his easy nature.
This disposition, if he had been continued in the command, would have destroyed in time the fame and glory of Scipio; but, he being under the control of the Senate, this injurious characteristic not only concealed itself, but contributed to his glory.
Returning to the question of being feared or loved, I come to the conclusion that, men loving according to their own will and fearing according to that of the prince, a wise prince should establish himself on that which is in his own control and not in that of others; he must endeavour only to avoid hatred, as is noted.
Therefore it is necessary for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast and the man.
This has been figuratively taught to princes by ancient writers, who describe how Achilles and many other princes of old were given to the Centaur Chiron to nurse, who brought them up in his discipline; which means solely that, as they had for a teacher one who was half beast and half man, so it is necessary for a prince to know how to make use of both natures, and that one without the other is not durable.
Therefore a wise lord cannot, nor ought he to, keep faith when such observance may be turned against him, and when the reasons that caused him to pledge it exist no longer.
Of this endless modern examples could be given, showing how many treaties and engagements have been made void and of no effect through the faithlessness of princes; and he who has known best how to employ the fox has succeeded best.
But it is necessary to know well how to disguise this characteristic, and to be a great pretender and dissembler; and men are so simple, and so subject to present necessities, that he who seeks to deceive will always find someone who will allow himself to be deceived.
Alexander the Sixth did nothing else but deceive men, nor ever thought of doing otherwise, and he always found victims; for there never was a man who had greater power in asserting, or who with greater oaths would affirm a thing, yet would observe it less; nevertheless his deceits always succeeded according to his wishes, because he well understood this side of mankind.
Therefore it is necessary for him to have a mind ready to turn itself accordingly as the winds and variations of fortune force it, yet, as I have said above, not to diverge from the good if he can avoid doing so, but, if compelled, then to know how to set about it.
For that reason, let a prince have the credit of conquering and holding his state, the means will always be considered honest, and he will be praised by everybody; because the vulgar are always taken by what a thing seems to be and by what comes of it; and in the world there are only the vulgar, for the few find a place there only when the many have no ground to rest on.
One prince of the present time, whom it is not well to name, never preaches anything else but peace and good faith, and to both he is most hostile, and either, if he had kept it, would have deprived him of reputation and kingdom many a time.
It makes him hated above all things, as I have said, to be rapacious, and to be a violator of the property and women of his subjects, from both of which he must abstain.
And when neither their property nor their honor is touched, the majority of men live content, and he has only to contend with the ambition of a few, whom he can curb with ease in many ways.
It makes him contemptible to be considered fickle, frivolous, effeminate, mean-spirited, irresolute, from all of which a prince should guard himself as from a rock; and he should endeavour to show in his actions greatness, courage, gravity, and fortitude; and in his private dealings with his subjects let him show that his judgments are irrevocable, and maintain himself in such reputation that no one can hope either to deceive him or to get round him.
That prince is highly esteemed who conveys this impression of himself, and he who is highly esteemed is not easily conspired against; for, provided it is well known that he is an excellent man and revered by his people, he can only be attacked with difficulty.
For this reason a prince ought to have two fears, one from within, on account of his subjects, the other from without, on account of external powers.
From the latter he is defended by being well armed and having good allies, and if he is well armed he will have good friends, and affairs will always remain quiet within when they are quiet without, unless they should have been already disturbed by conspiracy; and even should affairs outside be disturbed, if he has carried out his preparations and has lived as I have said, as long as he does not despair, he will resist every attack, as I said Nabis the Spartan did.
But concerning his subjects, when affairs outside are disturbed he has only to fear that they will conspire secretly, from which a prince can easily secure himself by avoiding being hated and despised, and by keeping the people satisfied with him, which it is most necessary for him to accomplish, as I said above at length.
And one of the most efficacious remedies that a prince can have against conspiracies is not to be hated and despised by the people, for he who conspires against a prince always expects to please them by his removal; but when the conspirator can only look forward to offending them, he will not have the courage to take such a course, for the difficulties that confront a conspirator are infinite.
And as experience shows, many have been the conspiracies, but few have been successful; because he who conspires cannot act alone, nor can he take a companion except from those whom he believes to be malcontents, and as soon as you have opened your mind to a malcontent you have given him the material with which to content himself, for by denouncing you he can look for every advantage; so that, seeing the gain from this course to be assured, and seeing the other to be doubtful and full of dangers, he must be a very rare friend, or a thoroughly obstinate enemy of the prince, to keep faith with you.
For whereas in general the conspirator has to fear before the execution of his plot, in this case he has also to fear the sequel to the crime; because on account of it he has the people for an enemy, and thus cannot hope for any escape.
Messer Annibale Bentivogli, who was prince in Bologna (grandfather of the present Annibale), having been murdered by the Canneschi, who had conspired against him, not one of his family survived but Messer Giovanni, who was in childhood: immediately after his assassination the people rose and murdered all the Canneschi.
For this reason I consider that a prince ought to reckon conspiracies of little account when his people hold him in esteem; but when it is hostile to him, and bears hatred towards him, he ought to fear everything and everybody.
Among the best ordered and governed kingdoms of our times is France, and in it are found many good institutions on which depend the liberty and security of the king; of these the first is the parliament and its authority, because he who founded the kingdom, knowing the ambition of the nobility and their boldness, considered that a bit to their mouths would be necessary to hold them in; and, on the other side, knowing the hatred of the people, founded in fear, against the nobles, he wished to protect them, yet he was not anxious for this to be the particular care of the king; therefore, to take away the reproach which he would be liable to from the nobles for favouring the people, and from the people for favouring the nobles, he set up an arbiter, who should be one who could beat down the great and favour the lesser without reproach to the king.
It seems to me sufficient to take all those emperors who succeeded to the empire from Marcus the philosopher down to Maximinus; they were Marcus and his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus and his son Antoninus Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander, and Maximinus.
From these causes it arose that Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander, being all men of modest life, lovers of justice, enemies to cruelty, humane, and benignant, came to a sad end except Marcus; he alone lived and died honoured, because he had succeeded to the throne by hereditary title, and owed nothing either to the soldiers or the people; and afterwards, being possessed of many virtues which made him respected, he always kept both orders in their places whilst he lived, and was neither hated nor despised.
And here it should be noted that hatred is acquired as much by good works as by bad ones, therefore, as I said before, a prince wishing to keep his state is very often forced to do evil; for when that body is corrupt whom you think you have need of to maintain yourselfit may be either the people or the soldiers or the noblesyou have to submit to its humours and to gratify them, and then good works will do you harm.
But let us come to Alexander, who was a man of such great goodness, that among the other praises which are accorded him is this, that in the fourteen years he held the empire no one was ever put to death by him unjudged; nevertheless, being considered effeminate and a man who allowed himself to be governed by his mother, he became despised, the army conspired against him, and murdered him.
And because the actions of this man, as a new prince, were great, I wish to show briefly that he knew well how to counterfeit the fox and the lion, which natures, as I said above, it is necessary for a prince to imitate.
Knowing the sloth of the Emperor Julian, he persuaded the army in Sclavonia, of which he was captain, that it would be right to go to Rome and avenge the death of Pertinax, who had been killed by the praetorian soldiers; and under this pretext, without appearing to aspire to the throne, he moved the army on Rome, and reached Italy before it was known that he had started.
On his arrival at Rome, the Senate, through fear, elected him emperor and killed Julian.
And as he considered it dangerous to declare himself hostile to both, he decided to attack Niger and to deceive Albinus.
To the latter he wrote that, being elected emperor by the Senate, he was willing to share that dignity with him and sent him the title of Caesar; and, moreover, that the Senate had made Albinus his colleague; which things were accepted by Albinus as true.
But after Severus had conquered and killed Niger, and settled oriental affairs, he returned to Rome and complained to the Senate that Albinus, little recognizing the benefits that he had received from him, had by treachery sought to murder him, and for this ingratitude he was compelled to punish him.
Afterwards he sought him out in France, and took from him his government and life.
He who will, therefore, carefully examine the actions of this man will find him a most valiant lion and a most cunning fox; he will find him feared and respected by every one, and not hated by the army; and it need not be wondered at that he, a new man, was able to hold the empire so well, because his supreme renown always protected him from that hatred which the people might have conceived against him for his violence.
But his son Antoninus was a most eminent man, and had very excellent qualities, which made him admirable in the sight of the people and acceptable to the soldiers, for he was a warlike man, most enduring of fatigue, a despiser of all delicate food and other luxuries, which caused him to be beloved by the armies.
Nevertheless, his ferocity and cruelties were so great and so unheard of that, after endless single murders, he killed a large number of the people of Rome and all those of Alexandria.
He became hated by the whole world, and also feared by those he had around him, to such an extent that he was murdered in the midst of his army by a centurion.
And here it must be noted that such-like deaths, which are deliberately inflicted with a resolved and desperate courage, cannot be avoided by princes, because any one who does not fear to die can inflict them; but a prince may fear them the less because they are very rare; he has only to be careful not to do any grave injury to those whom he employs or has around him in the service of the state. Antoninus had not taken this care, but had contumeliously killed a brother of that centurion, whom also he daily threatened, yet retained in his bodyguard; which, as it turned out, was a rash thing to do, and proved the emperor's ruin.
But let us come to Commodus, to whom it should have been very easy to hold the empire, for, being the son of Marcus, he had inherited it, and he had only to follow in the footsteps of his father to please his people and soldiers; but, being by nature cruel and brutal, he gave himself up to amusing the soldiers and corrupting them, so that he might indulge his rapacity upon the people; on the other hand, not maintaining his dignity, often descending to the theatre to compete with gladiators, and doing other vile things, little worthy of the imperial majesty, he fell into contempt with the soldiers, and being hated by one party and despised by the other, he was conspired against and was killed.
He was a very warlike man, and the armies, being disgusted with the effeminacy of Alexander, of whom I have already spoken, killed him and elected Maximinus to the throne.
This he did not possess for long, for two things made him hated and despised; the one, his having kept sheep in Thrace, which brought him into contempt (it being well known to all, and considered a great indignity by every one), and the other, his having at the accession to his dominions deferred going to Rome and taking possession of the imperial seat; he had also gained a reputation for the utmost ferocity by having, through his prefects in Rome and elsewhere in the empire, practised many cruelties, so that the whole world was moved to anger at the meanness of his birth and to fear at his barbarity.
First Africa rebelled, then the Senate with all the people of Rome, and all Italy conspired against him, to which may be added his own army; this latter, besieging Aquileia and meeting with difficulties in taking it, were disgusted with his cruelties, and fearing him less when they found so many against him, murdered him.
From the above I have excepted the Turk, who always keeps round him twelve thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry on which depend the security and strength of the kingdom, and it is necessary that, putting aside every consideration for the people, he should keep them his friends.
The kingdom of the Soldan is similar; being entirely in the hands of soldiers, it follows again that, without regard to the people, he must keep them his friends.
But you must note that the state of the Soldan is unlike all other principalities, for the reason that it is like the Christian pontificate, which cannot be called either an hereditary or a newly formed principality; because the sons of the old prince are not the heirs, but he who is elected to that position by those who have authority, and the sons remain only noblemen.
And this being an ancient custom, it cannot be called a new principality, because there are none of those difficulties in it that are met with in new ones; for although the prince is new, the constitution of the state is old, and it is framed so as to receive him as if he were its hereditary lord.
Because it would have been useless and dangerous for Pertinax and Alexander, being new princes, to imitate Marcus, who was heir to the principality; and likewise it would have been utterly destructive to Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus to have imitated Severus, they not having sufficient valour to enable them to tread in his footsteps.
Therefore a prince, new to the principality, cannot imitate the actions of Marcus, nor, again, is it necessary to follow those of Severus, but he ought to take from Severus those parts which are necessary to found his state, and from Marcus those which are proper and glorious to keep a state that may already be stable and firm.
2. There never was a new prince who has disarmed his subjects; rather when he has found them disarmed he has always armed them, because, by arming them, those arms become yours, those men who were distrusted become faithful, and those who were faithful are kept so, and your subjects become your adherents.
But when a prince acquires a new state, which he adds as a province to his old one, then it is necessary to disarm the men of that state, except those who have been his adherents in acquiring it; and these again, with time and opportunity, should be rendered soft and effeminate; and matters should be managed in such a way that all the armed men in the state shall be your own soldiers who in your old state were living near you.
4. Without doubt princes become great when they overcome the difficulties and obstacles by which they are confronted, and therefore fortune, especially when she desires to make a new prince great, who has a greater necessity to earn renown than an hereditary one, causes enemies to arise and form designs against him, in order that he may have the opportunity of overcoming them, and by them to mount higher, as by a ladder which his enemies have raised.
For this reason many consider that a wise prince, when he has the opportunity, ought with craft to foster some animosity against himself, so that, having crushed it, his renown may rise higher.
Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince of Siena, ruled his state more by those who had been distrusted than by others.
And since the matter demands it, I must not fail to warn a prince, who by means of secret favours has acquired a new state, that he must well consider the reasons which induced those to favour him who did so; and if it be not a natural affection towards him, but only discontent with their government, then he will only keep them friendly with great trouble and difficulty, for it will be impossible to satisfy them.
And weighing well the reasons for this in those examples which can be taken from ancient and modern affairs, we shall find that it is easier for the prince to make friends of those men who were contented under the former government, and are therefore his enemies, than of those who, being discontented with it, were favourable to him and encouraged him to seize it.
Notwithstanding that, Messer Nicolo Vitelli in our times has been seen to demolish two fortresses in Citta di Castello so that he might keep that state; Guido Ubaldo, Duke of Urbino, on returning to his dominion, whence he had been driven by Cesare Borgia, razed to the foundations all the fortresses in that province, and considered that without them it would be more difficult to lose it; the Bentivogli returning to Bologna came to a similar decision.
And this question can be reasoned thus: the prince who has more to fear from the people than from foreigners ought to build fortresses, but he who has more to fear from foreigners than from the people ought to leave them alone.
It has not been seen in our times that such fortresses have been of use to any prince, unless to the Countess of Forli, when the Count Girolamo, her consort, was killed; for by that means she was able to withstand the popular attack and wait for assistance from Milan, and thus recover her state; and the posture of affairs was such at that time that the foreigners could not assist the people.
But fortresses were of little value to her afterwards when Cesare Borgia attacked her, and when the people, her enemy, were allied with foreigners.
Therefore, it would have been safer for her, both then and before, not to have been hated by the people than to have had the fortresses.
He can almost be called a new prince, because he has risen, by fame and glory, from being an insignificant king to be the foremost king in Christendom; and if you will consider his deeds you will find them all great and some of them extraordinary.
In the beginning of his reign he attacked Granada, and this enterprise was the foundation of his dominions.
He did this quietly at first and without any fear of hindrance, for he held the minds of the barons of Castile occupied in thinking of the war and not anticipating any innovations; thus they did not perceive that by these means he was acquiring power and authority over them.
He was able with the money of the Church and of the people to sustain his armies, and by that long war to lay the foundation for the military skill which has since distinguished him.
Further, always using religion as a plea, so as to undertake greater schemes, he devoted himself with pious cruelty to driving out and clearing his kingdom of the Moors; nor could there be a more admirable example, nor one more rare.
Under this same cloak he assailed Africa, he came down on Italy, he has finally attacked France; and thus his achievements and designs have always been great, and have kept the minds of his people in suspense and admiration and occupied with the issue of them.
And his actions have arisen in such a way, one out of the other, that men have never been given time to work steadily against him.
Again, it much assists a prince to set unusual examples in internal affairs, similar to those which are related of Messer Bernabo da Milano, who, when he had the opportunity, by any one in civil life doing some extraordinary thing, either good or bad, would take some method of rewarding or punishing him, which would be much spoken about.
And a prince ought, above all things, always endeavour in every action to gain for himself the reputation of being a great and remarkable man.
A prince is also respected when he is either a true friend or a downright enemy, that is to say, when, without any reservation, he declares himself in favour of one party against the other; which course will always be more advantageous than standing neutral; because if two of your powerful neighbours come to blows, they are of such a character that, if one of them conquers, you have either to fear him or not.
Because he who conquers does not want doubtful friends who will not aid him in the time of trial; and he who loses will not harbour you because you did not willingly, sword in hand, court his fate.
Thus it will always happen that he who is not your friend will demand your neutrality, whilst he who is your friend will entreat you to declare yourself with arms.
But when a prince declares himself gallantly in favour of one side, if the party with whom he allies himself conquers, although the victor may be powerful and may have him at his mercy, yet he is indebted to him, and there is established a bond of amity; and men are never so shameless as to become a monument of ingratitude by oppressing you.
But if he with whom you ally yourself loses, you may be sheltered by him, and whilst he is able he may aid you, and you become companions on a fortune that may rise again.
In the second case, when those who fight are of such a character that you have no anxiety as to who may conquer, so much the more is it greater prudence to be allied, because you assist at the destruction of one by the aid of another who, if he had been wise, would have saved him; and conquering, as it is impossible that he should not do with your assistance, he remains at your discretion.
And here it is to be noted that a prince ought to take care never to make an alliance with one more powerful than himself for the purposes of attacking others, unless necessity compels him, as is said above; because if he conquers you are at his discretion, and princes ought to avoid as much as possible being at the discretion of any one.
At the same time he should encourage his citizens to practise their callings peaceably, both in commerce and agriculture, and in every other following, so that the one should not be deterred from improving his possessions for fear lest they be taken away from him or another from opening up trade for fear of taxes; but the prince ought to offer rewards to whoever wishes to do these things and designs in any way to honour his city or state.
Further, he ought to entertain the people with festivals and spectacles at convenient seasons of the year; and as every city is divided into guilds or into societies, he ought to hold such bodies in esteem, and associate with them sometimes, and show himself an example of courtesy and liberality; nevertheless, always maintaining the majesty of his rank, for this he must never consent to abate in anything.
And the first opinion which one forms of a prince, and of his understanding, is by observing the men he has around him; and when they are capable and faithful he may always be considered wise, because he has known how to recognize the capable and to keep them faithful.
But when they are otherwise one cannot form a good opinion of him, for the prime error which he made was in choosing them.
There were none who knew Messer Antonio da Venafro as the servant of Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince of Siena, who would not consider Pandolfo to be a very clever man in having Venafro for his servant.
Therefore, it follows necessarily that, if Pandolfo was not in the first rank, he was in the second, for whenever one has judgment to know good and bad when it is said and done, although he himself may not have the initiative, yet he can recognize the good and the bad in his servant, and the one he can praise and the other correct; thus the servant cannot hope to deceive him, and is kept honest.
But to enable a prince to form an opinion of his servant there is one test which never fails; when you see the servant thinking more of his own interests than of yours, and seeking inwardly his own profit in everything, such a man will never make a good servant, nor will you ever be able to trust him; because he who has the state of another in his hands ought never to think of himself, but always of his prince, and never pay any attention to matters in which the prince is not concerned.
On the other hand, to keep his servant honest the prince ought to study him, honouring him, enriching him, doing him kindnesses, sharing with him the honours and cares; and at the same time let him see that he cannot stand alone, so that many honours may not make him desire more, many riches make him wish for more, and that many cares may make him dread chances.
Therefore a wise prince ought to hold a third course by choosing the wise men in his state, and giving to them only the liberty of speaking the truth to him, and then only of those things of which he inquires, and of none others; but he ought to question them upon everything, and listen to their opinions, and afterwards form his own conclusions.
With these councillors, separately and collectively, he ought to carry himself in such a way that each of them should know that, the more freely he shall speak, the more he shall be preferred; outside of these, he should listen to no one, pursue the thing resolved on, and be steadfast in his resolutions.
He who does otherwise is either overthrown by flatterers, or is so often changed by varying opinions that he falls into contempt.
Fra Luca, the man of affairs to Maximilian, the present emperor, speaking of his majesty, said: He consulted with no one, yet never got his own way in anything. This arose because of his following a practice the opposite to the above; for the emperor is a secretive manhe does not communicate his designs to any one, nor does he receive opinions on them.
But as in carrying them into effect they become revealed and known, they are at once obstructed by those men whom he has around him, and he, being pliant, is diverted from them.
Hence it follows that those things he does one day he undoes the next, and no one ever understands what he wishes or intends to do, and no one can rely on his resolutions.
A prince, therefore, ought always to take counsel, but only when he wishes and not when others wish; he ought rather to discourage every one from offering advice unless he asks it; but, however, he ought to be a constant inquirer, and afterwards a patient listener concerning the things of which he inquired; also, on learning that any one, on any consideration, has not told him the truth, he should let his anger be felt.
And if there are some who think that a prince who conveys an impression of his wisdom is not so through his own ability, but through the good advisers that he has around him, beyond doubt they are deceived, because this is an axiom which never fails: that a prince who is not wise himself will never take good advice, unless by chance he has yielded his affairs entirely to one person who happens to be a very prudent man.
In this case indeed he may be well governed, but it would not be for long, because such a governor would in a short time take away his state from him.
But if a prince who is not inexperienced should take counsel from more than one he will never get united counsels, nor will he know how to unite them.
Each of the counsellors will think of his own interests, and the prince will not know how to control them or to see through them.
The previous suggestions, carefully observed, will enable a new prince to appear well established, and render him at once more secure and fixed in the state than if he had been long seated there.
For the actions of a new prince are more narrowly observed than those of an hereditary one, and when they are seen to be able they gain more men and bind far tighter than ancient blood; because men are attracted more by the present than by the past, and when they find the present good they enjoy it and seek no further; they will also make the utmost defence of a prince if he fails them not in other things.
Thus it will be a double glory for him to have established a new principality, and adorned and strengthened it with good laws, good arms, good allies, and with a good example; so will it be a double disgrace to him who, born a prince, shall lose his state by want of wisdom.
Philip of Macedon, not the father of Alexander the Great, but he who was conquered by Titus Quintius, had not much territory compared to the greatness of the Romans and of Greece who attacked him, yet being a warlike man who knew how to attract the people and secure the nobles, he sustained the war against his enemies for many years, and if in the end he lost the dominion of some cities, nevertheless he retained the kingdom.
Therefore, do not let our princes accuse fortune for the loss of their principalities after so many years' possession, but rather their own sloth, because in quiet times they never thought there could be a change (it is a common defect in man not to make any provision in the calm against the tempest), and when afterwards the bad times came they thought of flight and not of defending themselves, and they hoped that the people, disgusted with the insolence of the conquerors, would recall them.
Nevertheless, not to extinguish our free will, I hold it to be true that Fortune is the arbiter of one-half of our actions, but that she still leaves us to direct the other half, or perhaps a little less.
I compare her to one of those raging rivers, which when in flood overflows the plains, sweeping away trees and buildings, bearing away the soil from place to place; everything flies before it, all yield to its violence, without being able in any way to withstand it; and yet, though its nature be such, it does not follow therefore that men, when the weather becomes fair, shall not make provision, both with defences and barriers, in such a manner that, rising again, the waters may pass away by canal, and their force be neither so unrestrained nor so dangerous.
So it happens with fortune, who shows her power where valour has not prepared to resist her, and thither she turns her forces where she knows that barriers and defences have not been raised to constrain her.
I believe also that he will be successful who directs his actions according to the spirit of the times, and that he whose actions do not accord with the times will not be successful.
Because men are seen, in affairs that lead to the end which every man has before him, namely, glory and riches, to get there by various methods; one with caution, another with haste; one by force, another by skill; one by patience, another by its opposite; and each one succeeds in reaching the goal by a different method.
One can also see of two cautious men the one attain his end, the other fail; and similarly, two men by different observances are equally successful, the one being cautious, the other impetuous; all this arises from nothing else than whether or not they conform in their methods to the spirit of the times.
This follows from what I have said, that two men working differently bring about the same effect, and of two working similarly, one attains his object and the other does not.
Changes in estate also issue from this, for if, to one who governs himself with caution and patience, times and affairs converge in such a way that his administration is successful, his fortune is made; but if times and affairs change, he is ruined if he does not change his course of action.
But a man is not often found sufficiently circumspect to know how to accommodate himself to the change, both because he cannot deviate from what nature inclines him to do, and also because, having always prospered by acting in one way, he cannot be persuaded that it is well to leave it; and, therefore, the cautious man, when it is time to turn adventurous, does not know how to do it, hence he is ruined; but had he changed his conduct with the times fortune would not have changed.
Pope Julius the Second went to work impetuously in all his affairs, and found the times and circumstances conform so well to that line of action that he always met with success.
Consider his first enterprise against Bologna, Messer Giovanni Bentivogli being still alive.
The Venetians were not agreeable to it, nor was the King of Spain, and he had the enterprise still under discussion with the King of France; nevertheless he personally entered upon the expedition with his accustomed boldness and energy, a move which made Spain and the Venetians stand irresolute and passive, the latter from fear, the former from desire to recover the kingdom of Naples; on the other hand, he drew after him the King of France, because that king, having observed the movement, and desiring to make the Pope his friend so as to humble the Venetians, found it impossible to refuse him.
Therefore Julius with his impetuous action accomplished what no other pontiff with simple human wisdom could have done; for if he had waited in Rome until he could get away, with his plans arranged and everything fixed, as any other pontiff would have done, he would never have succeeded.
I will leave his other actions alone, as they were all alike, and they all succeeded, for the shortness of his life did not let him experience the contrary; but if circumstances had arisen which required him to go cautiously, his ruin would have followed, because he would never have deviated from those ways to which nature inclined him.
For my part I consider that it is better to be adventurous than cautious, because fortune is a woman, and if you wish to keep her under it is necessary to beat and ill-use her; and it is seen that she allows herself to be mastered by the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly.
She is, therefore, always, woman-like, a lover of young men, because they are less cautious, more violent, and with more audacity command her.
Although lately some spark may have been shown by one, which made us think he was ordained by God for our redemption, nevertheless it was afterwards seen, in the height of his career, that fortune rejected him; so that Italy, left as without life, waits for him who shall yet heal her wounds and put an end to the ravaging and plundering of Lombardy, to the swindling and taxing of the kingdom and of Tuscany, and cleanse those sores that for long have festered.
It is seen how she entreats God to send someone who shall deliver her from these wrongs and barbarous insolencies.
It is seen also that she is ready and willing to follow a banner if only someone will raise it.
Nor is there to be seen at present one in whom she can place more hope than in your illustrious house, with its valour and fortune, favoured by God and by the Church of which it is now the chief, and which could be made the head of this redemption.
And nothing honours a man more than to establish new laws and new ordinances when he himself was newly risen.
And although singly they are good, altogether they will be much better when they find themselves commanded by their prince, honoured by him, and maintained at his expense.
This opportunity, therefore, ought not to be allowed to pass for letting Italy at last see her liberator appear.
Nor can one express the love with which he would be received in all those provinces which have suffered so much from these foreign scourings, with what thirst for revenge, with what stubborn faith, with what devotion, with what tears.
The writer spoke of acute bodily illnessof a mental disorder which oppressed himand of an earnest desire to see me, as his best and indeed his only personal friend, with a view of attempting, by the cheerfulness of my society, some alleviation of his malady.
It was the manner in which all this, and much more, was saidit was the apparent heart that went with his requestwhich allowed me no room for hesitation; and I accordingly obeyed forthwith what I still considered a very singular summons.
I was aware, however, that his very ancient family had been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiar sensibility of temperament, displaying itself, through long ages, in many works of exalted art, and manifested, of late, in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity, as well as in a passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even more than to the orthodox and easily recognizable beauties, of musical science.
A valet, of stealthy step, thence conducted me, in silence, through many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio of his master.
His countenance, I thought, wore a mingled expression of low cunning and perplexity.
The valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the presence of his master.
Upon my entrance, Usher rose from a sofa on which he had been lying at full length, and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much in it, I at first thought, of an overdone cordialityof the constrained effort of the ennuy man of the world.
A glance, however, at his countenance convinced me of his perfect sincerity.
We sat down; and for some moments, while he spoke not, I gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity, half of awe.
Surely, man had never before so terribly altered, in so brief a period, as had Roderick Usher!
Yet the character of his face had been at all times remarkable. A cadaverousness of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and luminous beyond comparison; lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but of a surpassingly beautiful curve; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model, but with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations; a finely moulded chin, speaking, in its want of prominence, of a want of moral energy; hair of a more than web-like softness and tenuity;these features, with an inordinate expansion above the regions of the temple, made up altogether a countenance not easily to be forgotten.
For something of this nature I had indeed been prepared, no less by his letter, than by reminiscences of certain boyish traits, and by conclusions deduced from his peculiar physical conformation and temperament.
It was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of his earnest desire to see me, and of the solace he expected me to afford him.
He entered, at some length, into what he conceived to be the nature of his malady.
It was, he said, a constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he despaired to find a remedya mere nervous affection, he immediately added, which would undoubtedly soon pass off.
Some of these, as he detailed them, interested and bewildered me; although, perhaps, the terms and the general manner of the narration had their weight.
He suffered much from a morbid acuteness of the senses; the most insipid food was alone endurable; he could wear only garments of certain texture; the odors of all flowers were oppressive; his eyes were tortured by even a faint light; and there were but peculiar sounds, and these from stringed instruments, which did not inspire him with horror.
I shall perish, said he, I must perish in this deplorable folly.
I learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and equivocal hints, another singular feature of his mental condition.
He was enchained by certain superstitious impressions in regard to the dwelling which he tenanted, and whence, for many years, he had never ventured forthin regard to an influence whose supposititious force was conveyed in terms too shadowy here to be re-statedan influence which some peculiarities in the mere form and substance of his family mansion had, by dint of long sufferance, he said, obtained over his spiritan effect which the physique of the gray walls and turrets, and of the dim tarn into which they all looked down, had, at length, brought about upon the morale of his existence.
Her decease, he said, with a bitterness which I can never forget, would leave him (him the hopeless and the frail) the last of the ancient race of the Ushers.
While he spoke, the lady Madeline (for so was she called) passed slowly through a remote portion of the apartment, and, without having noticed my presence, disappeared.
I regarded her with an utter astonishment not unmingled with dread; and yet I found it impossible to account for such feelings.
A sensation of stupor oppressed me as my eyes followed her retreating steps.
When a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance sought instinctively and eagerly the countenance of the brother; but he had buried his face in his hands, and I could only perceive that a far more than ordinary wanness had overspread the emaciated fingers through which trickled many passionate tears.
The disease of the lady Madeline had long baffled the skill of her physicians.
Hitherto she had steadily borne up against the pressure of her malady, and had not betaken herself finally to bed; but on the closing in of the evening of my arrival at the house, she succumbed (as her brother told me at night with inexpressible agitation) to the prostrating power of the destroyer; and I learned that the glimpse I had obtained of her person would thus probably be the last I should obtainthat the lady, at least while living, would be seen by me no more.
For several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by either Usher or myself; and during this period I was busied in earnest endeavors to alleviate the melancholy of my friend.
We painted and read together, or I listened, as if in a dream, to the wild improvisations of his speaking guitar.
And thus, as a closer and still closer intimacy admitted me more unreservedly into the recesses of his spirit, the more bitterly did I perceive the futility of all attempt at cheering a mind from which darkness, as if an inherent positive quality, poured forth upon all objects of the moral and physical universe in one unceasing radiation of gloom.
I shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solemn hours I thus spent alone with the master of the House of Usher. Yet I should fail in any attempt to convey an idea of the exact character of the studies, or of the occupations, in which he involved me, or led me the way.
From the paintings over which his elaborate fancy brooded, and which grew, touch by touch, into vagueness at which I shuddered the more thrillingly, because I shuddered knowing not whyfrom these paintings (vivid as their images now are before me) I would in vain endeavor to educe more than a small portion which should lie within the compass of merely written words.
By the utter simplicity, by the nakedness of his designs, he arrested and overawed attention.
For me at least, in the circumstances then surrounding me, there arose out of the pure abstractions which the hypochondriac contrived to throw upon his canvas, an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow of which felt I ever yet in the contemplation of the certainly glowing yet too concrete reveries of Fuseli.
It was, perhaps, the narrow limits to which he thus confined himself upon the guitar which gave birth, in great measure, to the fantastic character of the performances.
But the fervid facility of his impromptus could not be so accounted for.
They must have been, and were, in the notes, as well as in the words of his wild fantasias (for he not unfrequently accompanied himself with rhymed verbal improvisations), the result of that intense mental collectedness and concentration to which I have previously alluded as observable only in particular moments of the highest artificial excitement.
I was, perhaps, the more forcibly impressed with it as he gave it, because, in the under or mystic current of its meaning, I fancied that I perceived, and for the first time, a full consciousness on the part of Usher of the tottering of his lofty reason upon her throne.
In state his glory well befitting,
And, round about his home, the glory
But, in his disordered fancy, the idea had assumed a more daring character, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon the kingdom of inorganization.
I lack words to express the full extent, or the earnest abandon of his persuasion.
The belief, however, was connected (as I have previously hinted) with the gray stones of the home of his forefathers.
The conditions of the sentience had been here, he imagined, fulfilled in the method of collocation of these stonesin the order of their arrangement, as well as in that of the many fungi which overspread them, and of the decayed trees which stood aroundabove all, in the long undisturbed endurance of this arrangement, and in its reduplication in the still waters of the tarn.
Its evidencethe evidence of the sentiencewas to be seen, he said, (and I here started as he spoke), in the gradual yet certain condensation of an atmosphere of their own about the waters and the walls.
The result was discoverable, he added, in that silent yet importunate and terrible influence which for centuries had moulded the destinies of his family, and which made him what I now saw himwhat he was.
I could not help thinking of the wild ritual of this work, and of its probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one evening, having informed me abruptly that the lady Madeline was no more, he stated his intention of preserving her corpse for a fortnight (previously to its final interment), in one of the numerous vaults within the main walls of the building.
The brother had been led to his resolution (so he told me) by consideration of the unusual character of the malady of the deceased, of certain obtrusive and eager inquiries on the part of her medical men, and of the remote and exposed situation of the burial-ground of the family.
Our glances, however, rested not long upon the deadfor we could not regard her unawed.
The pallor of his countenance had assumed, if possible, a more ghastly huebut the luminousness of his eye had utterly gone out.
The once occasional huskiness of his tone was heard no more; and a tremulous quaver, as if of extreme terror, habitually characterized his utterance.
There were times, indeed, when I thought his unceasingly agitated mind was laboring with some oppressive secret, to divulge which he struggled for the necessary courage.
It was no wonder that his condition terrifiedthat it infected me.
I felt creeping upon me, by slow yet certain degrees, the wild influences of his own fantastic yet impressive superstitions.
In an instant afterward he rapped, with a gentle touch, at my door, and entered, bearing a lamp.
His countenance was, as usual, cadaverously wanbut, moreover, there was a species of mad hilarity in his eyesan evidently restrained hysteria in his whole demeanor.
His air appalled mebut anything was preferable to the solitude which I had so long endured, and I even welcomed his presence as a relief.
And you have not seen it? he said abruptly, after having stared about him for some moments in silenceyou have not then seen it?but, stay! you shall.
Thus speaking, and having carefully shaded his lamp, he hurried to one of the casements, and threw it freely open to the storm.
Could I have judged, indeed, by the wild overstrained air of vivacity with which he hearkened, or apparently hearkened, to the words of the tale, I might well have congratulated myself upon the success of my design.
And Ethelred, who was by nature of a doughty heart, and who was now mighty withal, on account of the powerfulness of the wine which he had drunken, waited no longer to hold parley with the hermit, who, in sooth, was of an obstinate and maliceful turn, but, feeling the rain upon his shoulders, and fearing the rising of the tempest, uplifted his mace outright, and, with blows, made quickly room in the plankings of the door for his gauntleted hand; and now pulling therewith sturdily, he so cracked, and ripped, and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry and hollow-sounding wood alarumed and reverberated throughout the forest.
Who entereth herein, a conqueror hath bin; Who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win.
And Ethelred uplifted his mace, and struck upon the head of the dragon, which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, with a shriek so horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, that Ethelred had fain to close his ears with his hands against the dreadful noise of it, the like whereof was never before heard.
I was by no means certain that he had noticed the sounds in question; although, assuredly, a strange alteration had, during the last few minutes, taken place in his demeanor.
From a position fronting my own, he had gradually brought round his chair, so as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber; and thus I could but partially perceive his features, although I saw that his lips trembled as if he were murmuring inaudibly.
His head had dropped upon his breastyet I knew that he was not asleep, from the wide and rigid opening of the eye as I caught a glance of it in profile.
The motion of his body, too, was at variance with this ideafor he rocked from side to side with a gentle yet constant and uniform sway.
I rushed to the chair in which he sat.
His eyes were bent fixedly before him, and throughout his whole countenance there reigned a stony rigidity.
But, as I placed my hand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder over his whole person; a sickly smile quivered about his lips; and I saw that he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibbering murmur, as if unconscious of my presence.
Bending closely over him, I at length drank in the hideous import of his words.
We have put her living in the tomb!
I now tell you that I heard her first feeble movements in the hollow coffin.
And nowto-nightEthelredha! ha!the breaking of the hermits door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangor of the shield!say, rather, the rending of her coffin, and the grating of the iron hinges of her prison, and her struggles within the coppered archway of the vault!
Will she not be here anon?
Is she not hurrying to upbraid me for my haste?
Have I not heard her footstep on the stair?
Do I not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her heart?
Madman!here he sprang furiously to his feet, and shrieked out his syllables, as if in the effort he were giving up his soulMadman!
I tell you that she now stands without the door!
As if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had been found the potency of a spell, the huge antique panels to which the speaker pointed threw slowly back, upon the instant, their ponderous and ebony jaws.
There was blood upon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter struggle upon every portion of her emaciated frame.
For a moment she remained trembling and reeling to and fro upon the thresholdthen, with a low moaning cry, fell heavily inward upon the person of her brother, and in her violent and now final death-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim to the terrors he had anticipated.
The wife had discovered an intrigue between her husband and their former French governess, and declared that she would not continue to live under the same roof with him.
The wife kept to her own rooms, the husband stopped away from home all day; the children ran about all over the house uneasily, the English governess quarrelled with the housekeeper and wrote to a friend asking if she could find her another situation; the cook had gone out just at dinner-time the day before and had not returned; and the kitchen-maid and coachman had given notice.
On the third day after his quarrel with his wife, Prince Stephen Arkadyevich Oblonsky  Steve, as he was called in his set in Society  woke up at his usual time, eight o'clock, not in his wife's bedroom but on the morocco leather-covered sofa in his study.
He turned his plump, well-kept body over on the springy sofa as if he wished to have another long sleep, and tightly embracing one of the pillows leant his cheek against it; but then suddenly opened his eyes and sat up.
'Let me see what was it?' he thought, trying to recall his dream.
His eyes sparkled merrily and he smiled as he sat thinking. 'Yes, it was very nice.
There were many other delightful things which I can't just get hold of  can't catch now I'm awake.' Then, noticing a streak of light that had made its way in at the side of the blind, he gaily let down his legs and felt about with his feet for his slippers finished with bronze kid (last year's birthday present, embroidered by his wife); and from nine years' habit he stretched out his arm, without rising, towards where his dressing-gown usually hung in their bedroom.
And then he suddenly remembered that, and why, he was not sleeping there but in his study. The smile vanished from his face and he frowned.
'Oh dear, dear, dear!' he groaned recalling what had happened.
And the details of his quarrel with his wife, his inextricable position, and, worst of all, his guilt, rose up in his imagination.
'No, she will never forgive me; she can't forgive me!
That's the tragedy of it!' he thought. 'Oh dear, oh dear!' he muttered despairingly, as he recalled the most painful details of the quarrel.
The worst moment had been when returning home from the theatre merry and satisfied, with an enormous pear in his hand for his wife, he did not find her in the drawing-room nor, to his great surprise, in the study, but at last saw her in her bedroom with the unlucky note which had betrayed him in her hand.
She sat there: the careworn, ever-bustling, and (as he thought) rather simple Dolly  with the note in her hand and a look of terror, despair, and anger on her face.
This?' she asked, pointing to the note.
And, as often happens, it was not so much the memory of the event that tormented him, as of the way he had replied to her.
At that moment there had happened to him what happens to most people when unexpectedly caught in some shameful act: he had not had time to assume an expression suitable to the position in which he stood toward his wife now that his guilt was discovered.
Instead of taking offence, denying, making excuses, asking forgiveness, or even remaining indifferent (anything would have been better than what he did), he involuntarily ('reflex action of the brain,' thought Oblonsky, who was fond of physiology) smiled his usual kindly and therefore silly smile.
Dolly, seeing it, shuddered as if with physical pain, and with her usual vehemence burst into a torrent of cruel words and rushed from the room.
Since then she had refused to see him.
What can I do?' he asked himself in despair, and could find no answer.
He was incapable of self-deception and could not persuade himself that he repented of his conduct.
He could not feel repentant that he, a handsome amorous man of thirty-four, was not in love with his wife, the mother of five living and two dead children and only a year younger than himself.
He repented only of not having managed to conceal his conduct from her.
Nevertheless he felt his unhappy position and pitied his wife, his children, and himself.
He might perhaps have been able to hide things from her had he known that the knowledge would so distress her.
He had never clearly considered the matter, but had a vague notion that his wife had long suspected him of being unfaithful and winked at it.
He even thought that she, who was nothing but an excellent mother of a family, worn-out, already growing elderly, no longer pretty, and in no way remarkable  in fact, quite an ordinary woman  ought to be lenient to him, if only from a sense of justice.
She was contented, happy in her children; I never interfered with her but left her to fuss over them and the household as she pleased...
Of course it's not quite nice that she had been a governess in our house.
(He vividly pictured to himself Mlle Roland's roguish black eyes, and her smile.) 'Besides, as long as she was in the house I never took any liberties.
The worst of the matter is, that she is already...
He could no longer find forgetfulness in sleep, at any rate not before night, could not go back to the music and the songs of the little decanter-women, consequently he must seek forgetfulness in the dream of life.
'We'll see when the time comes,' thought Oblonsky, and got up, put on his grey dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the cords and drawing a full breath of air into his broad chest went with his usual firm tread toward the window, turning out his feet that carried his stout body so lightly, drew up the blind and rang loudly.
The bell was answered immediately by his old friend and valet, Matthew, who brought in his clothes, boots, and a telegram.
'Any papers from the Office?' asked Oblonsky, as he took the telegram and sat down before the looking-glass.
'They're on your table,' answered Matthew with a questioning and sympathizing glance at his master  adding after a pause with a sly smile: 'Some one has called from the jobmaster's.'
Matthew put his hands into the pocket of his jacket, put out his foot, and looked at his master with a slight, good-humoured smile.
'I ordered him to come the Sunday after next, and not to trouble you or himself needlessly till then,' said he, evidently repeating a sentence he had prepared.
He tore open the telegram and read it, guessing at the words, which (as so often happens in telegrams) were misspelt, and his face brightened.
'Matthew, my sister Anna Arkadyevna is coming to-morrow,' he said, motioning away for a moment the shiny plump hand of the barber, which was shaving a rosy path between his long curly whiskers.
'The Lord be thanked!' said Matthew, proving by his answer that he knew just as well as his master the importance of this visit: namely, that Anna Arkadyevna, Stephen Arkadyevich's favourite sister, might help to reconcile the husband and wife.
'Is she coming alone, or with Mr. Karenin?'
Oblonsky could not answer as the barber was busy with his upper lip; but he raised one finger, and Matthew nodded to him in the glass.
'Yes, tell her.
Give her the telegram, and see what she says.'
'You want to have a try at her?' was what Matthew meant, but he only said: 'Yes, sir.'
Oblonsky was washed, his hair brushed, and he was about to dress, when Matthew, stepping slowly in his creaking boots, re-entered the room with the telegram in his hand.
'Darya Alexandrovna told me to say that she is going away. "He may do as he pleases"  that is, as you please, sir,' he said, laughing with his eyes only; and, putting his hands in his pockets, with his head on one side, he gazed at his master.
Oblonsky remained silent, then a kind and rather pathetic smile appeared on his handsome face.
'Ah, Matthew!' he said, shaking his head.
'Do you think so?  Who's that?' asked Oblonsky, hearing the rustle of a woman's dress outside the door.
'It's me, sir,' answered a firm and pleasant woman's voice, and Matrena Filimonovna, the children's nurse thrust her stern pockmarked face in at the door.
'What is it, Matrena?' asked Oblonsky, stepping out to her.
Although he was entirely guilty and was conscious of it, almost every one in the house  even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna's best friend  sided with him.
'What is it?' said he mournfully.
She suffers dreadfully; it's pitiful to see her, and everything in the house is topsy-turvy.
'But she won't admit me!'
'All right  now go,' said Oblonsky, suddenly blushing. 'I must get dressed,' said he, turning to Matthew, and he resolutely threw off his dressing-gown.
Matthew blew some invisible speck off the shirt which he held ready gathered up like a horse's collar, and with evident pleasure invested with it his master's carefully tended body.
WHEN HE WAS QUITE DRESSED Oblonsky sprinkled some scent on himself, pulled down his cuffs, and as usual distributing in different pockets his cigarette-case, matches, pocket-book, and the watch with its double chain and bunch of charms, he shook out his handkerchief, and feeling clean, sweet, healthy, and physically bright in spite of his misfortune, went with a slight spring in each step into the dining-room where his coffee stood ready. Beside the coffee lay letters and papers from the Office.
He read the letters, one of which impressed him unpleasantly. It concerned the sale of a forest on his wife's estate, and came from a dealer who wanted to buy that forest.
This forest had to be sold; but until he was reconciled with his wife the sale was quite out of the question.
The idea that he might be biased by that consideration, might seek a reconciliation in order to sell the forest, offended him.
Having looked through his letters, Oblonsky drew the Departmental papers toward him, and turning over the pages of two files made a few notes on them with a big pencil; then pushing them aside, began to drink his coffee. At the same time he unfolded the still damp morning paper, and began reading.
And although neither science, art, nor politics specially interested him, he firmly held to the opinions of the majority and of his paper on those subjects, changing his views when the majority changed theirs,  or rather, not changing them  they changed imperceptibly of their own accord.
Oblonsky's tendency and opinions were not his by deliberate choice: they came of themselves, just as he did not choose the fashion of his hats or coats but wore those of the current style.
Living in a certain social set, and having a desire, such as generally develops with maturity, for some kind of mental activity, he was obliged to hold views, just as he was obliged to have a hat.
If he had a reason for preferring Liberalism to the Conservatism of many in his set, it was not that he considered Liberalism more reasonable, but because it suited his manner of life better.
The Liberal Party said that marriage was an obsolete institution which ought to be reformed; and family life really gave Oblonsky very little pleasure, forcing him to tell lies and dissemble, which was quite contrary to his nature.
The Liberal Party said, or rather hinted, that religion was only good as a check on the more barbarous portion of the population; and Oblonsky really could not stand through even a short church service without pain in his feet, nor understand why one should use all that dreadful high-flown language about another world while one can live so merrily in this one.
Besides, Oblonsky was fond of a pleasant joke, and sometimes liked to perplex a simple-minded man by observing that if you're going to be proud of your ancestry, why stop short at Prince Rurik and repudiate your oldest ancestor  the ape?
Thus Liberalism became habitual to Oblonsky, and he loved his paper as he loved his after-dinner cigar, for the slight mistiness it produced in his brain.
With his natural quickness of perception. he understood the meaning of each hit, whence it came, for whom it was meant and what had provoked it, and this as usual gave him a certain satisfaction.
He went on to read that there was a rumour of Count Beust's journey to Wiesbaden; that there would be no more grey hairs; that a light brougham was for sale, and a young person offered her services; but all this information did not give him the quiet, ironical pleasure it usually did.
Having finished the paper, his second cup of coffee, and a buttered roll, he got up, flicked some crumbs off his waistcoat, and, expanding his broad chest, smiled joyfully, not because there was anything specially pleasant in his mind  no, the smile was but the result of a healthy digestion.
But that joyful smile at once brought everything back to his mind, and he grew thoughtful.
Then he heard the sound of two childish voices outside the door, and recognized them as the voices of his eldest daughter, Tanya, and of his little boy Grisha.
'I told you not to put passengers on the roof,' the girl shouted in English. 'Now pick them up!'
'Everything is disorganized,' thought Oblonsky; 'here are the children running wild ' and going to the door he called them in.
They left the box, which represented a train, and came to their father.
The girl, her father's pet, ran boldly in, embraced him, and hung laughing on his neck, pleased, as she always was, to smell the familiar scent of his whiskers.
Having kissed his face, flushed by stooping and lit up by tenderness, the girl unclasped her hands and was going to run away, but he held her back.
'How's Mama?' he asked, passing his hand over his daughter's smooth delicate little neck, as he smilingly said 'Good morning' in answer to the little boy's greeting.
He was conscious of not caring as much for the boy as for the girl but did his best to treat them both alike. The boy felt this and did not respond to his father's cold smile.
She's up,' said the girl. Oblonsky sighed.
'That means that she has again not slept all night,' he thought.
'Yes, but is she cheerful?' he added.
The girl knew that her father and mother had quarrelled, and that her mother could not be cheerful, and also that her father must know this, so that his putting the question to her so lightly was all pretence, and she blushed for him.
'I don't know,' she said. 'She said we were not to have any lessons, but must walk with Miss Hull to Grandmamma's.'
Oh, wait!' he said, still holding her and stroking her delicate little hand.
Taking a box of sweets from the mantelpiece where he had put it the day before, he chose two sweets which he knew she liked best, a chocolate and a coloured cream.
'For Grisha?' she asked, holding out the chocolate.
'Yes, yes,' and stroking her shoulder he kissed her hair at the roots and her neck, and let her go.
'The carriage is ready,' said Matthew, 'and there is a woman on business waiting for you.'
'But I must give you time to finish your coffee,' answered Matthew in his friendly rude tone, with which it was impossible to be angry.
'Well, ask her in at once,' said Oblonsky, his face wrinkling with vexation.
The woman, widow of a petty official named Kalinin was petitioning for something impossible and absurd, but nevertheless Oblonsky, with his usual politeness, asked her to sit down and heard her attentively to the end, gave her full instructions how and to whom to apply and even wrote briskly and fluently in his large, graceful and legible hand a little note to a personage who might be of use to her.
Having dismissed her, he took his hat and paused to consider whether he had forgotten anything.
He found he had forgotten nothing but what he wanted to forget: his wife.
'Oh yes!' His head dropped, and his handsome face became worried.
'To go, or not to go?' he asked himself; and his inner consciousness answered that he ought not to go: that it could only result in hypocrisy; that it was impossible to restore their relations because it was impossible to render her attractive and capable of exciting love, or to turn him into an old man incapable of love.
Nothing except hypocrisy and falsehood could now result  and these were repugnant to his nature.
'Nevertheless it will have to be done sooner or later. After all, things can't remain as they are,' he said, trying to brace himself.
He expanded his chest, took out a cigarette, lit it, took two whiffs, then threw it into a pearl-shell ash-tray, and crossing the drawing-room with rapid steps, he opened the door which led into his wife's bedroom.
DARYA ALEXANDROVNA WAS THERE in a dressing-jacket, with her large frightened eyes, made more prominent by the emaciation of her face, and her knot of thin plaits of once luxurious and beautiful hair.
The room was covered with scattered articles, and she was standing among them before an open wardrobe, where she was engaged in selecting something.
Hearing her husband's step she stopped and looked at the door, vainly trying to assume a severe and contemptuous expression.
She felt that she was afraid of him and afraid of the impending interview.
She was trying to do what she had attempted ten times already during those three days, to sort out her own and her children's clothes to take to her mother's; but she could not bring herself to do it, and said again as she had done after each previous attempt, that things could not remain as they were  that she must do something to punish and humiliate him, and to revenge herself if only for a small part of the pain he had caused her.
She still kept saying that she would leave him, but felt that this was impossible. It was impossible because she could not get out of the habit of regarding him as her husband and of loving him.
Besides, she felt that if here, in her own home, it was all she could do to look after her five children properly, it would be still worse where she meant to take them.
She felt that it was impossible for her to leave; but still deceiving herself, she went an sorting the things and pretending that she really would go.
On seeing her husband she thrust her arms into a drawer of the wardrobe as if looking for something, and only when he had come close to her did she turn her face toward him.
But her face, which she wanted to seem stern and determined, expressed only perplexity and suffering.
'Dolly!' he said in a soft, timid voice.
He drew his head down, wishing to look pathetic and submissive, but all the same he shone with freshness and health.
With a rapid glance she took in his fresh and healthy figure from head to foot. 'Yes, he is happy and contented,' she thought, 'but what about me?...
And that horrid good-nature of his which people love and praise so, how I hate it!' She pressed her lips together and a cheek-muscle twitched on the right side of her pale nervous face.
'What do you want?' she said quickly in a voice unlike her usual deep tones.
'Dolly,' he repeated unsteadily, 'Anna is coming to-day.'
I can't receive her!' she exclaimed.
'But after all, Dolly, you really must,' said he.
'Go away, go away, go away!' she cried, as if in physical pain, without looking at him.
Oblonsky could think calmly of his wife, could hope that 'things would shape themselves' as Matthew had said, and could calmly read his paper and drink his coffee, but when he saw her worn, suffering face, and heard her tone, resigned and despairing, he felt a choking sensation. A lump rose to his throat and tears glistened in his eyes.
Her eyes drooped and she waited to hear what he would say, as if entreating him to persuade her somehow that she had made a mistake.
'A momentary infatuation...' he said, and was going on, but at those words her lips tightened again as if with pain, and again the muscle in her right cheek began to twitch.
'Go away  go away from here!' she cried in a still shriller voice, 'and don't talk to me of your infatuations and all those horrors!'
His face broadened, his lips swelled, and his eyes filled with tears.
'Dolly!' he said, now actually sobbing, 'for heaven's sake think of the children  they have done nothing!
She sat down and he could hear her loud, heavy breathing. He felt unutterably sorry for her.
'You think of our children when you want to play with them, but I am always thinking of them, and know they are ruined now,' she said, evidently repeating one of the phrases she had used to herself again and again during those three days.
But she had spoken of 'our children,' and looking gratefully at her he moved to take her hand; but she stepped aside with a look of repugnance.
'I do think of the children, and would do anything in the world to save them; but I do not know how to save them  whether by taking them away from their father, or by leaving them with a dissolute  yes, a dissolute father...
Say, is it possible?' she repeated, raising her voice. 'When my husband, the father of my children, has love affairs with his children's governess?'
'But what's to be done?  what's to be done?' said he, in a piteous voice, hardly knowing what he was saying, and sinking his head lower and lower.
'You are horrid and disgusting to me!' she shouted, getting more and more excited.
He looked at her and the hatred he saw in her face frightened and surprised him.
He did not understand that his pity exasperated her.
She saw in him pity for herself but not love. 'No, she hates me; she will not forgive me,' he thought.
'It is awful, awful!' he muttered.
Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face softened suddenly.
She seemed to be trying to recollect herself, as if she did not know where she was or what she had to do.
Then she rose quickly and moved toward the door.
'After all, she loves my child,' he thought, noticing the change in her face when the baby cried; 'my child  then how can she hate me?'
'Dolly, just a word!' he said, following her.
Oblonsky sighed, wiped his face, and with soft steps left the room. 'Matthew says "things will shape themselves,"  but how?
And her shouting  it was so vulgar,' he thought, recalling her screams and the words scoundrel and mistress. 'And the maids may have heard it!
It is dreadfully banal, dreadfully!' For a few seconds Oblonsky stood alone; then he wiped his eyes, sighed, and expanding his chest went out of the room.
Seeing him in the dining-room, Oblonsky recollected a joke he had once made at the expense of this accurate baldheaded clockmaker, and he smiled. 'The German,' he had said, 'has been wound up for life to wind up clocks.'
That's a good phrase,' he thought. 'I must use that.'
'Matthew!' he called, 'will you and Mary arrange everything for Anna Arkadyevna in the little sitting-room?' he added when Matthew appeared.
Oblonsky put on his fur coat, and went out into the porch.
'Will you be home to dinner, sir?' said Matthew, as he showed him out.
Oh, and here's some money,' said he, taking a ten-rouble note out of his pocket-book. 'Will it be enough?'
Meanwhile Darya Alexandrovna after soothing the child, knowing from the sound of the carriage wheels that her husband had gone, returned to her bedroom.
It was her only place of refuge from household cares.
Even now, during the few minutes she had spent in the nursery the English governess and Matrena Filimonovna had found time to ask some questions that could not be put off, and which she alone could answer. 'What should the children wear when they went out?
'Oh, do leave me alone!' she cried; and returning to her bedroom she sat down where she had sat when talking with her husband. Locking together her thin fingers, on which her rings hung loosely, she went over in her mind the whole of their conversation.
'Gone! But how did he finish with her?' she thought.
'Is it possible that he still sees her?
Even if we go on living in the same house, we are strangers  strangers for ever!' she repeated, specially emphasizing the word that was so dreadful to her. 'And how I loved him!
The most terrible thing...' She did not finish the thought, because Matrena Filimonovna thrust her head in at the door.
'Hadn't I better send for my brother?' she said. 'After all, he can cook a dinner,  or else the children will go without food till six o'clock, as they did yesterday.'
and Darya Alexandrovna plunged into her daily cares, and for a time drowned her grief in them.
OBLONSKY'S NATURAL ABILITY HAD HELPED HIM to do well at school, but mischief and laziness had caused him to finish very low in his year's class. Yet in spite of his dissipated life, his unimportant service rank, and his comparative youth, he occupied a distinguished and well-paid post as Head of one of the Government Boards in Moscow.
This post he had obtained through Alexis Alexandrovich Karenin, his sister Anna's husband, who held one of the most important positions in the Ministry to which that Moscow Board belonged.
But even if Karenin had not nominated his brother-in-law for that post, Steve Oblonsky, through one of a hundred other persons  brothers, sisters, relations, cousins, uncles or aunts  would have obtained this or a similar post with a salary of some 6000 roubles a year, which he needed because in spite of his wife's substantial means his affairs were in a bad way.
Half Moscow and half Petersburg were his relations or friends.
One third of the official world, the older men, were his father's friends and had known him in petticoats, he was on intimate terms with another third, and was well acquainted with the last third.
Consequently the distributors of earthly blessings, such as government posts, grants, concessions, and the like, were all his friends. They could not overlook one who belonged to them, so that Oblonsky had no special difficulty in obtaining a lucrative post; he had only not to raise any objections, not to be envious, not to quarrel, and not to take offence  all things which, being naturally good-tempered, he never did.
It would have seemed to him ridiculous had he been told that he would not get a post with the salary he required; especially as he did not demand anything extraordinary. He only wanted what other men of his age and set were getting; and he could fill such an office as well as anybody else.
Oblonsky was not only liked by every one who knew him for his kind and joyous nature and his undoubted honesty, but there was something in him  in his handsome and bright appearance, his beaming eyes, black hair and eyebrows, and his white-and-rosy complexion, that had a physical effect on those he met, making them feel friendly and cheerful.
Here he is!' said almost every one he met, smilingly.
It was the third year that Oblonsky had been Head of that Government Board in Moscow, and he had won not only the affection but also the respect of his fellow-officials, subordinates, chiefs, and all who had anything to do with him.
The chief qualities that had won him this general respect in his Office were, first, his extreme leniency, founded on a consciousness of his own defects; secondly, his true Liberalism  not that of which he read in his paper, but that which was in his blood and made him treat all men alike whatever their rank or official position; thirdly and chiefly, his complete indifference to the business he was engaged on, in consequence of which he was never carried away by enthusiasm and never made mistakes.
Having arrived at his destination, Oblonsky; respectfully followed by the door-keeper bearing his portfolio, entered his little private room, put on his uniform, and came out into the Office.
Oblonsky walked quickly, as was his wont, to his place, shook hands with the Members, and sat down.
He chatted and joked just as much as was proper and then turned to business.
No one could determine better than he the limits of freedom, simplicity, and formality, necessary for the pleasant transaction of business.
'Got it at last?' said Oblonsky, holding this paper down with his finger. 'Well, gentlemen...' and the sitting commenced.
'If they only knew,' he thought, bowing his head gravely as he listened to a Report, 'how like a guilty little boy their President was half-an-hour ago!...' and his eyes sparkled while the Report was being read.
When the Report had been read, Oblonsky rose, stretching himself, and, paying tribute to the Liberalism of the times, took out a cigarette before leaving the Office to go to his private room.
Two of his colleagues  Nikitin, an old hard-working official, and Grinevich, a Gentleman of the Bedchamber  followed him out.
'Who was it came in?' he asked the door-keeper.
'Some man came in without permission, your Excellency, when I wasn't looking.
'Where is he?'
'Perhaps he has gone out into the hall; he was walking about there just now.
That's him,' said the door-keeper pointing to a strongly-built broad-shouldered man with a curly beard, who, without taking off his sheep-skin cap, was running lightly and quickly up the worn steps of the stone staircase.
A lanky official, going down with a portfolio, stopped, with a disapproving look at the feet of the man running upstairs, and then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky, who was standing at the top of the stairs.
His kindly face, beaming over the gold-embroidered collar of his uniform, grew still more radiant when he recognized the man who was coming up.
'Yes, it's he!
Levin, at last!' he said, scrutinizing the approaching Levin with a friendly mocking smile. 'How is it you deign to look me up in this den?' he asked; and not contented with pressing his friend's hand, he kissed him.
'Well then, come into my room,' said Oblonsky, who knew his friend's self-conscious and irritable shyness; and seizing him by the arm he led him along as if past some danger.
Oblonsky was on intimate terms with almost all his acquaintances, men of sixty and lads of twenty, actors, Ministers of State, tradesmen, and Lords in Waiting, so that a great many people on familiar terms with him stood at the two extremes of the social ladder and would have been much surprised to know that they had something in common through Oblonsky.
He was on familiar terms with everybody he drank champagne with, and he drank champagne with everybody.
But when in the presence of his subordinates he happened to meet any of his 'disreputable pals,' as he jocularly called them, he was able, with his innate tact, to minimize the impression such a meeting might leave on their minds.
Levin was not a 'disreputable pal,' but Oblonsky felt that Levin imagined he might not care to show their intimacy in the presence of the subordinates, and that was why he hurried him into his private room.
Levin had been his comrade and friend in early youth, and they were fond of one another as friends who have come together in early youth often are, in spite of the difference in their characters and tastes.
Yet, as often happens between men who have chosen different pursuits, each, while in argument justifying the other's activity, despised it in the depth of his heart.
Each thought that his own way of living was real life, and that the life of his friend was  illusion.
How many times he had already seen him arriving in Moscow from the country, where he did something, though what it was Oblonsky could never quite understand or feel any interest in.
Levin came to Moscow always excited, always in a hurry, rather shy and irritated by his own shyness, and usually with totally new and unexpected views about things.
Similarly, Levin in his heart despised the town life his friend was leading, and his official duties which he considered futile and ridiculed.
'We have long been expecting you,' said Oblonsky entering his private room and releasing Levin's arm, as if to show that here all danger was past. 'I'm very, very glad to see you!' continued he.
'I have the honour of knowing your brother, Sergius Ivanich,' said Grinevich, holding out his narrow hand with the long fingernails.
Though Levin had great respect for his step-brother, an author known throughout Russia, he hated to be regarded not as Constantine Levin but as a brother of the famous Koznyshev.
'No, I am no longer on the Zemstvo  I have quarrelled with the lot of them, and don't attend their meetings any more,' said he, addressing his friend.
'It's a long story  I'll tell you some other time,' said Levin, but at once began telling it. 'To put it in a nutshell, I have come to the conclusion that there is, and can be, no such thing as Zemstvo work,' he said, speaking as if some one had just offended him.
On the other hand...' he hesitated, 'it is a means of getting pelf for the provincial coterie!
We used to have guardianships and judgeships as soft jobs, and now we've Zemstvos  not bribes, but unearned salaries!' he went on as warmly as if he had just been contradicted.
'Didn't you tell me you would never again put on Western European clothes?' he asked, surveying Levin's new suit, evidently made by a French tailor. 'That's it!
'The two words are... however, it's nothing particular,' said Levin, and his face became almost vicious in his efforts to overcome his shyness.
Oblonsky, who had long known that Levin was in love with his, Oblonsky's, sister-in-law Kitty, smiled very slightly and his eyes sparkled merrily.
The Secretary came in, familiarly respectful, though with a certain modest consciousness (common to all secretaries) of his superiority to his chief in knowledge of business affairs, approached Oblonsky with some papers and on the plea of asking a question began to explain some difficulty.
Oblonsky, without hearing him to the end, put his hand in a kindly way on the Secretary's sleeve and, softening his remark with a smile, said:
'No; please do it as I said,' and, having in a few words explained his view of the matter, he pushed the paper away and said finally: 'Yes, please do it that way, Zachary Nikitich!'
Levin, who during Oblonsky's talk with the Secretary had quite overcome his shyness, stood leaning both arms on the back of a chair and listening with ironical attention.
'I don't understand it at all!' he remarked.
'What don't you understand?' asked Oblonsky with his usual merry smile, as he took out a cigarette.
'I don't understand what you're doing,' said Levin shrugging his shoulders. 'How can you do it seriously?'
'But all the same I admire your dignity and am proud that my friend is such a great man! But all the same you've not answered my question,' he added, making a desperate effort to look Oblonsky straight in the face.
It's all very well for you, who have three thousand desyatins in the Karazin District, and such muscles, and are as fresh as a twelve-year-old girl! But still, you'll be joining us yourself some day!...
'We'll talk about that too later on,' said Levin and again blushed to his very ears.
'That'll be all right!' said Levin and left the room, only recollecting when already at the door that he had not taken leave of Oblonsky's colleagues.
'He seems a very energetic man,' said Grinevich when Levin was gone.
'Yes, my dear fellow,' said Oblonsky, shaking his head, 'and he's a lucky man!
Three thousand desyatins in the Karazin District, his life before him, and such freshness!
WHEN OBLONSKY ASKED LEVIN HIS REASON for coming to town, Levin had blushed and been angry with himself for blushing, because he could not answer: 'I have come to propose to your sister-in-law,' although he really had come solely for that purpose.
He could not remember his mother, and his sister was much his senior, so that in the Shcherbatskys' house he saw for the first time the family life of a well-educated and honourable family of the old aristocracy  a life such as he had been deprived of by the death of his own father and mother.
All the members of that family, especially the women, appeared to him as though wrapped in some mystic poetic veil, and he not only saw no defects in them, but imagined behind that poetic veil the loftiest feelings and every possible perfection.
Why these three young ladies had to speak French and English on alternate days; why at a given time they played, each in her turn, on the piano (the sound of which reached their brother's room where the students were at work); why those masters of French literature, music, drawing, and dancing came to the house; why at certain hours the three young ladies accompanied by Mademoiselle Linon were driven in a calche to the Tverskoy Boulevard, wearing satin cloaks (Dolly a long one; Nataly a somewhat shorter one; and Kitty so short a cloak that her shapely little legs in their tight red stockings were quite exposed); why they had to walk up and down the Tverskoy Boulevard accompanied by a footman with a gilt cockade in his hat,  all this and much more that happened in this mystic world he did not understand; but he knew that everything done there was beautiful and he was in love with the very mystery of it all.
In his student days he very nearly fell in love with the eldest daughter, Dolly; but a marriage was soon after arranged between her and Oblonsky.
Then he began falling in love with the second daughter. He seemed to feel that he must fall in love with one of the sisters, but he was not sure with which.
But Nataly too, as soon as she came out, married the diplomat, Lvov.
Young Shcherbatsky who entered the navy was drowned in the Baltic; and after that, in spite of his friendship with Oblonsky, Levin's intercourse with the Shcherbatskys became less frequent.
But when he had come to Moscow early in the winter of this year and met them, he knew at last which of the three sisters he was really fated to love.
It would seem that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man of good family, rich rather than poor, and thirty-two years of age to propose to the Princess Shcherbatskaya. In all likelihood he would have been considered quite a suitable match.
But Levin was in love, and therefore Kitty seemed to him so perfect in every respect, so transcending everything earthly, and he seemed to himself so very earthly and insignificant a creature, that the possibility of his being considered worthy of her by others or by herself was to him unimaginable.
Having spent two months in Moscow, living as in a fog, meeting Kitty almost every day in Society which he began to frequent in order to meet her, he suddenly made up his mind that it was impossible, and returned to the country.
Levin's conviction that it was impossible rested on the idea that from her relatives' point of view he was not a good or suitable match for the delightful Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him.
From her parents' standpoint (it seemed to him) he had no settled occupation or position in the world. He was thirty-two, and while his former comrades were already colonels, aides-de-camp, Bank and Railway Directors, or Heads of Government Boards like Oblonsky, he (he knew very well what others must think of him) was merely a country squire, spending his time breeding cows, shooting snipe, and erecting buildings  that is to say, a fellow without talent, who had come to no good and was only doing what in the opinion of Society good-for-nothing people always do.
Of course the mysterious, enchanting Kitty could not love a plain fellow, such as he considered himself to be, a man so ordinary and undistinguished.
Moreover, his former relation to Kitty had been that of a grown-up man towards a child whose brother's friend he was, and this seemed an additional obstacle in love's path.
He thought a plain kindly fellow like himself might be loved as a friend, but to be loved with the kind of love he felt for Kitty, a man must be handsome and above all remarkable.
He had heard that women often love plain ordinary men but he did not believe it, because he judged by himself and he could only love beautiful mysterious exceptional women.
But after spending two months alone in the country he became convinced that this time he was not in love as he had been when quite young  for his present feelings gave him not a moment's rest  and that he could not live unless the question whether she was to be his wife or not were decided; also that his despair had been the outcome of his own fancy, and that he had no proof that he would be rejected.
So he had now come to Moscow determined to propose to her, and to marry her if he was accepted.
Or... but he dared not think what would happen if she refused him.
HAVING REACHED MOSCOW BY A MORNING TRAIN, Levin went to stay at the house of his half-brother Koznyshev, who was older than he, and after changing his clothes entered his brother's study, intending to tell him why he had come and to ask his advice. But his brother was not alone.
When Levin entered, Sergius Ivanich greeted him with the coldly affable smile he bestowed on everybody and, having introduced him to the professor, went on with the discussion.
The small spectacled man with the narrow forehead interrupted the conversation a moment to say, 'how do you do' to Levin and, paying no further attention to him, went on talking.
He had seen in the papers the articles they were discussing, and had read them because they interested him as a development of the bases of natural science  familiar to him as he had studied in that faculty at the University but he had never connected these scientific deductions as to man's animal origin, reflex actions, biology and sociology, with those questions concerning the meaning to himself of life and death, which had of late more and more frequently occurred to him.
Listening to his brother's conversation with the professor, he noticed that they connected the scientific question with the spiritual and several times almost reached the latter, but every time they approached this, which seemed to him the most important question, they at once hurriedly retreated and again plunged into the domain of fine sub-divisions, reservations, quotations hints and references to authorities; and he found it difficult to understand what they were talking about.
'I cannot admit,' said Koznyshev with his usual clear and precise expression and polished style, 'I cannot on any account agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external world is the outcome of impressions.
But here again it seemed to Levin that having reached the most important matter they avoided it; and he made up his mind to ask the professor a question.
'Consequently, if my senses are destroyed, if my body dies, no further existence is possible?' he asked.
But Koznyshev, who did not speak with anything like the same effort, or as one-sidedly, as the professor, and had room in his head for an answer to his opponent as well as for comprehension of the simple and natural point of view from which the question arose, smiled and said:
'We have not the data...' added the professor and went back to his arguments. 'No,' said he; 'I point out that if, as Pripasov definitely states, sensation is based on impressions, we must still carefully distinguish between these two perceptions.'
WHEN THE PROFESSOR HAD GONE, Koznyshev turned to his step-brother.
Levin knew that farming did not interest his elder brother and that the question was merely a concession, therefore he replied generally as to the sale of wheat and money matters.
He wanted to tell his brother of his intended marriage and to ask his advice.
He had even firmly made up his mind to do so, but when he saw his brother and heard his conversation with the professor, and afterward noticed the involuntarily patronizing tone in which he asked him about the business of their estate (this estate which they had jointly inherited from their mother had not been divided, and Levin was managing the whole of it), he felt that something prevented him from beginning to speak to his brother about his intention to marry.
He felt that his brother would not look at the matter as he wished him to.
To justify himself Levin began to relate what used to happen at the Meetings in his district.
Nicholas was Constantine Levin's elder brother, and Koznyshev's half-brother. He was a ruined man who had squandered the greater part of his fortune, mixed with the strangest and worst society, and quarrelled with his brothers.
Where is he?
Do you know?' Levin rose from his chair as if meaning to go at once.
'I am sorry I told you,' said Koznyshev, shaking his head at his brother's excitement. 'I sent to find out where he is living, and forwarded him a note of hand he had given to Trubin, which I had paid.
Koznyshev took a note from under a paper-weight and handed it to his brother.
When Levin had read the note, holding it in his hand, he remained standing in front of Koznyshev without lifting his head.
A struggle was going on within him between the desire to forget his unfortunate brother for the present, and the consciousness that this would be wrong.
'He evidently wants to offend me,' continued Koznyshev,' but he cannot do that. I wish with all my heart I could help him, but I know it can't be done.'
'Go if you like, but I don't advise it,' said Koznyshev. 'That's to say, I'm not afraid of it on my own account, he will not make mischief between us, but on your account I don't advise it.
I have begun to look differently, more leniently, at what is called rascality, since brother Nicholas became what he is.
Do you know what he has done?'
Having got the address from Koznyshev's footman Levin thought of going at once to see his brother; but, on reflection, decided to put off the visit till the evening.
He therefore went to Oblonsky's office, and having received news of the Shcherbatskys he drove to the place where he was told he could see Kitty.
AT FOUR O'CLOCK THAT AFTERNOON LEVIN, CONSCIOUS that his heart was beating rapidly, got out of the hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens and went down the path leading to the ice-hills and skating lake, sure of finding Kitty there, for he had noticed the Shcherbatskys' carriage at the entrance. It was a clear frosty day.
Be quiet, stupid!' he said to his heart. But the more he tried to be calm, the more laboured grew his breath.
A few more steps brought him to the skating lake, and among all the skaters he at once recognized her.
He knew she was there by the joy and terror that took possession of his heart.
There seemed to be nothing striking in her dress or attitude, but it was as easy for Levin to recognize her in that crowd as to find a rose among nettles. Everything was lit up by her.
She was the smile that brightened everything around. 'Can I really step down on to the ice, and go up to her?' he thought.
The spot where she stood seemed to him an unapproachable sanctuary, and there was a moment when he nearly went away, he was so filled with awe.
He had to make an effort and reason with himself that all sorts of people were passing near her and he himself might have come just to skate.
He stepped down, avoiding any long look at her as one avoids long looks at the sun, but seeing her as one sees the sun, without looking.
Yet skaters appeared quite calmly to gain on her, to catch her up, and even speak to her, and quite independently of her to amuse themselves enjoying the excellent ice and the fine weather.
Nicholas Shcherbatsky, Kitty's cousin, in a short jacket, tight trousers, with skates on his feet, was sitting on a bench, and seeing Levin, called out to him.
'I haven't any skates,' answered Levin, wondering at such boldness and freedom of manner in her presence and not losing sight of her for a moment although not looking at her.
She was turning a corner, her little feet, shod in high boots, kept close together, and she was skating timidly toward him.
A little boy dressed in a Russian costume, violently swinging his arms and stooping very low, was overtaking her.
She was not very firm on her feet. Having drawn her hands from the muff that hung by a cord from her neck, she held them out and looking at Levin, whom she had recognized, she smiled at him and at her fears.
Having turned the corner, she pushed off with an elastic little foot, glided straight up to Shcherbatsky, and catching hold of him with her hand, nodded smilingly to Levin.
She was more beautiful than he had imagined her.
When he thought about her he could vividly picture to himself her entire person, and especially the charm of her small, fair-haired head, so lightly poised on the shapely girlish shoulders, and the childlike brightness and kindness of her face.
In that childlike look, combined with the slim beauty of her figure, lay her special charm; and this he thoroughly appreciated, but what always struck him afresh as unexpected was the expression of her eyes  mild, calm, and truthful  and above all her smile, which carried him into a fairyland where he felt softened and filled with tenderness  as he remembered feeling on rare occasions in his early childhood.
'Have you been here long?' she said, shaking hands with him. 'Thank you,' she added as he picked up the handkerchief she had dropped from her muff.
I mean to-day...' replied Levin, in his excitement not quite taking in her question. 'I wanted to come and see you,' he went on, and then, remembering the reason why he wanted to see her he became abashed, and blushed.
She looked attentively at him as if wishing to understand his confusion.
There is a tradition here that you are the best skater,' she said, flicking off with a small black-gloved hand some hoar-frost crystals that had fallen on her muff.
'You seem to do everything passionately,' she remarked with a smile.
Can it be possible?' thought Levin looking at her.
'I'll go and put them on at once,' he said, and went to hire some skates.
'You've not looked us up for a long time, sir,' said one of the attendants as, holding up Levin's foot, he bored a hole in the heel of his boot. 'Since you left we have had no gentleman who is such a master at it as you!
Is that right?' he added, pulling the strap tight.
'Yes, that's right, that's right! Please be quick!' answered Levin, trying to restrain the happy smile which appeared on his face.
'Yes,' he thought, 'this is life  this is joy! She said, "Together: let us skate together"!
Shall I tell her now? But that's just why I'm afraid of speaking.
He stood up, took off his overcoat, and having given himself a start on the rough ice near the shelter, glided down to the smooth surface of the lake, increasing and diminishing his speed and shaping his course as if by volition only.
He approached Kitty timidly, but her smile again tranquillized him.
She gave him her hand and they went on together, increasing their speed, and the faster they went the closer she pressed his hands.
'I should learn quicker with you, for some reason  feel confidence in you,' she said.
'And I am confident of myself when you lean on me,' he answered, and was immediately frightened of what he had said, and blushed.
And in fact, as soon as he had uttered these words her face lost its kind expression  as when the sun hides behind a cloud  and Levin noticed that familiar play of her features which indicated an effort of mind: a wrinkle appeared on her smooth forehead.
'Has anything unpleasant happened...? But I have no right to ask,' he said hurriedly.
No, nothing unpleasant has happened,' she answered coldly, adding immediately: 'You have not seen Mlle Linon?'
'Go to her then, she is so fond of you.'
'What does she mean?
I have hurt her.
She welcomed Levin as an old friend, showing her set of false teeth in a smile.
'Yes, you see we grow up,' she said, indicating Kitty with a glance, 'and grow old. "Tiny Bear" is grown up!' continued the Frenchwoman, laughing and reminding him of his old joke when he called the three young ladies the Three Bears of the English fairy tale.
He had not the faintest recollection of it, but she was fond of the joke and had laughed at it for the last ten years.
Our Kitty is beginning to skate nicely, isn't she?'
When Levin returned to Kitty her face was no longer stern and her eyes had their former truthful, kindly look but he thought there was an intentionally quiet manner in her affability and he felt sad.
Having spoken about her old governess and her peculiarities, she asked him about his way of life.
'Do you really manage not to feel dull in the country in winter?' she said.
'I don't feel at all dull, I am very busy,' he answered, conscious that she was subduing him to her quiet tone, from which  as had happened at the beginning of the winter  he would not be able to free himself.
'I don't know,' he answered, without thinking of what he was saying.
The idea that if he accepted her tone of calm friendliness he would again go away without having settled anything occurred to him, and he determined to rebel.
It all depends on you,' he said, and was at once terrified at his own words.
Whether she had not heard his words or did not wish to hear them, anyhow, after slightly stumbling and striking her foot twice against the ice, she skated hurriedly away from him toward Mlle Linon, said something to her, and went toward the little house where the ladies took off their skates.
O Lord, help me and teach me!' prayed Levin, and feeling at the same time a need of violent exercise, he got up speed and described inner and outer circles.
Just then a young man, the best of the new skaters, with a cigarette in his mouth and skates on, came out of the coffee-room, and taking a run, descended the steps leading to the lake, clattering with his skates as he jumped from step to step.
He then flew down the slope and glided along the ice without so much as changing the easy position of his arms.
Levin went up the path as far back as he could to get up speed, and then slid downwards, balancing himself with his arms in this unaccustomed movement.
He caught his foot on the last step, but, scarcely touching the ice with his hand, made a violent effort, regained his balance, and skated away laughing.
'Good! Dear man!' thought Kitty who at that moment was just coming out of the little house with Mlle Linon, looking at him with a smile of gentle tenderness as at a dear brother.
I know it's not him I love, but still I feel happy with him, he is so charming!
Only why did he say that?' she thought.
When he saw Kitty who was going away, and her mother who had met her on the steps, Levin, flushed with the violent exercise, stood still and considered.
He then took off his skates and overtook mother and daughter at the gates of the Gardens.
Kitty was sorry to hear that dry tone and could not resist the desire to counteract her mother's coldness.
She turned her head and said smilingly:
Just then Oblonsky, his hat tilted on one side, with radiant face and eyes, walked into the Gardens like a joyous conqueror.
But on approaching his mother-in-law he answered her questions about Dolly's health with a sorrowful and guilty air: After a few words with her in a subdued and mournful tone, he expanded his chest and took Levin's arm.
'Well, shall we go?' he asked.
'I kept thinking about you, and am very, very glad you've come,' he went on, looking significantly into Levin's eyes.
'Well then, the Angleterre,' said Oblonsky, choosing the Angleterre because he was deeper in debt to that restaurant than to the Hermitage, and therefore considered it wrong to avoid it.
Levin was considering what the change in Kitty's face meant now; persuading himself that there was hope, now in despair, seeing clearly that such hope was madness; but yet feeling an altogether different being from what he had been before her smile and the words 'Au revoir!'
'You like turbot, don't you?' he asked, as they drove up to the restaurant.
WHEN THEY ENTERED THE RESTAURANT Levin could not help noticing something peculiar in his friend's expression, a kind of suppressed radiance in his face and whole figure. Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat on one side walked into the dining-room, giving his orders to the Tartar waiters, in their swallow-tail coats, with napkins under their arms, who attached themselves to him. Bowing right and left to his acquaintances who, here as elsewhere, greeted him joyfully, he passed on to the buffet, drank a glass of vodka and ate a bit of fish as hors-d'oeuvre, and said something to the painted Frenchwoman, bedecked with ribbons and lace, who sat at a little counter  something that made even this Frenchwoman burst into frank laughter.
'This way, please your Excellency! This way  no one will disturb your Excellency here,' said a specially officious waiter, an old white-headed Tartar, so wide in the hips that the tails of his coat separated behind.
'If you please, your Excellency,' he said, turning to Levin and as a mark of respect to Oblonsky paying attention to his guest. In a moment he had spread a fresh cloth on a round table already covered with a cloth beneath a bronze chandelier, moved two velvet chairs to the table, and stood with a napkin and menu awaiting the order.
'Shall we change our plan, Levin?' he said, with his finger on the bill of fare and his face expressing serious perplexity. 'But are the oysters really good?
Don't think that I do not appreciate your choice,' he added, noticing a dissatisfied look on Oblonsky's face.
The Tartar darted off, his coat-tails flying; and five minutes later rushed in again, with a dish of opened oysters in pearly shells and a bottle between his fingers.
Oblonsky crumpled his starched napkin and pushed a corner of it inside his waistcoat, then, with his arms comfortably on the table, attacked the oysters.
'Not bad,' he said, pulling the quivering oysters out of their pearly shells with a silver fork, and swallowing one after another. 'Not bad,' he repeated, lifting his moist and glittering eyes now to Levin, now to the Tartar.
Levin could eat oysters, though he preferred bread and cheese. But it gave him more pleasure to watch Oblonsky.
Even the Tartar, who having drawn the cork and poured the sparkling wine into the thin wide glasses was straightening his white tie, glanced with a smile of evident pleasure at Oblonsky.
'You don't care much for oysters?' said Oblonsky, emptying his champagne glass  'or perhaps you're thinking of something else. Eh?'
The feelings that filled his heart made him ill-at-ease and uncomfortable in this restaurant with its private rooms where men took women to dine. Everything seemed offensive: these bronzes, mirrors, gaslights and Tartar waiters.
He was afraid of soiling that which filled his soul.
Yes, I am preoccupied  and besides, all this makes me feel constrained,' he said. 'You can't imagine how strange it all seems to me who live in the country,  like the nails of that gentleman I saw at your place.'
He works with his mind...'
He remembered his brother Nicholas and frowned, feeling ashamed and distressed; but Oblonsky started a subject which at once distracted his thoughts.
'Well, are you going to see our people to-night? The Shcherbatskys, I mean,' he said, pushing away the rough and now empty oyster shells and drawing the cheese toward him, while his eyes glittered significantly.
It's just her manner...
Come, bring us the soup, my good fellow!... It's her grande dame manner,' said Oblonsky.
'Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!' interrupted Oblonsky, looking straight into his eyes.
'Don't you guess?' answered Levin, the light shining deep in his eyes as he gazed steadily at Oblonsky.
'Well, and what do you say to it?' asked Levin with a trembling voice, feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering. 'What do you think of it?'
Oblonsky slowly drank his glass of Chablis, his eyes fixed on Levin.
'There is nothing I should like better,' said he, 'nothing!
Do you know what we are talking about?' said Levin, peering into his interlocutor's face. 'You think it possible?'
You know, that would be terrible both for her and for me.'
'Oh no! In any case there's nothing in it terrible for the girl.
Every girl is proud of an offer.'
'Yes, every girl, but not she.'
He understood that feeling of Levin's so well, knew that for Levin all the girls in the world were divided into two classes: one class included all the girls in the world except her, and they had all the usual human failings and were very ordinary girls; while the other class  herself alone  had no weaknesses and was superior to all humanity.
'No, wait, wait!' he said. 'Understand that for me it is a question of life and death.
My wife is a most wonderful woman...' He sighed, remembering his relations with his wife; then after a minute's pause he continued: 'She has the gift of clairvoyance.
She sees people through and through! But more than that, she knows what is going to happen especially in regard to marriages.
For instance, she predicted that the Shahovskaya girl would marry Brenteln.
No one would believe it, but as it turned out she was right. And she is on your side.'
'In this way  she not only likes you, but says that Kitty is sure to be your wife.'
'She says that?' he cried. 'I have always thought her a jewel, your wife!
But enough  enough about it!' and he got up.
He strode up and down the little cage of a room blinking to force back his tears, and only when he had succeeded did he sit down again.
'Try and realize,' he said, 'that this is not love.
I heard to-day about my brother Nicholas... he's here, you know... and I forgot all about him.
It seems to me as if he too were happy.
'My one consolation is that prayer that I like so much: "Not according to my deserts but according to Thy mercy!" And she too can only forgive me that way.'
'Another bottle!' said Oblonsky, turning to the Tartar, who was filling their glasses and hovering round them just when he was not wanted.
'The reason you ought to know Vronsky is this: he is one of your rivals.'
'What is he?' asked Levin, the expression of childlike rapture which Oblonsky had been admiring suddenly changing into an angry and unpleasant one.
I met him in Tver when I was in the Service there and he came on conscription duty.
And he's even more than a first-rate fellow.
As I have got to know him now, he turns out to be both educated and very clever  a man who will go far.'
'Well, so he came here soon after you left, and as far as I can make out is head over ears in love with Kitty; and you understand that her mother...'
'Pardon me, but I understand nothing,' said Levin, dismally knitting his brows.
And at once he thought of his brother Nicholas and how mean he was to forget him.
Levin leant back in his chair. His face was pale.
I can't drink any more,' said Levin pushing his glass aside, 'or I shall be tipsy... Well, and how are you getting on?' he continued, evidently wishing to change the subject.
He now repented with his whole heart of having begun this conversation with Oblonsky.
His personal feelings had been desecrated by the mention of some Petersburg officer as his rival, and by Oblonsky's conjectures and advice.
'I'll come some day,' he said. 'Ah, old chap, women are the pivot on which everything turns!
Tell me quite frankly...' He took out a cigar, and with one hand on his glass he continued: 'Give me some advice.'
Supposing you were married and loved your wife, but had been fascinated by another woman...
A woman, a dear, gentle, affectionate creature, poor and lonely, sacrifices everything.
Now when the thing is done... just consider, should one forsake her? Granted that one ought to part with her so as not to destroy one's family life, but oughtn't one to pity her and provide for her and make things easier?'
I have never seen any charming fallen creatures, and never shall see any; and people like that painted Frenchwoman with her curls out there by the counter, are an abomination to me, and all these fallen ones are like her.'
Christ would never have spoken those words, had he known how they would be misused!
'It's all very well for you to talk like that  it's like that gentleman in Dickens, who with his left hand threw all difficult questions over his right shoulder.
A man hardly has time to turn round, before he feels that he can no longer love his wife in that way, whatever his regard for her may be.
But just consider, here are two women: one insists only on her rights, and her rights are your love, which you cannot give her; and the other sacrifices herself and demands nothing.
And the reason is this: I think love, both kinds of love, which you remember Plato defines in his "Symposium"  both kinds of love serve as a touchstone for men.
Here Levin recollecting his own sins and the inner struggle he had lived through added unexpectedly,
You also want the activity of each separate man to have an aim, and love and family life always to coincide  and that doesn't happen either.
He was thinking of his own affairs and not listening to Oblonsky.
And suddenly both felt that though they were friends, and had dined and drunk wine together which should have drawn them yet closer, yet each was thinking only of his own affairs and was not concerned with the other.
'The bill!' he shouted and went out into the dining-hall, where he immediately saw an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance, and entered into conversation with him about an actress and her protector.
When the Tartar returned with a bill for twenty-six roubles odd, Levin quite unconcernedly paid his share which with the tip came to fourteen roubles, a sum that usually would have horrified his rustic conscience, and went home to dress and go on to the Shcherbatskys' where his fate was to be decided.
PRINCESS KITTY SHCHERBATSKAYA WAS EIGHTEEN, and this was her first season.
Her success in Society was greater than that of her two elder sisters, and greater even than her mother had expected.
Not only were nearly all the youths that danced at the Moscow balls in love with Kitty, but two serious suitors presented themselves for her that very first winter: Levin and, immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.
Levin's arrival at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits and evident love for Kitty gave rise to her parents' first serious deliberation as to her future and to disputes between them.
The Prince took Levin's part and said he desired nothing better for Kitty.
The Princess with a woman's way of talking round the question said that Kitty was too young, that Levin had not shown that his intentions were serious, that Kitty was not in love with him, and so on; but she did not say the most important things, namely that she expected a better match for her daughter, that she did not like Levin and did not understand him.
When he suddenly left, the Princess was pleased and triumphantly said to her husband, 'You see, I was right!' When Vronsky appeared she was still more pleased and was strengthened in her opinion that Kitty ought to make not only a good but a brilliant match.
In the mother's eyes there was no comparison between Levin and Vronsky.
She did not like Levin's strange and harsh criticisms, his awkward manner in Society which she attributed to pride, and what she considered his strange way of life in the country; occupied with cattle and peasants; in particular she did not like the fact that when he was in love with her daughter he came to the house for six weeks as if waiting and looking out for something, afraid of doing them too great an honour by making an offer of marriage, and that he did not understand that, if he visited at a house where there was a marriageable girl, he ought to declare his intentions. And then suddenly he left without proposing!
'It's a good thing he is so unattractive, and that Kitty has not fallen in love with him,' thought her mother.
Vronsky satisfied all the mother's desires: he was very rich, clever, distinguished, with a brilliant military career before him, a position at Court, and altogether was an enchanting man.
Vronsky was openly attentive to Kitty when they met at balls, danced with her, and came to the house, so there could be no doubt as to the seriousness of his intentions.
But in spite of this the mother was in a dreadful state of anxiety and agitation all that winter.
Her fianc about whom everything was known beforehand came, saw his intended bride, and was seen by her people, then the matchmaking aunt learnt what was thought on each side, and passed on the information. All was satisfactory.
Afterwards at an appointed time and place the expected proposal was made to, and accepted by, her parents.
At least so it seemed to the Princess. But in her daughters' case she experienced how far from easy and simple the apparently easy business of marrying off a daughter really was.
What anxiety she had to suffer, how many questions to consider over and over again, how much money to spend, how many encounters with her husband to go through; when her two elder daughters Darya and Nataly were married!
Now that her youngest daughter had come out she was living through the same fears and doubts, and having even worse disputes with her husband than on her elder daughters' account.
Like all fathers, the old Prince was extremely punctilious where his daughters' purity and honour were concerned; he was unreasonably jealous especially about Kitty, his favourite, and at every step reproached the Princess with compromising her daughter.
The Princess had grown used to this in respect to her older daughters, but now she felt that her husband's punctiliousness had more justification.
She could see that lately social customs had changed very much and a mother's duties had become still more difficult.
The French way, of parents deciding a daughter's fate, was not accepted, and was even condemned.
The English way, of giving a girl perfect freedom, was also rejected, and would have been impossible in Russian Society.
But how a girl was to get married, or how a mother was to get a daughter given in marriage, no one knew.
After all it's the young people who marry and not their parents, therefore they must be left to arrange matters as they think best.' It was all very well for people who had no daughters to talk like that, but the Princess knew that intimacy might be followed by love and that her daughter might fall in love with some one who had no intention of marrying or was not fit to be her husband.
And whatever people might say about the time having come when young people must arrange their future for themselves, she could not believe it any more than she could believe that loaded pistols could ever be the best toys for five-year-old children.
That is why the Princess was more anxious about Kitty than she had been about her elder daughters.
And now she was afraid that Vronsky might content himself with merely flirting with her daughter.
She saw that Kitty was in love with him, but consoled herself with the thought that Vronsky was an honest man and therefore would not act in such a way.
At the same time she knew that the freedom now permitted made it easy for a man to turn a girl's head, and knew how lightly men regarded an offence of that kind.
The week before, Kitty had repeated to her mother a conversation she had had with Vronsky while dancing the mazurka with him.
This conversation had partly reassured the Princess; but she could not feel quite at ease.
Vronsky had told Kitty that he and his brother were so used to comply with their mother's wishes that they never made up their minds to take an important step without consulting her. 'And I am now especially happy looking forward to my mother's arrival from Petersburg,' he had said.
But to her mother they appeared in a different light.
She knew that the old lady was expected any day, and would approve of her son's choice; and though she thought it strange that he should delay proposing for fear of hurting his mother, she so desired the marriage, and especially relief from her own anxiety, that she believed it.
Hard as it was to see the misfortune of Dolly, her eldest daughter (who thought of leaving her husband), the Princess's anxiety as to her youngest daughter's fate, now about to be decided, entirely absorbed her.
Levin's arrival that day gave her further cause for anxiety.
She was afraid that her daughter who had once seemed to have a certain affection for Levin might be led by an exaggerated feeling of loyalty to reject Vronsky, and she feared that in general Levin's arrival might cause complications and delays in matters now so near conclusion.
'Has he been back long?' asked the Princess when they got home, referring to Levin.
'There is one thing I want to say...' the Princess began, and from her serious look Kitty guessed what was coming.
'Mama,' she said flushing and turning quickly toward her mother, 'please, please, say nothing about it!
Her wish was the same as her mother's, but the motive underlying her mother's wish offended her.
'I won't,  only this, my darling,' said the mother, seeing tears in her daughter's eyes, '... you promised not to have any secrets from me and you won't, will you?'
'Never, Mama, never at all,' answered Kitty blushing as she looked her mother straight in the face. 'But I have nothing to say at present...
'No, she could not possibly tell an untruth with such eyes,' thought the mother smiling at her agitation and joy.
The Princess smiled to think how immense and important what was going on in her own soul must appear to the poor girl.
During THE INTERVAL between dinner and the beginning of the evening party, Kitty experienced something resembling a young man's feelings before a battle.
Her heart was beating violently and she could not fix her thoughts on anything.
She felt that this evening, when those two men were to meet for the first time, would decide her fate; and she kept picturing them to herself, now individually and now together.
When she thought of the past, she dwelt with pleasure and tenderness on her former relations with Levin.
Memories of childhood and of Levin's friendship with her dead brother lent a peculiar poetic charm to her relations with him.
His love for her, of which she felt sure, flattered and rejoiced her, and she could think of him with a light heart.
With her thought of Vronsky was mingled some uneasiness, though he was an extremely well-bred and quiet-mannered man; a sense of something false, not in him, for he was very simple and kindly, but in herself; whereas in relation to Levin she felt herself quite simple and clear.
On the other hand when she pictured to herself a future with Vronsky a brilliant vision of happiness rose up before her, while a future with Levin appeared wrapped in mist.
On going upstairs to dress for the evening and looking in the glass, she noticed with pleasure that this was one of her best days, and that she was in full possession of all her forces, which would be so much wanted for what lay before her.
She was conscious of external calmness and of freedom and grace in her movements.
At half-past seven, as soon as she had come down into the drawing-room, the footman announced 'Constantine Dmitrich Levin!' The Princess was still in her bedroom, nor had the Prince yet come down.
'So it's to be!' thought Kitty and the blood rushed to her heart. Glancing at the mirror she was horrified at her pallor.
She felt sure that he had come so early on purpose to see her alone and to propose to her.
And now for the first time the matter presented itself to her in a different and entirely new light.
Only now did she realize that this matter (with whom she would be happy, who was the man she loved) did not concern herself alone, but that in a moment she would have to wound a man she cared for, and to wound him cruelly...
Because the dear fellow was in love with her.
'Oh God, must I tell him so myself?' she thought. 'Must I really tell him that I don't care for him?
She was already approaching the door when she heard his step.
Besides, it's impossible to feel awkward with him. Here he is!' she thought, as she saw his powerful diffident figure before her and his shining eyes gazing at her.
She looked straight into his face as if entreating him to spare her, and gave him her hand.
'I don't think I've come at the right time, I'm too early,' he said, gazing round the empty drawing-room.
When he saw that his expectation was fulfilled and that nothing prevented his speaking to her, his face clouded over.
'But all I wanted was to find you alone,' he began, still standing and avoiding her face so as not to lose courage.
She spoke without knowing what she was saying, her eyes fixed on him with a caressing look full of entreaty.
He glanced at her; she blushed and was silent.
Her head dropped lower and lower, knowing the answer she would give to what was coming.
'That it would depend on you,' he repeated. 'I want to say...
I came on purpose... that... to be my wife!' he uttered hardly knowing what he said; but feeling that the worst was out he stopped and looked at her.
She had not at all expected that his declaration of love would make so strong an impression on her.
She remembered Vronsky, lifted her clear, truthful eyes to Levin's face, and noticing his despair she replied quickly:
How near to him she had been a minute ago, how important in his life!
And how estranged and distant she seemed now!
'Nothing else was possible,' he said, without looking at her, and bowing he turned to go...
An expression of terror appeared in her face on seeing them alone together and noticing their troubled looks. Levin bowed to her and said nothing.
Kitty sat with downcast eyes. 'Thank Heaven she has refused him,' thought the mother, and her face brightened into the usual smile with which she greeted her visitors on Thursday evenings.
She sat down and began questioning Levin about his life in the country.
She was a thin, sallow, nervous, ailing woman with shining black eyes.
She was fond of Kitty, and her affection showed itself as the affection of a married woman for an unmarried one generally does, in a desire to get Kitty married according to her  the Countess's  own ideal of conjugal bliss; and she wished to see her married to Vronsky.
She always disliked Levin, whom at the beginning of the winter she had often met at the Shcherbatskys.
'I love it when he looks down at me from the height of his dignity, or breaks off his clever conversation because I am too stupid, or when he shows his condescension toward me.
I am very glad he hates me,' she used to say with reference to him.
She was right, because Levin really could not bear her and despised her for the very thing she was proud of and regarded as a merit, that is, her nervousness and refined contempt and disregard for all the rough and common things of life.
So you have returned to our depraved Babylon!' she said, holding out her tiny yellow hand and repeating the words he had used early in the winter when he had called Moscow 'Babylon,'  'Has Babylon improved or have you deteriorated?' she added, and turned toward Kitty with a sarcastic smile.
'I am much flattered that you remember my words so well, Countess,' replied Levin who had had time to recover his self-possession, resuming immediately and by force of habit his banteringly hostile relation with her. 'They evidently produced a strong impression on you.'
Awkward as it would have been for Levin to leave just then, he would have preferred doing so to remaining in the house for the rest of the evening in sight of Kitty, who now and then glanced at him but avoided catching his eye.
He was about to rise, when the Princess noticing his silence turned toward him and said:
'No, Princess, I am no longer on the Zemstvo,' he answered,' I have come to Moscow for a few days.'
'Something out of the common has happened to him,' thought the Countess Nordston, scrutinizing his stern and serious face; 'why does he not start on one of his discourses?
'Mr. Levin,' she began, 'explain to me, please, you who know everything, how it is that at our Kaluga estate the peasant men and women have drunk everything they had, and never pay anything they owe us.
'Excuse me, Countess, but really I know nothing about it, and can't tell you anything,' he said, and as he turned he saw an officer who had come into the room behind the lady.
'That must be Vronsky,' he thought, and looked at Kitty to make sure.
And by the look of her eyes which had involuntarily brightened Levin realized that she loved this man, realized it as surely as if she had told it him in so many words.
But what kind of man was he?
Now, rightly or wrongly, Levin could not but remain. He had to find out what sort of a man it was that she loved.
Vronsky was a dark sturdily-built man of medium height, with a good-natured, handsome, exceedingly quiet and firm face.
Everything about his face and figure  from his black closely-cropped hair and freshly-shaven chin to his wide, brand-new uniform  was simple and at the same time elegant. Having stepped aside to let a lady pass, Vronsky approached first the Princess and then Kitty.
When he moved toward her his fine eyes brightened with a special tenderness, and carefully and respectfully bending over her with a scarcely perceptible, happy, and (as it seemed to Levin) modestly-triumphant smile, he held out to her his small broad hand.
Having greeted and spoken a few words to every one else, he sat down without having once looked at Levin, who had not taken his eyes off him.
Vronsky rose and looking cordially into Levin's eyes pressed his hand.
'I was to have dined with you earlier this winter,' he said with his simple frank smile, 'but you unexpectedly went away to the country.'
'My words, must make a deep impression on you for you to remember them so long,' said Levin; then recollecting that he had said this before he blushed.
'And do you always live in the country?' he asked. 'Isn't it dull in the winter?'
I have experienced a curious feeling,' he went on.
'Nowhere have I felt so homesick for the country, our Russian country, with its peasants in bark-shoes, as when I spent a winter with my mother in Nice.
He was addressing both Kitty and Levin, his quiet and friendly glance passing from the one to the other. He was evidently speaking quite sincerely and frankly.
Noticing that the Countess Nordston wished to say something, he stopped without finishing what he was saying, and listened attentively to her.
Levin wished to join in the general conversation, but found it impossible, and kept saying to himself, 'Now I will go,' yet he did not go, but waited for something indefinite.
The conversation touched on table-turning and spiritualism, and the Countess Nordston, who believed in spiritualism, began relating miracles she had witnessed.
'Very well, next Saturday,' replied the Countess Nordston. 'And you; Mr. Levin, do you believe in it?' she asked, turning to him.
'Then you think I am not telling the truth?' and she laughed mirthlessly.
'Oh no, Masha, Mr. Levin only says he can't believe...' said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin understanding this became still more irritated and wished to answer, but Vronsky, with his bright and frank smile, came at once to the rescue of the conversation, which was threatening to become unpleasant.
'You don't admit that it is even possible?' he asked. 'But why not?
Vronsky listened attentively to Levin as he always listened, evidently interested in what he was saying.
Probably feeling that the conversation was becoming too serious for a drawing-room, Vronsky did not reply, but in order to change the subject he smiled gaily and turned toward the ladies.
'Let us try now, Countess,' he began, but Levin wanted to finish saying what he thought.
'I think,' he continued, 'that this attempt of the Spiritualists to explain their wonders by some kind of new force is most unsuccessful.
Everybody waited for him to finish and he was conscious of it.
Levin opened his mouth to reply, but blushed and said nothing.
'Let us try table-turning now, Princess Kitty, please do,' said Vronsky. 'May we, Princess?' he said to her mother and he rose and looked round for a suitable table.
Kitty rose to fetch a table, and as she passed Levin their eyes met.
She pitied him with her whole soul, especially because she herself had caused him to suffer. 'If you can forgive me, please do,' pleaded her look.
'I hate everybody, including you and myself,' answered his eyes; and he took up his hat.
But he was not fated to go yet.
Just as the others began settling round the table and Levin was about to go, the old Prince came in, and having greeted the ladies he turned to Levin.
'Ah!' said he heartily. 'Been here long?
Kitty was conscious that, after what had taken place, her father's cordiality oppressed Levin.
She also noticed how coldly her father at last responded to Vronsky's bow, and with what good-natured perplexity Vronsky looked at him, trying, but failing, to understand how it was possible not to be friendly disposed toward him, and she blushed.
Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, but in my opinion playing at hunt the ring is more amusing,' said the old Prince, looking at Vronsky and guessing that he had started the thing. 'After all there is some sense in "Hunting the ring."-'
Vronsky's unflinching eye glanced in astonishment at the old Prince, and slightly smiling he at once began talking to the Countess Nordston about the ball that was to take place the next week.
'I hope you will be there,' he said to Kitty.
As soon as the old Prince had turned away from him Levin went out unobserved, and his last impression was Kitty's happy smiling face as she answered Vronsky's question about the ball.
AFTER THE GUESTS HAD GONE Kitty told her mother of her conversation with Levin, and in spite of all her pity for him she was pleased by the thought that she had had a proposal.
She did not doubt that she had acted rightly, yet for a long time she lay in bed unable to sleep.
One image pursued her relentlessly.
It was Levin's face with his kind eyes looking mournfully from under his knit brows as he stood listening to her father and glancing at her and at Vronsky, and she felt so sorry for him that tears rose to her eyes.
But she immediately remembered for whom she had exchanged him.
She vividly pictured to herself that strong manly face, that well-bred calm and the kindness toward everybody he always showed: she remembered the love the man she loved bore her, and again became joyful and with a happy smile put her head on her pillow.
'It is a pity, a pity, but I am not to blame,' she said to herself, but an inner voice said something different.
Whether she repented of having drawn Levin on or of having rejected him she did not know, but her happiness was troubled by doubts.
'Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy,' she repeated to herself till she fell asleep. Meanwhile below in the Prince's little study her parents were having one of their frequent scenes about their favourite daughter.
I'll tell you what!' shouted the Prince flourishing his arms and immediately again wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown around him. 'You have no pride, no dignity, you disgrace and ruin your daughter by this vile idiotic match-making.'
After her talk with her daughter she had come in, happy and contented, to say good-night to the Prince as usual, and though she did not intend to speak to him about Levin's proposal and Kitty's refusal she hinted to him that she thought the matter with Vronsky was quite settled and would probably be definitely decided as soon as his mother arrived.
And when she said that, the Prince suddenly flared up and began to shout rudely:
Levin is a thousand times the better man.
But even if he were a Prince of the blood my daughter does not need him.'
'I know this much,' the Princess interrupted him, 'that if I were to listen to what you say we should never see our daughter married, and we had better go and live in the country.'
No, certainly not, but a young man and an excellent young man falls in love with Kitty, and she too seems...'
And suppose she really falls in love with him while he intends to marry about as much as I do... Oh, I wish my eyes had never seen it...
Ah the ball!"-' And the Prince imagining himself to be impersonating his wife curtsied at each word. 'And then if we really ruin Kitty's happiness, if she really gets it into her head...'
I can recognize a man who has serious intentions  such as Levin  and I can see through a weathercock like that popinjay who only wishes to amuse himself.'
The Princess had been at first firmly convinced that this evening had decided Kitty's fate and that there could be no doubt as to Vronsky's intentions; but her husband's words disturbed her, and when she reached her room, in terror of the uncertainty of the future, she mentally repeated, just as Kitty had done: 'Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!'
His mother in her youth had been a brilliant Society woman, and during her married life and especially in her widowhood had had many love affairs, known to everybody.
He hardly remembered his father, and had been educated in the Cadet Corps.
On leaving that Corps as a very young and brilliant officer he at once joined the swim of the wealthy military Petersburg set.
Though he occasionally went into the highest Petersburg Society, all his love interests lay outside it.
In Moscow, after this luxurious course of Petersburg life, he experienced for the first time the delight of intimacy with a sweet, innocent Society girl who fell in love with him.
It never entered his head that there could be any wrong in his relations with Kitty.
At balls he danced chiefly with her and he visited her at her home.
He talked with her the usual Society talk: all sorts of rubbish, but rubbish into which involuntarily he put a special meaning for her.
Though he never said anything to her which could not have been said before everybody he was conscious that she was becoming more and more dependent upon him, and the more he felt this the pleasanter it was, and the more tender became his feelings toward her.
He did not know that his behaviour toward Kitty had a name of its own, that it was decoying a girl with no intentions of marrying her, and is one of the evil actions common among brilliant young men like himself.
He thought he was the first to discover this pleasure and he enjoyed his discovery.
If he could have heard what her parents said that night, if he could have known her family's point of view and learnt that Kitty would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have been much surprised and would not have believed it.
He would not have believed that what gave so much and such excellent pleasure to him, and  what was more  to her, could be wrong.
Every less could he have believed that he ought to marry.
Not only did he dislike family life, but in accordance with the views generally held in the bachelor world in which he lived he regarded the family, and especially a husband, as something alien, hostile, and above all ridiculous.
But although Vronsky had no suspicion of what Kitty's parents were saying, he felt, as he left the Shcherbatskys' house that night, that the secret spiritual bond which existed between him and Kitty had so strengthened during the evening that some action ought to be taken.
But what this should or could be he could not imagine.
'That's what is so delightful,' he thought as he left the Shcherbatskys' house, carrying away from there, us usual, a pleasant feeling of purity and freshness (partly due to the fact that he had not smoked at all that evening) and deeply touched by a new sense of tender joy in the consciousness of her love for him. 'That is what is so delightful, that nothing was said either by me or by her, yet we so well understand one another in that subtle language of looks and tones that to-day more plainly than ever she has told me that she loves me.
Those dear loving eyes! when she said, "and very much."
It's pleasant for me and for her,' and he considered where he should finish his evening.
He passed in review the places he might go to.
He went straight to his rooms at the Hotel Dusseau, had supper, and after undressing had hardly laid his head on his pillow before he was fast asleep.
AT ELEVEN O'CLOCK NEXT MORNING Vronsky drove to the Petersburg railway station in Moscow to meet his mother, and the first person he saw on the steps of the large portico was Oblonsky, who was expecting his sister by the same train.
'My mother,' replied Vronsky, shaking hands and smiling (as everybody did when meeting Oblonsky) as they went up the steps together. 'She is coming from Petersburg to-day.'
'-"Fiery steeds by" something "brands / I can always recognize; / Youths in love..."-' declaimed Oblonsky, just as he had done to Levin.
Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed not to deny the implication but he immediately changed the subject.
'And whom have you come to meet?' he asked.
'I? A lovely woman,' answered Oblonsky.
'I expect you know her?'
I know he is clever, learned, and by way of being religious, but you know it is not my... not in my line,' he added in English.
'Oh yes, he is a very remarkable man, a bit conservative, but a splendid fellow,' said Oblonsky, 'a splendid fellow.'
'Well, so much the better for him,' and Vronsky smiled. 'Ah, you are here!' he went on, turning toward his mother's old footman who was standing by the door.
Besides liking Oblonsky, as everybody did, Vronsky latterly had felt still more drawn to him because he was connected in his mind with Kitty.
'Well, are we to give a supper to the diva next Sunday?' he asked smilingly, taking Oblonsky's arm.
Only he left very early.'
He is a very nervous man, and does make himself unpleasant sometimes, that's true enough; but on the other hand he is sometimes very charming.
His is such an honest, straightforward nature, and he has a heart of gold.
But yesterday there were special reasons,' continued Oblonsky with a significant smile, quite forgetting the sincere sympathy he had felt for his friend the day before, and now only feeling the same sympathy for Vronsky. 'Yes, there was a reason why he had to be either specially happy or specially unhappy.'
Did he propose to your belle soeur last night '
Oh yes, if he left early and was in a bad temper it must be that...
He has been in love with her so long, and I am very sorry for him.'
But I should think she may make a better match,' said Vronsky, and expanding his chest he again moved forward. 'However, I don't know him,' he added.
The sprightly guard blew his whistle and jumped off while the train was still moving, and impatient passengers began to descend one after another: an officer of the guards, erect and looking sternly round, a fidgety little tradesman with a bag, a peasant with a sack over his shoulder.
Vronsky, as he stood by Oblonsky and watched these passengers coming out of the carriages, quite forgot about his mother.
What he had just heard about Kitty excited and delighted him.
His chest involuntarily expanded and his eyes shone, he felt himself to be a conqueror.
His words roused Vronsky from his reverie and reminded him of his mother and of the coming meeting.
In the depths of his heart he did not respect his mother and (though this he never acknowledged to himself) did not love her, but in accordance with the views of the set he lived in, and as a result of his education, he could not imagine himself treating her in any way but one altogether submissive and respectful; the more submissive and respectful he was externally, the less he honoured and loved her in his heart.
The trained insight of a Society man enabled Vronsky with a single glance to decide that she belonged to the best Society.
He apologized for being in her way and was about to enter the carriage, but felt compelled to have another look at her, not because she was very beautiful nor because of the elegance and modest grace of her whole figure, but because he saw in her sweet face as she passed him something specially tender and kind.
When he looked round she too turned her head.
Her bright grey eyes which seemed dark because of their black lashes rested for a moment on his face as if recognizing him, and then turned to the passing crowd evidently in search of some one.
In that short look Vronsky had time to notice the subdued animation that enlivened her face and seemed to flutter between her bright eyes and a scarcely perceptible smile which curved her rosy lips.
It was as if an excess of vitality so filled her whole being that it betrayed itself against her will, now in her smile, now in the light of her eyes.
She deliberately tried to extinguish that light in her eyes, but it shone despite of her in her faint smile.
His mother, a thin old woman with black eyes and curled hair, screwed up her eyes as she recognized her son and her thin lips smiled slightly.
She rose from the seat, and giving her hand-bag to her maid held out her small dry hand to her son, then lifting his head which had been bent to kiss her hand kissed him on his face.
'Have you had a good journey?' asked her son, sitting down on the seat beside her and involuntarily listening to a woman's voice outside the door.
He knew it was the voice of the lady he had met as he entered the carriage.
'Not at all, simply a woman's views.'
'Well, have you found your brother?' asked Vronsky's mother, addressing the lady.
'Excuse my not recognizing you before. Our acquaintance was so slight,' he said with a bow, 'that I am sure you do not remember me.'
'Oh yes, I should have recognized you, especially as I believe your mother and I have talked of nothing but you all the way,' said she, at last allowing the animation she had been trying to suppress to reveal itself in a smile. 'But my brother is not here yet.'
Mrs. Karenina did not wait for her brother to come in, but, on seeing him, descended from the carriage with a firm light step.
As soon as her brother came up to her she threw her left arm round his neck with a movement that struck Vronsky by its firmness and grace, and drawing him to herself gave him a vigorous kiss.
Vronsky did not take his eyes off her, and kept smiling, he knew not why.
But remembering that his mother was waiting for him he went back into the carriage.
'She is very charming, isn't she?' said the Countess, referring to Mrs. Karenina. 'Her husband put her into the compartment with me and I was very pleased.
'I don't know what you mean, maman,' the son replied coldly. 'Well, shall we go?'
'There, Countess, you have met your son and I my brother,' she said, 'and I have exhausted my stock of stories and should have had nothing more to tell you.'
'No, no,' said the Countess holding her hand,' I could travel round the world with you and not be dull.
But please don't fret about your son, you can't expect never to be parted.'
Mrs. Karenina stood very erect and her eyes were smiling.
'Anna Arkadyevna Karenina has a son who, I think, is eight years old,' explained the Countess, 'and she has never before been separated from him and so she is worried at having left him.'
'Yes, the Countess and I have talked all the time  I about my son and she about hers,' said Mrs. Karenina, and a smile brightened her face, a kind smile on his account.
'I expect you got very weary of it,' he said, quickly seizing in its flight the ball of coquetry she had thrown at him.
But she evidently did not wish to continue the conversation in that tone, and turned to the old Countess.
I'm an old woman and say what I mean, and tell you frankly that I've lost my heart to you.'
She blushed, stooped a little, and held out her face for the Countess to kiss, then she stood up again, and with the same smile hovering between her lips and eyes held out her hand to Vronsky.
He pressed the little hand, and the firm grip with which she shook his gave him unusual pleasure.
She went out with that brisk tread which carried her rather full figure with such wonderful ease.
Her son thought so too.
He followed her with his eyes as long as he could see her graceful form, and his face retained its smile.
Through the carriage window he saw her approach her brother and speak to him with animation about something that evidently had no connection with him, Vronsky, and that seemed to him provoking.
'Well, maman, are you quite well?' he said, turning toward his mother.
And she began to tell about what interested her most, her grandson's christening, for which she had gone to Petersburg, and the special favour the Emperor had shown to her eldest son.
The old major-domo, who had accompanied the Countess on her journey, came in and announced that everything was ready, and the Countess rose to go.
Vronsky gave his arm to his mother, but, just as they were coming out of the carriage, several people ran past them with frightened faces. The station-master with his peculiar coloured cap also ran past them.
Oblonsky, with his sister on his arm, also turned back, and, avoiding the crowd, stood with frightened faces beside the carriage.
His face was puckered and he seemed ready to cry.
Ah, how terrible!' he kept saying.
'Oh, if you had seen it, Countess,' said Oblonsky. And his wife was there...
It was dreadful to see her.
She threw herself on the body. They say he was the sole support of a very large family.
'Can nothing be done for her?' said Mrs. Karenina in an agitated whisper.
Vronsky glanced at her and at once went out.
'I will be back directly, maman,' he added, turning at the doorway.
When he returned a few minutes later Oblonsky was already talking to the Countess about the new opera singer, while she was impatiently glancing at the door in expectation of her son.
'Now let's go,' said Vronsky as he came in.
They went together, Vronsky walking in front with his mother, Mrs. Karenina following with her brother.
'For the widow,' said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders. 'I don't understand what need there is to ask.'
'You have given it!' exclaimed Oblonsky behind Vronsky, and pressing his sister's arm he added, 'Very kind, very kind!
Isn't he a fine fellow?
My respects to you, Countess,' and he remained behind with his sister, seeking her maid.
'What a terrible death!' said some gentleman as he passed them; 'cut in half, I hear.'
Mrs. Karenina got into her brother's carriage, and Oblonsky noticed with surprise that her lips were trembling and that it was with difficulty she kept back her tears.
'What is the matter with you, Anna?' he asked when they had gone a few hundred yards.
'It is a bad omen,' she replied.
'And have you known Vronsky long?' she asked.
Do you know we hope he will marry Kitty?'
'Yes?' said Anna softly. 'But let us talk about your affairs,' she added, shaking her head as if she wished physically to drive away something superfluous that hampered her.
'Yes, all my hopes are fixed on you,' said her brother.
And Oblonsky began his story.
On reaching his house, he helped his sister out of the carriage, pressed her hand, and drove off to his office.
WHEN ANNA ARRIVED Dolly was sitting in her little drawing-room giving a fair-haired, plump little boy (who already resembled his father) a French reading-lesson.
The boy, as he read, kept twisting and trying to pull off a loose button that hung from his jacket.
His mother moved his plump little hand away several times, but it always returned to the button.
At last she pulled the button off and put it into her pocket.
'Keep your hands quiet, Grisha,' she said, and again took up the rug she was knitting, a piece of work begun long ago, to which she always returned in times of trouble, and which she was now knitting, nervously throwing the stitches over with her fingers and counting them.
Though she had sent word to her husband the day before that she did not care whether his sister came or not, she had prepared everything for her visit and awaited her with agitation.
Dolly was overpowered by her sorrow and was quite absorbed by it. Nevertheless, she remembered that her sister-in-law, Anna, was the wife of one of the most important men in Petersburg, and a grande dame.
Thanks to that circumstance she did not carry out her threat to her husband, and did not forget that her sister-in-law was coming. 'After all, it is not in the least Anna's fault,' thought she.
'I know nothing but good about her, and she has never shown me anything but kindness and friendship.' It was true that, as far as she could remember her visit to the Karenins in Petersburg, she had not liked their house: there seemed to be something false in the tone of their family life.
If only she does not try to console me!' thought Dolly. 'All these consolations and exhortations and Christian forgivenesses, I have considered them a thousand times, and they are all no good.'
All these last days Dolly had been alone with her children.
She did not wish to talk about her sorrow, yet with that on her mind she could not talk about indifferent matters.
She knew that, one way or other, she would tell Anna everything, and now it pleased her to think how she would say it, and then she felt vexed to have to speak of her humiliation to her  his sister  and to hear from her set phrases of exhortation and consolation.
As it often happens, though she kept looking at the clock, waiting for Anna, she let the moment when her visitor arrived go by without even hearing the bell.
And when she heard soft steps and the rustle of petticoats already in the doorway, she looked round with an expression not of pleasure but of surprise on her careworn face.
She rose and embraced her sister-in-law.
'So you're here already?' she said, kissing her.
'She must know,' she thought, noticing the look of sympathy on Anna's face. 'Come, let me take you to your room,' she went on, trying to put off as long as possible the moment for explanation.
Dear me, how he has grown!' said Anna, and having kissed him, she stood with her eyes fixed on Dolly and blushed.
She took off her shawl and her hat and, having caught it in her black and very curly hair, shook her head to disengage it.
'Why, dear me, here is Tanya! You're just the same age as my little Serezha,' she added, turning to the little girl who had run into the room, and, taking her in her arms, Anna kissed her.
'Shall we go and see them?' she said. 'It is a pity Vasya is asleep.'
'Dolly' she said 'he has told me!'
'Dolly dear!' she began, 'I do not wish to take his part or console you; that would be impossible, but, dearest, I am simply sorry for you, sorry from the bottom of my heart!'
She moved closer to her sister-in-law and with her energetic little hand took hold of Dolly's.
The latter did not draw back from her but her face retained its rigid expression.
As soon as she had said it her face softened.
'Dolly, my darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you. Tell me everything.'
Dolly looked at her inquiringly.
'But Stephen Arkadyevich never told me anything. You will hardly believe it, but up to now I thought I was the only woman he had ever known.
To be fully convinced of one's happiness and suddenly...' continued Dolly, suppressing her sobs, 'to read a letter, his letter to his mistress, my children's governess. No, it is too horrible!'
She hurriedly drew out her handkerchief and hid her face in it. 'I could perhaps understand a momentary slip,' she went on after a pause, 'but deliberately, cunningly to deceive me... and with whom?
To go on living with me as my husband, and with her at the same time.... it's awful; you cannot realize...'
'Oh yes, I do, I do understand, Dolly dear, I do understand,' said Anna, pressing her hand.
'And do you think he realizes the horror of my situation?' continued Dolly. 'Not at all!
'Oh no,' Anna quickly interrupted. 'He is pitiable, he is overwhelmed with remorse...'
'Is he capable of remorse?' interrupted Dolly, looking searchingly into her sister-in-law's face.
He is kind-hearted, but he is proud too, and now he is so humiliated.
He is ashamed of the children, and that, loving you... yes, yes, loving you more than anything else in the world,' she hurriedly went on, not listening to Dolly who was about to reply, 'he has hurt you, hit you so hard. He kept saying, ' "No, no, she will not forgive me!"-'
Dolly, gazing beyond her sister-in-law, listened thoughtfully.
'Yes, I understand that his position is dreadful; it is worse for the guilty than for the innocent one,' she said, 'if he feels that the misfortune all comes from his fault.
But how can I forgive him, how can I be a wife to him after her?...
Sobs cut short her words.
But as if intentionally every time she softened, she again began to speak of the thing that irritated her.
'You know she is young, she is pretty,' she said. 'You see, Anna, my youth and my good looks have been sacrificed, and to whom?
For him and his children.
I have served his purpose and lost all I had in the service, and of course a fresh, good-for-nothing creature now pleases him better. They probably talked about me, or, worse still, avoided the subject...
And hatred again burned in her eyes. 'And after that he will tell me...
Anna could not think of anything, but her heart responded to every word and every look of Dolly's.
'All I can say is,' began Anna,' I am his sister and I know his character, his capacity for forgetting everything,' she made a gesture with her hand in front of her forehead, 'that capacity for letting himself be completely carried away, but on the other hand for completely repenting.
He can hardly believe now  can hardly understand  how he could do it.'
'No, he understands and understood,' Dolly interrupted. 'And I... you forget me...
When he was speaking to me, I confess I did not quite realize the misery of your position.
I saw only his side, and that the family was upset, and I was sorry for him, but now having spoken with you I as a woman see something else. I see your suffering and I cannot tell you how sorry I am for you.
'No,' Dolly began, but Anna stopped her and again kissed her hand.
'I know the world better than you do,' she said. 'I know men like Steve and how they see these things.
You think he spoke to her about you.
'Yes, but he kissed her...'
I have seen Steve when he was in love with you.
I remember his coming to me and weeping (what poetry and high ideals you were bound up with in his mind!), and I know that the longer he lived with you the higher you rose in his esteem.
You know we used to laugh at him because his every third word was, "Dolly is a wonderful woman."
You have been and still are his divinity, and this infatuation never reached his soul...'
Yes, I can,' said Anna, after a minute's consideration. Her mind had taken in and weighed the situation, and she added, 'Yes, I can, I can.
I should not remain the same woman  no, but I should forgive, and forgive it as utterly as if it had never happened at all.'
'Well, of course...' Dolly put in quickly as if saying what she had often herself thought, 'or else it would not be forgiveness.
THE WHOLE OF THAT DAY Anna remained at home, that is at the Oblonskys' house, and did not receive anybody, although several of her acquaintances who had heard of her arrival came to see her.
She spent the earlier part of the day with Dolly and the children, and sent a note to her brother to be sure and come home to dinner. 'Come,' she wrote.
Oblonsky dined at home, the conversation was general, and his wife addressed him familiarly in the second person singular, which she had not done all these days.
She knew Anna, but only slightly, and came to her sister's not without fear of how she might be received by this Petersburg Society woman whom everybody admired so much.
But she noticed at once that Anna liked her.
It was evident that her beauty and youth gave Anna pleasure and before Kitty had time to regain her self-possession she felt not only that she was under Anna's influence but that she was in love with her, as young girls often are with married women older than themselves.
Anna was not like a Society woman or the mother of an eight-year-old son. The flexibility of her figure, her freshness, and the natural animation of her face appearing now in her smile, now in her eyes, would have made her look more like a girl of twenty had it not been for a serious and sometimes even sad expression in her eyes which struck Kitty and attracted her.
Kitty felt that Anna was perfectly unaffected and was not trying to conceal anything, but that she lived in another, higher world full of complex poetic interests beyond Kitty's reach.
After dinner, when Dolly had gone to her own room, Anna got up quickly and went to her brother who was just lighting a cigar.
'Steve,' she said to him with a merry twinkle in her eye and making the sign of the cross over him as she indicated the door with a look. 'Go, and may God help you.'
He understood, threw down his cigar, and disappeared through the door.
When Oblonsky had gone, she returned to the sofa where she had been sitting surrounded by the children.
Whether because they saw that 'Mama' was fond of this aunt, or because they themselves felt her peculiar charm, first the two elder children and then the younger ones, as is often the way with children, had even before dinner begun clinging to her, and now would not leave her side.
And they started something like a game which consisted in trying to get as close to her as possible, to touch her, hold her little hand, kiss her, play with her ring, or at least touch the frills of her dress.
'Now how were we sitting before?' said Anna, resuming her seat.
And Grisha again pushed his head under her arm and leaning against her dress beamed with pride and joy.
'No, my dear, there are no more jolly balls for me,' said Anna, and Kitty saw in her eyes that peculiar world which was not yet revealed to her. 'There are some that are not as difficult and dull as the rest.'
Here, take this,' she said, turning to Tanya who was drawing off a ring which fitted loosely on her aunt's small tapering finger.
'Well, then, if I have to go, I shall console myself with the reflection that it will give you pleasure... Grisha, please don't pull so hard, it is all in a tangle already,' she said, arranging a loose lock of hair with which Grisha was playing.
There's Miss Hull calling you to tea,' she went on, disengaging herself from the children and dispatching them to the dining-room.
Kitty smiled and remained silent. 'How did she pass through it?
How I should like to know her story!' thought she, recollecting the unpoetic appearance of Anna's husband Alexis Karenin.
'Oh, was he there?' asked Kitty, blushing. 'What did Steve tell you?'
'Steve let it all out to me, and I shall be very pleased. I travelled yesterday with Vronsky's mother,' she continued, 'and she talked about him all the time.
He is her favourite son. I know how partial mothers are, but...'
'What did his mother tell you?'
'Oh very much! and I know he is her favourite, but anyone can see he is full of chivalry...
For instance she told me that he wished to give all his property to his brother, that already as a boy he had done something extraordinary, saved a woman from drowning.
In a word, he is a hero,' said Anna, smiling and remembering the 200 roubles he had given away at the station.
But she did not mention the 200 roubles.
For some reason she did not like to think about them.
She felt that there had been something in it relating personally to her that should not have been.
'She particularly wished me to go and see her,' continued Anna. 'I shall be glad to see the old lady again, and will go to-morrow.
Well, thank heaven Steve is stopping a long time with Dolly,' she added changing the subject, and she rose, dissatisfied with something, Kitty thought.
'All together!' said Anna laughing and running to meet them, and putting her arms round them she tumbled the whole heap of children  struggling and shrieking joyfully  on to the floor.
Oblonsky did not appear. He had probably left his wife's room by the other door.
'It will be too light for you downstairs,' said her sister-in-law.
'What are you talking about?' asked Oblonsky, entering the room from his study and addressing his wife.
From his tone both Kitty and Anna gathered that a reconciliation had taken place.
'Goodness knows if they have quite made it up,' thought Anna on hearing her tone, which was cold and calm.
'Come now, Dolly! always making difficulties,' said her husband. 'If you like I will do it all.'
'I know how you'll do it all,' answered Dolly. 'You will tell Matthew to do something that cannot be done and will go away yourself, and he will muddle everything,' and as she spoke her usual ironical smile wrinkled the corners of Dolly's mouth.
'Yes, a full, a full reconciliation, quite complete. Thank God!' thought Anna, and pleased to have been the means of bringing it about, she went up to Dolly and kissed her.
'Not at all. Why do you so despise Matthew and me?' said Oblonsky, turning to his wife with a slight smile.
All that evening Dolly maintained her usual slightly bantering manner toward her husband, and Oblonsky was contented and cheerful, but not to the extent of seeming to forget his guilt after having obtained forgiveness.
'I have her photo in my album,' said she, 'and I'll show you my Serezha's too,' she added with a mother's proud smile.
For toward ten o'clock  the time when she generally said good-night to her son and often put him to bed herself before going to a ball  she felt sad at being so far from him, and, whatever they talked about, her thoughts kept returning to her curly-headed Serezha.
She longed to look at his portrait and to talk about him.
Seizing the first opportunity she rose and, stepping firmly and lightly, went out to fetch her album.
The flight of stairs to her room went up from a landing of the well-heated front staircase.
As she was coming out of the drawing-room there was a ring at the door.
Anna looked down from the landing where she stood and at once recognized Vronsky, and a strange feeling of pleasure mixed with fear suddenly stirred in her heart.
He stood in his overcoat, feeling for something in his pockets.
When Anna was half-way up the top flight, he lifted his eyes and saw her, and a look of something like embarrassment and fear came into his face.
When Anna returned with her album he had already gone, and Oblonsky was saying that Vronsky had called to inquire about a dinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who was visiting Moscow, but that he could not be induced to come in. 'He seemed so queer,' added Oblonsky.
Kitty blushed. She thought that she alone understood why he had come to the house and why he would not come in.
'He has been to our house,' she thought, 'and not finding me in he guessed that I was here. And he would not come in because Anna is here, and he thought it too late.'
There was nothing extraordinary or strange in the fact that a man had called at half-past nine at a friend's house to ask about a dinner they were planning and that he would not come in; but it seemed strange to all of them.
THE BALL HAD ONLY JUST BEGUN when Kitty and her mother ascended the broad staircase which was deluged with light, decorated with flowering plants, and occupied by powdered footmen in red liveries.
A little old man, who had smoothed the grey hair on his temples before the mirror and who smelt strongly of scent, happened to jostle them on the stairs, and stepped aside in evident admiration of Kitty, whom he did not know.
A beardless youth, one of those whom the old Prince Shcherbatsky called puppies, with a very low-cut waistcoat, straightening his white tie as he went along, bowed to them and ran past but returned to ask Kitty for a quadrille.
An officer, buttoning his glove, stood aside at the doorway to make room for them, and smoothing his moustache looked with evident pleasure at the rosy Kitty.
Although Kitty's gown and coiffure and all her other adornments had given her much trouble and thought, she now entered the ballroom in her complicated dress of white net over a pink slip, as easily and simply as if these bows and laces and all the details of her toilet had not cost her or her people a moment's attention, as if she had been born in this net and lace and with that high coiffure and the rose and its two leaves on the top.
When, just before entering the ball-room, her mother wished to put straight a twisted end of her sash, Kitty drew slightly back: she felt that everything on her must be naturally right and graceful and that there was no need to adjust anything.
Her dress did not feel tight anywhere, the lace around her bodice did not slip, the bows did not crumple or come off, the pink shoes with their high curved heels did not pinch but seemed to make her feet lighter.
All three buttons on each of her long gloves, which fitted without changing the shape of her hand, fastened without coming off.
The black velvet ribbon of her locket clasped her neck with unusual softness.
That ribbon was charming, and when Kitty had looked at her neck in the glass at home, she felt that that ribbon was eloquent.
Kitty smiled, here at the ball, when she caught sight of it again in the mirror.
Her bare shoulders and arms gave her a sensation as of cold marble, a feeling she liked very much.
Her eyes shone and she could not keep her rosy lips from smiling at the consciousness of her attractive appearance.
Before she had reached the light-coloured crowd of women in tulle, ribbons, and lace, who were waiting for partners (Kitty never long formed one of the crowd), she was already asked for the waltz and asked by the best dancer, the leader of the dancing hierarchy, the famous dirigeur and Master of the Ceremonies, a handsome, stately married man, George Korsunsky.
He had just left the Countess Bonin, with whom he had danced the first round of the waltz, and looking round his domain  that is to say, a few couples who had begun to dance  he noticed Kitty just coming in. He approached her at that peculiar free and easy amble natural only to Masters of Ceremonies, bowed, and, without even asking her consent, put his arm round her slim waist.
She looked about for some one to hold her fan and the mistress of the house took it from her with a smile.
'How fine that you have come in good time,' he said with his arm round her waist. 'It's wrong of people to come so late.'
Bending her left arm she put her hand on his shoulder, and her little feet in their pink shoes began moving quickly, lightly, and rhythmically in time with the music, over the smooth parquet floor.
'It is a rest to waltz with you,' he said as he took the first slow steps of the dance. 'What lightness and precision! it's delightful!' he remarked, saying to her what he said to almost all the dancing partners whom he really liked.
She smiled at his praise, and over his shoulder continued to survey the ball-room.
She was not a girl just come out, for whom all faces at a ball blend into one fairy-like vision; nor was she a girl who had been dragged from ball to ball till all the faces were familiar to dullness. She was between those two extremes, and though elated was able to control herself sufficiently to be observant.
And he was there.
Kitty had not seen him since the day she had refused Levin.
With her far-sighted eyes she recognized him at once and even noticed that he was looking at her.
'I believe Anna Arkadyevna Karenina is here, take me to her.'
And Korsunsky waltzed toward the left of the room, gradually diminishing his step and repeating 'Pardon, mesdames, pardon, pardon, mesdames,' as he steered through that sea of lace, tulle and ribbons without touching as much as a feather, and then turned his partner so suddenly that her delicate ankles in the open-work stockings appeared as her train spread out like a fan and covered Krivin's knees.
Korsunsky bowed, straightened his broad shirt front, and offered Kitty his arm to conduct her to Anna.
Kitty flushed and, a little giddy, took her train off Krivin's knees and looked round for Anna.
Anna was not in lilac, the colour Kitty was so sure she ought to have worn, but in a low-necked black velvet dress which exposed her full shoulder and bosom that seemed carved out of old ivory, and her rounded arms with the very small hands.
In her black hair, all her own, she wore a little garland of pansies, and in her girdle, among the lace, a bunch of the same flowers.
The only noticeable things about it were the wilful ringlets that always escaped at her temples and on the nape of her neck and added to her beauty.
Round her finely chiselled neck she wore a string of pearls.
Kitty had been seeing Anna every day and was in love with her and had always imagined her in lilac, but seeing her in black she felt that she had never before realized her full charm.
She now saw her in a new and quite unexpected light.
She now realized that Anna could not have worn lilac, and that her charm lay precisely in the fact that her personality always stood out from her dress, that her dress was never conspicuous on her.
And her black velvet with rich lace was not at all conspicuous, but served only as a frame; she alone was noticeable  simple, natural, elegant and at the same time merry and animated.
She was standing among that group, very erect as usual, and was talking to the master of the house with her head slightly turned toward him, when Kitty approached.
'No, I am not going to throw the first stone,' she was saying in reply to some question, adding, with a shrug of her shoulders, 'although I cannot understand it'; and at once she turned to Kitty with a tender protecting smile.
She surveyed Kitty's dress with a rapid feminine glance and with a movement of her head, scarcely perceptible but understood by Kitty, she signified her approval of Kitty's dress and beauty.
'You even come into the room dancing,' she said. 'She is one of my most faithful helpers,' said Korsunsky, turning to Anna whom he had not yet seen.
'The Princess helps to make a ball gay and beautiful. Anna Arkadyevna, shall we have a turn?' he added, stooping toward her.
'I don't dance if it is possible not to,' she said.
'But to-night it is not possible,' he rejoined.
'Well, if it is impossible not to dance to-night, let us dance,' she said taking no notice of Vronsky's bow and quickly putting her hand on Korsunsky's shoulder.
'Why is she displeased with him?' thought Kitty, noticing that Anna had intentionally taken no notice of Vronsky's bow.
He came up to Kitty, reminding her of the first quadrille and regretting that he had not seen her for such a long time.
Kitty, while gazing with admiration at Anna waltzing, listened to him, expecting him to ask her to waltz, but he did not do so and she glanced at him with surprise.
He blushed and hurriedly asked her to dance, but scarcely had he put his arm round her slim waist and taken one step when the music stopped.
Kitty looked into his face which was so near her own, and long after  for years after  that look so full of love which she then gave him, and which met with no response from him, cut her to the heart with tormenting shame.
'Pardon, pardon, a waltz  a waltz,' shouted Korsunsky from the other end of the room, and seizing the first girl within reach he himself began dancing.
VRONSKY AND KITTY WALTZED several times round the room and then Kitty went to her mother, but hardly had she exchanged a few words with the Countess Nordston before Vronsky returned to fetch her for the first quadrille.
Nothing special was said during the quadrille: they talked in snatches about the Korsunskys, husband and wife, whom Vronsky very amusingly described as dear forty-year-old children, and about a proposed Stage Society, and only once did the conversation touch her to the quick  when he asked her about Levin, whether he was still in Moscow, and added that he had liked him very much.
But Kitty had not expected more from the quadrille, she waited with a clutch at her heart for the mazurka.
It seemed to her that the mazurka would settle everything.
That he did not ask her for the mazurka while they were dancing the quadrille did not disturb her.
She was sure that she would dance the mazurka with him as at previous balls, and she refused five other partners for that dance, saying that she was already engaged.
She only stopped dancing when she felt too tired and had to ask to be allowed a rest.
But while dancing the last quadrille with one of the youthful bores whom it would not do to refuse, she happened to be vis--vis to Anna.
She had not come across Anna since the beginning of the ball, and now she suddenly saw her again in a different and unexpected light.
She saw that Anna was intoxicated by the rapture she had produced.
She knew the feeling and knew its symptoms, and recognized them in Anna  she saw the quivering light flashing in her eyes, the smile of happiness and elation that involuntarily curled her lips, and the graceful precision, the exactitude and lightness, of her movements.
'All or only one?' And without trying to help her youthful partner who was painfully struggling to carry on the conversation the thread of which he had lost, as she mechanically obeyed the merry, loud, and authoritative orders of Korsunsky, who commanded every one to form now a grand rond, now a chaine, she watched, and her heart sank more and more.
'No, it is not the admiration of the crowd that intoxicates her, but the rapture of one, and that one is... can it be he?' Every time he spoke to Anna the joyful light kindled in her eyes and a smile of pleasure curved her rosy lips.
She seemed to make efforts to restrain these signs of joy, but they appeared on her face of their own accord. 'But what of him?'
Kitty looked at him and was filled with horror. What she saw so distinctly in the mirror of Anna's face, she saw in him.
What had become of his usually quiet and firm manner and the carelessly calm expression of his face?
Every time he turned toward Anna he slightly bowed his head as if he wished to fall down before her, and in his eyes there was an expression of submission and fear. 'I do not wish to offend,' his every look seemed to say, 'I only wish to save myself, but I do not know how.'
They talked about their mutual friends, carrying on a most unimportant conversation, but it seemed to Kitty that every word they said was deciding their and her fate.
And, strange to say, though they were talking about Ivan Ivanich, who made himself so ridiculous with his French, and how Miss Eletskaya could have made a better match, yet these words were important for them and they felt this as well as Kitty.
Only the thorough training she had had enabled and obliged her to do what was expected of her, that is, to dance, to answer the questions put to her, to talk, and even to smile.
She had refused five men who had asked for the mazurka and now she had no partner for it.
She had not even a hope of being asked again just because she had too much success in Society for anyone to think that she was not already engaged for the dance.
She must tell her mother that she was feeling ill, and go home, but she had not the strength to do it.
Her light skirt stood out like a cloud round her slight body; one thin bare girlish arm dropped listlessly and sank into the pink folds of her tunic, the other hand held a fan with which she rapidly fanned her flushed face.
But although she seemed like a butterfly just settled on a blade of grass and ready at any moment to flutter and spread its rainbow wings, her heart was crushed with terrible despair.
'But perhaps I am mistaken, perhaps it was nothing of the kind?' And she again recalled all that she had witnessed.
Kitty's nether lip trembled, and she rose quickly.
'He asked her for the mazurka in my presence,' said the Countess, knowing that Kitty would understand whom she meant by 'him' and 'her.'
'Oh! it's all the same to me!' replied Kitty. No one but herself understood her situation, because no one knew that she had only a few days ago refused a man whom she perhaps loved, and refused him because she trusted another.
Kitty danced in the first pair, and luckily for her she was not obliged to talk, because Korsunsky ran about all the time giving orders in his domain.
Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite to her.
And she saw them with her far-sighted eyes, she saw them close by, too; when they met in the dance, and the more she saw of them the surer she was that the blow had fallen.
On Vronsky's face, usually so firm and self-possessed she noticed that expression of bewilderment and submission which had so surprised her  an expression like that of an intelligent dog when it feels guilty.
Anna smiled  and the smile passed on to him; she became thoughtful  and he became serious.
She looked charming in her simple black dress; her full arms with the bracelets, her firm neck with the string of pearls round it, her curly hair now disarranged, every graceful movement of her small feet and hands, her handsome, animated face,  everything about her was enchanting, but there was something terrible and cruel in her charm.
Kitty admired her even more than before, and suffered more and more.
She felt herself crushed and her face expressed it.
When Vronsky happened to knock against her as they danced, he did not at once recognize her, so changed was she.
'A delightful ball,' he remarked, in order to say something.
'Yes,' she replied.
In the middle of the mazurka, performing a complicated figure newly-invented by Korsunsky, Anna stepped into the middle of the room and chose two men and two ladies, one of whom was Kitty, to join her.
Kitty, as she moved toward Anna, gazed at her with fear.
Anna half-closed her eyes to look at Kitty, smiled and pressed her hand, but noticing that Kitty only responded to her smile by a look of surprise and despair, she turned away from her and talked cheerfully with the other lady.
'Yes, there is something strange, satanic, and enchanting about her,' thought Kitty.
Anna did not wish to stay to supper, but the master of the house tried to persuade her to do so.
'Come, Anna Arkadyevna,' began Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm under his, 'I have such a good idea for a cotillion  Un bijou.'
And he moved slowly on, trying to draw her with him.
'No, I won't stay,' answered Anna, smiling, and despite her smile Korsunsky and the host understood from the firm tone of her voice that she would not stay. 'No, as it is I have danced more in Moscow at your one ball than I danced the whole winter in Petersburg,' said Anna, looking round at Vronsky who stood beside her.
'Yes, I think so,' Anna replied as if surprised at the boldness of his question; but the uncontrollable radiance of her eyes and her smile burnt him as she spoke the words.
'YES, THERE IS CERTAINLY SOMETHING OBJECTIONABLE and repellent about me,' thought Levin after leaving the Shcherbatskys, as he walked toward his brother's lodgings. 'I do not get on with other people.
If I had any pride, I should not have put myself into such a position.' And he pictured to himself Vronsky, happy, kind, clever, calm, and certainly never placing himself in such a terrible position as he, Levin, had been in that evening.
'Yes, she was bound to choose him. It had to be so, and I have no cause to complain of anyone or anything.
What right had I to imagine that she would wish to unite her life with mine?
A man of no account, wanted by no one and of no use to anyone.' And he remembered his brother Nicholas, and kept his mind gladly on that memory.
'Is he not right that everything on earth is evil and horrid?
And have we judged brother Nicholas fairly? Of course, from Prokofy's point of view, who saw him in a ragged coat and tipsy, he is a despicable fellow; but I know him from another side.
I know his soul, and know that we resemble one another.
And yet I, instead of looking him up, dined out and came here.' Levin went up to a lamp-post and read his brother's address which he had in his pocket-book, and then hired a sledge.
On the long way to his brother's he recalled all the events he knew of Nicholas's life.
He recalled how despite the ridicule of his fellow-students his brother had lived like a monk while at the University and for a year after, strictly observing all the religious rites, attending service, fasting, avoiding all pleasures and especially women; and then how he suddenly broke loose, became intimate with the vilest people and gave himself up to unbridled debauchery.
He remembered how his brother had brought a boy from the country to educate, and in a fit of anger had so beaten the lad that proceedings were commenced against him for causing bodily harm.
He remembered an affair with a sharper to whom his brother had lost money, and whom he had first given a promissory note and then prosecuted on a charge of fraud.
(That was when his brother Sergius had paid the money for him.)
Then he remembered the night which Nicholas had spent in the police cells for disorderly conduct, and the disgraceful proceedings he had instigated against his brother Sergius Ivanich, whom he accused of not having paid out to him his share of his mother's fortune: and lastly, the time when his brother took an official appointment in one of the Western Provinces and was there arrested for assaulting an Elder... It was all very disgusting, but to Levin it did not seem nearly so disgusting as it must have seemed to those who did not know Nicholas, nor his whole story, nor his heart.
Levin remembered that when Nicholas was passing through his pious stage of fasting, visiting monks, and going to church; when he was seeking in religion for help to curb his passionate nature, not only did no one encourage him, but every one, and Levin among them, made fun of him.
He was teased and called 'Noah' and 'monk,' and then when he broke loose no one helped him, but all turned away from him with horror and disgust.
Levin felt that his brother Nicholas, in his soul, in the innermost depths of his soul, despite the depravity of his life, was no worse than those who despised him.
It was not his fault that he was born with his ungovernable temper, and with a cramped mind. He always wished to do right.
'I will tell him everything, I will get him to tell me everything. I will show him that I love and therefore understand him,' Levin decided in his mind, as toward eleven o'clock he drove up to the hotel of which he had the address.
'Is he in?'
Levin heard a stranger's voice, but knew at once that his brother was there, for he heard him coughing.
As he entered the doorway the stranger's voice was saying:
Constantine Levin glanced into the room, which was beyond a partition, and saw that the speaker was a young man with an enormous head of hair, who wore a workman's coat, and that a young, pock-marked woman in a woollen dress without collar or cuffs [At that time better-class women always wore something white round their necks and wrists.] was sitting on the sofa.
He could not see his brother, and his heart sank painfully at the thought that Nicholas lived among such strange people.
No one noticed him, and, as he took off his goloshes, he overheard what the man in the workman's coat was saying.
'Oh, let the privileged classes go to the devil,' said his brother's voice, with a cough. 'Masha, get us some supper and bring the wine if any is left, or send for some.'
The woman rose, came out from behind the partition and saw Constantine.
'Here is a gentleman, Nicholas Dmitrich,' she said.
Constantine heard how he rose hurriedly and caught against something, and then in the doorway before him he saw the familiar yet ever strange figure of his brother, wild, sickly, gigantic, lean, and round-shouldered, with large, frightened eyes.
He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and broad bones appeared more immense than ever.
His hair was thinner but the same straight moustache covered his lips; and the same eyes with their peculiar, naive gaze looked out at the new-comer.
'Ah! Kostya!' he said suddenly, recognizing his brother, and his eyes lit up with joy.
But at the same moment he turned to look at the young man and convulsively jerked his head and neck as if his necktie were strangling him, a movement Levin knew well, and quite another expression  a wild, suffering, and cruel look  settled on his haggard face.
Constantine when thinking of him had forgotten the most trying and worst part of his character, that which made intercourse with him so difficult, but now when he saw his face, and especially that convulsive movement of his head, he remembered it all.
'I do not want anything of you specially,' he answered meekly; 'I have simply come to see you.'
'Ah! You have come just for that?' he said.
Do you know who this is?' he added, turning to his brother and pointing to the man in the workman's coat. 'It is Mr. Kritsky, my friend ever since my Kiev days, a very remarkable fellow.
Of course the police are after him, because he is not a scoundrel.'
And he glanced round at everybody present as was his way.
Seeing that the woman in the doorway was about to go out he shouted to her: 'Wait, I told you,' and in the awkward and blundering manner familiar to Constantine, he again looked round at everybody, and began to tell his brother about Kritsky: how he had been expelled from the University because he had started a society to help the poorer students, and also Sunday schools, and how he had afterwards taught in an elementary school, and had been turned out from that too, and had then been tried on some charge or other.
'And this woman,' said Nicholas Levin, interrupting him, and pointing to her, 'is my life's companion, Mary Nikolavna; I took her out of a house...' and as he said this he again jerked his neck. 'But I love and respect her and beg all those who wish to know me,' he added, raising his voice and scowling, 'to love and respect her.
And again his eyes glanced questioningly around.
'SO YOU SEE...' NICHOLAS LEVIN CONTINUED with an effort, wrinkling his brow and twitching.
He evidently found it hard to decide what to say and to do. 'Do you see...' he pointed to a bundle of iron rods tied together with string, in a corner of the room.
He kept glancing at his brother's sickly, consumptive face, and felt more and more sorry for him, nor could he force himself to pay attention to what Nicholas was telling him about the Association.
He realized that this Association was merely an anchor to save his brother from self-contempt.
And this system must be changed,' he concluded, with an inquiring look at his brother.
'Yes, of course,' said Constantine, looking intently at the hectic flush which had appeared on his brother's face below its prominent cheek bones.
I know that he uses all the powers of his mind to justify the existing evils.'
Go, go in God's name!' he exclaimed, rising from his chair. 'Go, go!'
Nicholas gave her an angry look.
'I am not well and have grown irritable,' said Nicholas, breathing heavily and quieting down. 'And you talk to me about Sergius Ivanich and his article.
What can a man write about justice, who does not understand it?'
'Have you read his article?' he said, turning to Kritsky again, sitting down to the table and clearing away from it a heap of half-filled cigarettes to make room.
But it is a different matter with me. I see through his thought, and therefore know why it is weak.'
Kritsky rose and took up his hat.
'He also is not much good,' he remarked. 'I can see...'
Left alone with Mary Nikolavna, Levin spoke to her.
'Have you been long with my brother?' he asked.
His health is very bad, he drinks too much,' she said.
'Really  what does he drink?'
'Yes,' she said looking timidly toward the door, just as Nicholas returned.
'What were you talking about?' he asked frowning and looking from one to the other with frightened eyes. 'What was it?'
Only you have no business to talk to her.
She's a street girl, and you are a gentleman,' he muttered jerking his neck. 'You, I see, have examined and weighed everything here, and regard my errors with compassion,' he continued, again raising his voice.
'Well, all right, all right!... and how about supper? Ah, here it is,' he said noticing a waiter who was bringing in a tray.
'Here, here, put it down here,' he said crossly, and at once poured out a wineglass full of vodka and drank it greedily. 'Have a drink, will you?' he said to his brother, brightening up at once.
Tell me what you are doing,' he continued, greedily chewing a crust of bread and filling himself another glass. 'How are you getting on?'
'I am living alone in the country, as I did before, and I look after the farming,' answered Constantine, observing with horror how greedily his brother ate and drank, and trying not to let it be seen that he noticed it.
'Do you know that your Vanyusha is now a clerk in my office at Pokrovsk?' he said.
Nicholas jerked his head and grew thoughtful.
'Still, say what you will, you must choose between him and me,' said Nicholas with a timid look at his brother.
You are both to blame: You more in external matters and he more in essential ones.'
But Nicholas understood that he meant just that, and frowning, again took hold of the vodka bottle.
'Enough, Nicholas Dmitrich!' said Mary Nikolavna, stretching out her plump arm with its bare wrist to take the bottle.
Leave me alone! I'll thrash you!' shouted he.
Mary Nikolavna gave a mild, kindly smile, which evoked one from Nicholas, and she took away the bottle.
'Do you think she doesn't understand?' said Nicholas. 'She understands it all better than any of us.
There really is something good and sweet about her.'
'Don't speak to her in that way.
It frightens her.
No one but the magistrate, when she was tried for an attempt to escape from the house of ill fame, ever spoke to her so politely... Oh heavens, how senseless everything is in this world!' he suddenly exclaimed.
And he began to relate all his encounters with these new institutions.
Constantine Levin listened to him, and the condemnation of the social institutions, which he shared with him and had often expressed, was unpleasant to him when he heard it from his brother's lips.
'We shall understand it better in the next world,' he said playfully.
Ah, I do dislike that next world,' said Nicholas, fixing his wild, frightened eyes on his brother's face. 'One would think that to leave all these abominations, these muddles (one's own and other people's), would be good, yet I fear death  I fear it terribly.'
His speech began to grow confused and he jumped from one subject to another.
NEXT MORNING CONSTANTINE LEVIN LEFT MOSCOW and toward evening he reached home.
On his way back in the train he talked with his fellow-passengers about politics and the new railways, and felt oppressed, just as in Moscow, by the confusion of the views expressed, by discontent with himself and a vague sense of shame.
But when he got out of the train at his station and by the dim light from the station windows saw his one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with his coat-collar turned up, and his sledge with its carpet-lined back, his horses with their tied-up tails, and the harness with its rings and tassels, and when Ignat, while still putting the luggage into the sledge, began telling him the village news: how the contractor had come, and Pava had calved,  Levin felt that the confusion was beginning to clear away and his shame and self-dissatisfaction to pass.
He felt this at the mere sight of Ignat and the horses; but when he had put on the sheepskin coat that had been brought for him and, well wrapped up, had seated himself in the sledge and started homeward, turning over in his mind the orders he would give about the work on the estate, and as he watched the side horse (once a saddle-horse that had been overridden, a spirited animal from the Don), he saw what had befallen him in quite a different light.
He felt that he was himself and did not wish to be anyone else.
He only wished now to be better than he had been formerly.
First of all he decided that he would no longer hope for the exceptional happiness which marriage was to have given him, and consequently he would not underrate the present as he had done.
Secondly, he would never again allow himself to be carried away by passion, the repulsive memory of which had so tormented him when he was making up his mind to propose.
Then, remembering his brother Nicholas, he determined that he would never allow himself to forget him again, but would watch over him, keep him in sight, and be ready to help when things went hard with him.
And he felt that that would be soon.
Then his brother's talk about communism, which he had taken lightly at the time, now made him think.
He considered an entire change of economic conditions nonsense; but he had always felt the injustice of his superfluities compared with the peasant's poverty, and now decided, in order to feel himself quite justified, that though he had always worked hard and lived simply, he would in future work still more and allow himself still less luxury.
And it all seemed to him so easy to carry out that he was in a pleasant reverie the whole way home, and it was with cheerful hopes for a new and better life that he reached his house toward nine o'clock in the evening.
A light fell on the snow-covered space in front of the house from the windows of the room of his old nurse Agatha Mikhaylovna, who now acted as his housekeeper.
She had not yet gone to bed, and Kuzma, whom she had roused, came running out barefoot and still half-asleep into the porch.
Laska, a setter bitch, ran out too, almost throwing Kuzma off his feet, and whined and rubbed herself against Levin's knees, jumping up and wishing but not daring to put her front paws on his chest.
Visiting is all very well, but "there is no place like home,"-' he replied, and went into his study.
A candle just brought in gradually lit up the study and its familiar details became visible: the stag's horns, the book shelves, the looking-glass, the hot-air aperture of the stove with its brass lid, which had long been in need of repair, his father's couch, the large table on which were an open volume, a broken ash-tray, and an exercise-book in his handwriting.
When he saw all this, he was overcome by a momentary doubt of the possibility of starting the new life of which he had been dreaming on his way.
All these traces of his old life seemed to seize hold of him and say, 'No, you will not escape us and will not be different, but will remain such as you have been: full of doubts; full of dissatisfaction with yourself, and of vain attempts at improvement followed by failures, and continual hopes of the happiness which has escaped you and is impossible for you.'
That was what the things said, but another voice within his soul was saying that one must not submit to the past and that one can do anything with oneself.
And obeying the latter voice he went to the corner where two thirty-six pound dumb-bells lay and began doing gymnastic exercises with them to invigorate himself.
Levin felt quite certain that if it had been burnt it was only because the precautions about which he had given instructions over and over again had been neglected.
He was vexed, and he reprimanded the steward.
But the steward had one important and pleasant event to report. Pava, his best and most valuable cow, bought at the cattle-show, had calved.
And you tell them to bring a lantern. I will go and have a look at her,' he said to the steward.
Crossing the yard past the heap of snow by the lilac bush, he reached the shed.
The bull, Berkut, with a ring through his nose, was lying down, and almost rose up, but changed his mind and only snorted a couple of times as they passed by.
The red beauty Pava, enormous as a hippopotamus, turned her back,
hiding her calf from the newcomers and sniffing at it.
Levin entered the stall and examined Pava, who, becoming excited, was about to low, but quieted down when Levin moved the calf toward her, and sighing heavily began licking it with her rough tongue.
The calf fumbled about, pushing its nose under its mother's belly and swinging its little tail.
'Show a light here, Theodore, here,' said Levin, examining the calf. 'Like its mother,' he said, 'although the colour is its father's; very fine, big-boned and deep-flanked.
Vasily Fedorich, isn't she fine?' he said, turning to the steward, and quite forgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his satisfaction about the calf.
'Whom could she take after, not to be good? Simon the contractor, came the day after you left.
This one question led Levin back to all the details of his farming, which was on a large and elaborate scale.
He went straight from the cow-shed to the office, and after talking things over with the steward and with Simon the contractor, he returned to the house and went directly upstairs to the drawing-room.
IT WAS A LARGE OLD-FASHIONED HOUSE, and though only Levin was living in it, he used and heated the whole of it.
He knew this to be foolish and even wrong, and contrary to his new plans, but this house was a whole world to Levin.
It was the world in which his father and mother had lived and died.
They had lived a life which appeared to him ideally perfect, and which he had dreamed of renewing with a wife and family of his own.
Levin could scarcely remember his mother. His conception of her was to him a sacred memory, and in his imagination his future wife was to be a repetition of the enchanting and holy ideal of womanhood that his mother had been.
He could not imagine the love of woman without marriage, and even pictured to himself a family first and then the woman who would give him the family.
His views on marriage therefore did not resemble those of most of his acquaintances, for whom marriage was only one of many social affairs; for Levin it was the chief thing in life, on which the whole happiness of life depended.
And now he had to renounce it.
When he had settled in the arm-chair in the little drawing room where he always had his tea, and Agatha Mikhaylovna had brought it in for him and had sat down at the window with her usual remark, 'I will sit down sir!' he felt that, strange to say, he had not really forgotten his dreams and that he could not live without them.
With her, or with another, they would come true.
He read his book, and followed what he read, stopping now and then to listen to Agatha Mikhaylovna, who chattered indefatigably; and at the same time various pictures of farming and future family life arose disconnectedly in his mind.
He felt that in the depth of his soul something was settling down, adjusting and composing itself.
He listened to Agatha Mikhaylovna's talk of how Prokhor had forgotten the Lord, was spending on drink the money Levin had given him to buy a horse with, and had beaten his wife nearly to death; he listened and read, and remembered the whole sequence of thoughts raised by what he was reading.
It was a book of Tyndall's on heat. He recalled his disapproval of Tyndall's self-conceit concerning the cleverness of his experiments and his lack of a philosophic outlook.
He returned to his book. 'Well, let us grant that electricity and heat are one and the same, but can we substitute the one quantity for the other in solving an equation?
But who is she?' and he remembered what had happened in Moscow. 'Well, what is to be done?...
He lifted his head and pondered. Old Laska, who had not yet quite digested her joy at her master's return and had run out to bark in the yard, now came back, bringing a smell of fresh air with her into the room and, wagging her tail, she approached him and putting her head under his hand whined plaintively, asking to be patted.
'She is only a dog, but she understands that her master has come back feeling depressed.'
Levin looked at her intently, surprised that she knew so well what was in his mind.
'Shall I bring you a little more tea?' she said and went out with his cup.
Laska kept on pushing her head under his hand.
He patted her a little, and she curled herself up at his feet with her head on her outstretched hind paw.
And to show that all was now well and satisfactory, she slightly opened her mouth, smacked her sticky lips, and drawing them more closely over her old teeth lay still in blissful peace.
'And it is just the same with me!' he said to himself.
EARLY IN THE MORNING after the ball Anna sent a telegram to her husband to say that she was leaving Moscow that same evening.
'Really I must, I must go,' she said, explaining her altered plans to her sister-in-law in a tone suggesting that she had suddenly remembered so many things she had to do that it was not even possible to enumerate them all. 'Really I had better go to-day.'
Stephen Oblonsky was not dining at home, but promised to be back at seven to see his sister off.
Kitty also had not come, but had sent a note to say that she had a headache.
Whether it is that children are inconstant or that they are sensitive and felt that Anna was not the same person to-day as she had been that other day when they had been so fond of her, and that she no longer took any interest in them, at any rate they suddenly left off playing with their aunt and loving her, and were not at all concerned about her leaving.
Anna spent the whole morning preparing for her departure: writing notes to her Moscow acquaintances, making up accounts, and packing.
It seemed to Dolly that Anna was not at ease in her mind, but in a state of anxiety that Dolly knew well from her own experience, a state which does not come on without a cause, but generally hides dissatisfaction with oneself.
After dinner Anna went to her room to dress and Dolly followed her.
It is very silly, but it will pass,' said Anna hurriedly, and she bent her flushed face over the tiny bag into which she was packing a night-cap and some lawn handkerchiefs.
'You came here and did a good action,' said Dolly, scrutinizing her attentively.
Anna looked at her with her eyes wet with tears.
'I have one!' said Anna, and unexpectedly following her tears, a sly, humorous smile puckered her lips.
And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing to her ears and to the curly black locks on her neck.
I have spoiled... I mean I was the cause of the ball being a torture instead of a pleasure to her.
But really, really I was not to blame, or only a very little,' she said, drawling out the word 'very' in a high-pitched voice.
'Oh no, no, I am not Steve,' she said frowning. 'The reason I have told you is that I do not even for a moment allow myself to distrust myself.'
But at the moment when she uttered these words she knew they were untrue: she not only distrusted herself but was agitated by the thought of Vronsky, and was leaving sooner than she had intended only that she might not meet him again.
'Yes, Steve told me that you danced the mazurka with him, and that he...'
'But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his side,' Anna interrupted her. 'I am sure that it will all be forgotten, and Kitty will no longer hate me.'
'Well, do you know, Anna, to tell you the truth, I am not very anxious that Kitty should marry him: It is much better that it should come to nothing if he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a day.'
'Oh, my goodness! How stupid it would be,' said Anna, and again a deep flush of pleasure suffused her face at hearing the thought that occupied her mind expressed in words.
Oh, what a darling she is! But you will put it right?
She was fond of Anna, but it was pleasant to find that she too had a weakness.
'I should so like you all to love me as I love you and now I love you still more,' said Anna with tears in her eyes. 'Oh dear, how silly I am to-day.'
She dabbed her face with her handkerchief, and began to dress.
Oblonsky, smelling of wine and cigars, with his face red and happy, came in late, just as she was about to start.
Anna's emotion had spread to Dolly, who as she embraced her sister-in-law for the last time whispered:
'I do not know why you should,' said Anna, kissing her and trying to hide her tears.
'WELL, THAT'S ALI, OVER, thank Heaven!' was Anna's first thought when she had taken leave of her brother, who stood to the last moment obstructing the entrance to the railway carriage.
She sat down beside her maid Annushka, and peered round the dimly-lit sleeping compartment. 'Thank Heaven, to-morrow I shall see Serezha and Alexis Alexandrovich again, and my good accustomed life will go on as of old.'
With the same preoccupied mind she had had all that day, Anna prepared with pleasure and great deliberation for the journey.
With her deft little hands she unlocked her red bag, took out a small pillow which she placed on her knees, and locked the bag again; then she carefully wrapped up her feet and sat down comfortably.
Two other ladies began talking to Anna. One, a fat old woman, while wrapping up her feet, remarked upon the heating of the carriage.
Anna said a few words in answer, but not foreseeing anything interesting from the conversation asked her maid to get out her reading-lamp, fixed it to the arm of her seat, and took a paper-knife and an English novel from her handbag.
At first she could not read.
For a while the bustle of people moving about disturbed her, and when the train had finally started it was impossible not to listen to the noises, then there was the snow, beating against the window on her left, to which it stuck, and the sight of the guard, who passed through the carriage closely wrapped up and covered with snow on one side; also the conversation about the awful snow-storm which was raging outside distracted her attention.
And so it went on and on: the same jolting and knocking, the same beating of the snow on the windowpane, the same rapid changes from steaming heat to cold, and back again to heat, the gleam of the same faces through the semidarkness, and the same voices,  but at last Anna began to read and to follow what she read.
Annushka was already dozing, her broad hands, with a hole in one of the gloves, holding the red bag on her lap.
When she read how the heroine of the novel nursed a sick man, she wanted to move about the sick-room with noiseless footsteps; when she read of a member of Parliament making a speech, she wished to make that speech; when she read how Lady Mary rode to hounds, teased her sister-in-law, and astonished everybody by her boldness  she wanted to do it herself.
But there was nothing to be done, so she forced herself to read, while her little hand toyed with the smooth paper-knife.
The hero of the novel had nearly attained to his English happiness of a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna wanted to go to the estate with him, when she suddenly felt that he must have been ashamed, and that she was ashamed of the same thing,  but what was he ashamed of?
'What am I ashamed of?' she asked herself with indignant surprise.
She put down her book, leaned back, and clasped the paper-knife tightly in both hands.
She called up all her Moscow memories. They were all good and pleasant.
She recalled the ball and Vronsky and his humble, enamoured gaze, and their relations with one another; there was nothing to be ashamed of.
And yet at that very point of her recollections when she remembered Vronsky, the feeling of shame grew stronger and some inner voice seemed to say to her, 'warm, very warm, burning!' 'Well, what of it?' she finally said to herself with decision, changing her position on the seat.
Just as if there existed, or could exist, between me and this officer-lad any relations differing from those with other acquaintances.' She smiled disdainfully and again took up her book; but now she absolutely could not understand what she was reading.
She passed her paper-knife over the windowpane, then pressed its cold smooth surface against her cheek and almost laughed aloud, suddenly overcome with unreasoning joy.
She felt that her nerves were being stretched like strings drawn tighter and tighter round pegs.
She felt her eyes opening wider, her fingers and toes nervously moving, and something inside her stopping her breath, and all the forms and sounds in the swaying semi-darkness around struck her with unusual vividness.
Momentary doubts kept occurring in her mind as to whether the train was moving forwards or backwards or standing still.
Was it Annushka who was sitting beside her, or a stranger? 'And am I here, myself?
Something seemed to draw her to them, but she had the power to give way to them or to resist.
To get over it she rose, threw off her wrap, and took off the cape of her coat.
She came to her senses for a moment, and knew that the lean peasant in the long nankin coat with a button missing who had come into the compartment was the carriage stoker and was looking at the thermometer, and that the wind and snow rushed in when he opened the door; but afterwards everything again became confused...
The peasant in the long coat started gnawing at something on the wall; the old woman began stretching her legs the whole length of the carriage, which she filled with a black cloud; then something squeaked and clattered in a dreadful manner, as if some one was being torn to pieces; then a blinding red light appeared, and at last everything was hidden by a wall.
Anna felt as if she had fallen through the floor.
The voice of a man wrapped up and covered with snow shouted something just above her ear.
She asked Annushka to give her the cape she had removed and a shawl, and putting them on she moved to the door.
She opened the carriage door. The snow and wind rushed toward her and had a tussle with her for the door.
And this too struck her as amusing.
The wind seemed only to have waited for her: it whistled merrily and tried to seize and carry her off, but she held on to the cold door-post and held down her shawl, then stepping on to the platform she moved away from the carriage.
With enjoyment she drew in full breaths of the snowy, frosty air as she stood beside her carriage looking round at the platform and the lighted station.
The shadow of a man stooping slipped past her feet and she heard a hammer striking the carriage wheels. 'Let me have the telegram!' came an angry voice from the other side out of the stormy darkness.
Two gentlemen passed her with glowing cigarettes between their lips.
She took another deep breath to get her fill of fresh air and had already drawn her hand out of her muff to take hold of the handrail and get into the train when another man wearing a military overcoat came close between her and the wavering light of the lamp.
With his hand in salute, he bowed and asked if she wanted anything and whether he could be of any service to her.
For some time she looked into his face without answering, and, though he stood in the shade she noticed, or thought she noticed, the expression of his face and eyes.
It was the same expression of respectful ecstasy that had so affected her the night before.
She had assured herself more than once during those last few days, and again a moment ago, that Vronsky in relation to her was only one of the hundreds of everlastingly identical young men she met everywhere, and that she would never allow herself to give him a thought; yet now, at the first moment of seeing him again, she was seized by a feeling of joyful pride.
There was no need for her to ask him why he was there.
She knew as well as if he had told her, that he was there in order to be where she was.
Why are you going?' she asked, dropping the hand with which she was about to take hold of the handrail.
Her face beamed with a joy and animation she could not repress.
'Why am I going?' he repeated, looking straight into her eyes. 'You know that I am going in order to be where you are,' said he.
The awfulness of the storm appeared still more beautiful to her now.
He had said just what, her soul desired but her reason dreaded.
She did not reply and he saw a struggle in her face.
'Forgive me if my words displease you,' he said humbly.
He spoke courteously and respectfully, but so firmly and stubbornly that she was long unable to reply.
'What you are saying is wrong, and if you are a good man, I beg you to forget it, as I will forget it,' she said at last.
'Enough, enough!' she cried, vainly trying to give a severe expression to her face, into which he was gazing eagerly.
But in that little lobby she stopped, going over in her imagination what had just taken place.
Though she could remember neither his nor her own words, she instinctively felt that that momentary conversation had drawn them terribly near to one another, and this both frightened her and made her happy.
After standing still for a few seconds she went into the carriage and sat down.
The overwrought condition which tormented her before not only returned again, but grew worse and reached such a degree that she feared every moment that something within her would give way under the intolerable strain.
She did not sleep at all that night, but the strain and the visions which filled her imagination had nothing unpleasant or dismal about them; on the contrary they seemed joyful, glowing, and stimulating.
Toward morning Anna, while still sitting up, fell into a doze; when she woke it was already light and the train was approaching Petersburg.
At once thoughts of home, her husband, her son, and the cares of the coming day and of those that would follow, beset her.
When the train stopped at the Petersburg terminus and she got out, the first face she noticed was that of her husband. 'Great heavens!
What has happened to his ears?' she thought, gazing at his cold and commanding figure, and especially at the gristly ears which now so struck her, pressing as they did against the rim of his hat.
When he saw her, he came toward her with his customary ironical smile and looked straight at her with his large tired eyes.
An unpleasant feeling weighed on her heart when she felt his fixed and weary gaze, as if she had expected to find him different.
She was particularly struck by the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself which she experienced when she met him. It was that ordinary well-known feeling, as if she were dissembling, which she experienced in regard to her husband, but formerly she had not noticed it, while now she was clearly and painfully conscious of it.
'Yes, as you see. Here is a devoted husband; devoted as in the first year of married life,  consumed by desire to see you,' said he in his slow, high-pitched voice and in the tone in which he always addressed her, a tone which ridiculed those who could use such words in earnest.
'Is Serezha well?' she asked.
'And is this all the reward I get,' he said, 'for my ardour? He is quite well, quite well...'
He sat in his place, his eyes staring straight before him, not observing the people who went in or out, and if previously his appearance of imperturbable calm had struck and annoyed those who did not know him, he now seemed to them even prouder and more self-confident.
A nervous young man, a Law Court official, who sat opposite, hated him for that look.
The young man repeatedly lit his cigarette at Vronsky's, talked to him, and even jostled him to prove that he was not a thing but a man; yet Vronsky still looked at him as at a street lamp, and the young man made grimaces, feeling that he was losing self-control under the stress of this refusal to regard him as human.
He felt himself a king, not because he believed that he had made an impression on Anna  he did not yet believe that  but because the impression she had made on him filled him with happiness and pride.
What would come of it all he did not know and did not even consider.
He felt that all his powers, hitherto dissipated and scattered, were now concentrated and directed with terrible energy toward one blissful aim.
He knew only that he had told her the truth: that he would go where she went, that all the happiness of life and the only meaning of life for him now was in seeing and hearing her.
When he had got out of the train at Bologoe station to drink a glass of seltzer water and had seen Anna, he had involuntarily at once told her just what he was thinking about it.
He was glad he had said it to her, and that she now knew it and was thinking about it.
When he returned to the train, he kept recalling all the positions in which he had seen her, and all her words; and in his imagination, causing his heart to stand still, floated pictures of a possible future.
When he got out of the train at Petersburg he felt, despite his sleepless night, as fresh and animated as after a cold bath. He stopped outside the carriage, waiting till she appeared.
'I shall see her again,' he thought and smiled involuntarily. 'I shall see her walk, her face... she will say something, turn her head, look at me, perhaps even smile.'
Only now did Vronsky for the first time clearly realize that the husband was connected with her. He knew she had a husband, but had not believed in his existence, and only fully believed in him when he saw him there: his head and shoulders, and the black trousers containing his legs, and especially when he saw that husband with an air of ownership quietly take her hand.
When he saw Karenin, with his fresh Petersburg face, his sternly self-confident figure, his round hat and his slightly rounded back, Vronsky believed in his existence, and had such a disagreeable sensation as a man tortured by thirst might feel on reaching a spring and finding a dog, sheep, or pig in it, drinking the water and making it muddy.
Karenin's gait, the swinging of his thighs, and his wide short feet, particularly offended Vronsky, who acknowledged only his own unquestionable right to love Anna.
But she was still the same, and the sight of her still affected him physically, exhilarating and stimulating him and filling him with joy.
He ordered his German valet, who had run up from a second-class carriage, to get his luggage and take it home, and he himself went up to her.
He saw the husband and wife meet, and with the penetration of a lover he noticed the signs of slight embarrassment when she spoke to her husband. 'No, she doesn't and can't love him,' he decided mentally.
While he was approaching her from behind he observed with joy that she became aware of his approach and was about to turn but, on recognizing him, again addressed her husband.
'Did you have a good night?' he inquired, bowing toward them both, and leaving it to Karenin to take the greeting as meant for himself and to recognize him, or not, as he pleased.
'Yes, quite comfortable, thank you,' she replied.
Her face seemed tired and had none of that play which showed now in a smile and now in the animation of her eyes; but just for an instant as she looked at him he saw a gleam in her eyes and, though the spark was at once extinguished, that one instant made him happy.
She glanced at her husband to see whether he knew Vronsky.
Karenin looked at him with displeasure, absently trying to recall who he might be.
'Ah! I believe we have met before,' said Karenin extending his hand with indifference.
'You travelled there with the mother and came back with the son,' he said, uttering every word distinctly as though it were something valuable he was giving away. 'I suppose you are returning from furlough?' he remarked; and without waiting for an answer said to his wife in his playful manner: 'Well, were many tears shed in Moscow over the parting?'
By addressing himself thus to his wife he conveyed to Vronsky his wish to be alone with her, and turning to Vronsky he touched his hat.
Karenin glanced at him with his weary eyes.
'We are at home on Mondays.' Then having finally dismissed Vronsky he said to his wife in his usual bantering tone: 'What a good thing it was that I had just half an hour to spare to meet you and was able to show my devotion!'
'You insist too much on your devotion, for me to value it greatly,' she replied in the same playful tone, while she involuntarily listened to the sound of Vronsky's footsteps following them. 'But what does he matter to me?' she asked herself, and began inquiring of her husband how Serezha had got on during her absence.
Mariette says he was very sweet. But  I'm sorry to grieve you!  he did not fret after you... like your husband!...
Our dear samovar will be in ecstasies.' (He called the celebrated Countess Lydia Ivanovna samovar because she was always getting heated and boiling over about something.)
'She was asking after you. And, do you know, if I may advise, you should go and see her to-day.
At present, in addition to all her other worries, she is concerned about the Oblonskys' reconciliation.'
Countess Lydia Ivanovna was Anna's husband's friend and the centre of that set in Petersburg Society with which Anna, through her husband, was most closely connected.
'But I wrote to her.'
'Yes, but she wants the particulars.
Go and see her my dear, if you are not too tired...
Now I shan't have to dine alone,' he went on, no longer in a bantering manner. 'You can't think how I used...'
and with a long pressure of her hand and a special kind of smile he helped her into the carriage.
THE FIRST PERSON TO MEET ANNA when she reached home was her son.
He ran down the stairs to her regardless of his governess's cries, and with desperate delight called out: 'Mama! Mama!'
'I told you it was Mama!' he shouted to the governess.
'I knew!' Her son, like his father, produced on Anna a feeling akin to disappointment.
Her fancy had pictured him nicer than he was in reality.
She had to come down to reality in order to enjoy him as he was.
But even as he was, he was charming, with his fair curls, blue eyes and plump shapely legs in tight-fitting stockings.
Anna experienced an almost physical pleasure in feeling his proximity and his caresses, and a moral solace when she met his simple, trustful, and loving gaze and heard his naive questions.
She unpacked the presents which Dolly's children had sent him, and told him that there was a girl in Moscow whose name was Tanya, who could read and even teach other children.
'And am I worse than she?' asked Serezha.
'I know,' he said, smiling.
Before Anna had time to finish her coffee the Countess Lydia Ivanovna was announced.
The Countess was a tall, stout woman with a sickly sallow complexion and beautiful, dreamy, black eyes.
Anna was fond of her, but to-day she seemed to see her for the first time with all her defects.
'Well, my dear! did you take the olive branch?' asked the Countess Lydia Ivanovna as soon as she entered the room.
But the Countess, who was interested in everything that did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to what interested her, and she interrupted Anna:
Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist who resided abroad. The Countess told Anna what he had written.
She then went on to tell her of other unpleasantnesses, and of the underhand opposition to the plan for uniting the Churches, and she went away in a hurry, as she had that afternoon to be at a meeting of another society as well as to attend a Slavonic Committee meeting.
'This is all just as it was before, but how is it that I never noticed it before?' said Anna to herself. 'Or is it that she is specially irritated this morning?
But it is really funny; her aim is to do good, she is a Christian and yet she is always angry and always has enemies  all on account of Christianity and philanthropy!'
At three she also left, promising to come back to dinner.
Anna, left alone, spent part of the time before dinner in seeing her son have his dinner (he dined apart), in putting her things in order, and in reading and answering the notes and letters that had accumulated on her table.
The feeling of causeless shame she had felt during the journey, and her agitation, had quite vanished.
In her accustomed conditions of life she again felt firm and blameless.
She thought with wonder of her state the day before. 'What had happened?
To speak of it would be to give it an importance that does not belong to it.' She remembered how she had once told her husband about one of his subordinates who very nearly made her a declaration, and how Karenin had answered that every woman living in Society was liable to such things, but that he had full confidence in her tact and would never degrade himself and her by being jealous.
'So there is no need to tell him! Besides; thank Heaven there is nothing to tell!' she said to herself.
KARENIN RETURNED FROM THE MINISTRY at four o'clock, but, as often happened, he had no time to go up and see his wife.
He went straight to his study to receive some petitioners and sign a few documents brought by his private secretary.
At the Karenins' dinners there were usually about three visitors. This time there came an old lady, a cousin of Karenin's; the Director of a Department; the Director's wife; and a young man who had been recommended to Karenin for a post under him.
Exactly at five  the bronze clock (style of Peter I) had not finished striking  Karenin entered in evening dress with a white tie and two stars on his coat, as he had to attend an official meeting directly after dinner.
Every moment of his life was filled up and apportioned, and in order to find time to perform all the tasks allotted to each day he observed the strictest regularity. 'Without haste and without rest,' was his motto.
He entered the room, greeted everybody, and quickly sat down, smiling at his wife.
You wouldn't believe how uncomfortable'  he put special emphasis on the word uncomfortable  'it is to dine alone!'
At dinner he spoke a little about Moscow affairs with his wife, asking with an ironical smile after Stephen Oblonsky; but for the most part the conversation was general and dealt with Petersburg service and social affairs.
After dinner he spent half an hour with his guests, and then, having again with a smile pressed his wife's hand, went away to the Council.
That evening Anna went neither to see the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who having heard of Anna's return had invited her, nor to the theatre, where she had a box for that evening.
Her chief reason for not going was that a dress on which she had counted was not ready.
Altogether, when, after her visitors had left, Anna busied herself with her toilet, she was much vexed.
Before going to Moscow, she  being an adept at dressing on comparatively little money  left three dresses to be altered.
She wanted them made up so that they should be unrecognizable, and they were to have been sent home three days ago; but she now found that two were not ready at all, while the third had not been done in the way she wished.
The dressmaker came to explain that it was better as she had done it, and Anna lost her temper to such a degree that she afterwards felt ashamed.
Completely to regain her composure, she went to the nursery and spent the evening with her son. She put him to bed herself, made the sign of the cross over him, and tucked him up.
She was glad she had not gone out that evening but had spent it so pleasantly at home.
She felt light-hearted and tranquil, and saw clearly that what in the train had appeared so important had merely been an ordinary and trivial incident of Society life, and that there was no reason for her to feel ashamed, or for anyone to blame her.
She sat down by the fire with an English novel and awaited her husband.
Exactly at half-past nine there was a ring at the front door, and he entered the room.
'Here you are at last!' she said, holding out her hand to him. He kissed it, and seated himself beside her.
'In general, I see that your journey has been a success,' said he.
'Yes, quite,' she replied, and related everything that had happened from the beginning: her journey with the Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, the accident at the railway station.
Then she spoke of her pity, first for her brother and then for Dolly.
'I don't think that one can excuse such a man, even though he is your brother,' remarked Karenin, severely.
She knew he had said that in order to show that no consideration of kinship could hinder the expression of his sincere opinion.
She knew that trait in her husband's character, knew and liked it.
'I am glad it has all ended satisfactorily and that you are back again,' he continued. 'But what are they saying there about the new Statute I carried in the Council?'
Anna had heard nothing about the Statute, and felt ashamed that she had so lightly forgotten what was of such importance to him.
'Here, on the contrary, it has made quite a stir,' he said with a self-satisfied smile.
Anna saw that he wanted to tell her something pleasant to himself about that affair, and by questioning she led him on to tell her all about it.
With the same self-satisfied smile he told her about the ovations he had received on account of the enactment of that Statute.
Having finished his second cup of tea and cream and his bread and butter, he rose and went into his study.
You must have been dull,' he said.
'Oh no!' she answered, rising and following him through the room to his study. 'And what are you reading now?' she asked.
'I am now reading the Duc de Lille's Posie des enfers, he replied. 'A very remarkable book.'
Anna smiled, as one smiles at the weaknesses of people one loves, and slipping her hand under his arm walked with him to the study door.
She knew his habit, which had become a necessity, of reading in the evening.
She knew that in spite of his time being almost entirely absorbed by the duties of his post, he considered it incumbent on him to follow everything of importance that appeared in the world of thought.
She also knew that really he was interested in political, philosophic, and theological books, and that art was quite foreign to his nature, yet in spite of this  or rather because of it  he never ignored anything that caused a stir in that sphere but considered it his duty to read everything.
She knew that in the sphere of politics, philosophy, and theology Alexis Alexandrovich doubted and searched; but in questions of art, poetry, and especially music  which he did not at all understand  he held most definite and firm opinions.
He liked talking of Shakespeare, Raphael and Beethoven, and about the importance of the new schools of poetry and music, which in his mind were all classified with very logical exactitude.
'Well, God bless you!' she said at the door of the study, where a shaded candle and a bottle of water had been placed ready for him beside his arm-chair; 'and I will go and write to them in Moscow.'
He pressed her hand and again kissed it.
'After all, he is a good man: truthful, kind, and remarkable in his own sphere,' said Anna to herself when she had returned to her room, as if defending him from some one who accused him and declared it was impossible to love him. 'But why do his ears stick out so?
Or has he had his hair cut?'
Exactly at midnight, when Anna was still sitting at her writing-table finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the measured tread of slippered feet, and Karenin entered, freshly washed, his hair brushed, and a book under his arm.
'It's time! It's time!' said he with a peculiar smile, going into their bedroom.
'And what right had he to look at him as he did?' thought Anna, remembering how Vronsky had looked at Karenin.
When she was undressed she went into the bedroom, but on her face not only was there not a trace of that animation which during her stay in Moscow had sparkled in her eyes and smile, but on the contrary the fire in her now seemed quenched or hidden somewhere very far away.
WHEN HE WENT TO Moscow, Vronsky had left his large flat on the Morskaya to his friend and favourite comrade, Petritsky.
Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not of very aristocratic birth, and not only not wealthy but heavily in debt, tipsy every evening, and often under arrest for amusing or improper escapades, but popular both with his comrades and superiors.
When he rang the bell, while still outside, he heard men's laughter, a woman's lisping voice, and Petritsky shouting: 'If it is one of the villains, don't let him in!' Vronsky told the servants not to announce his arrival, and softly entered the first room.
Petritsky's friend, the Baroness Chilton, her lilac satin dress and pink and white face glistening, and like a canary filling the whole room with her Parisian voice, was seated at the round table making coffee.
Petritsky in his great coat, and Captain Kamerovsky in full uniform probably straight from parade, sat on each side of her.
'Vronsky! Bravo!' exclaimed Petritsky jumping up and noisily pushing back his chair.
I hope you are pleased with this ornament to your study,' he added, pointing to the Baroness. 'Of course, you know one another?'
'I should think so!' replied Vronsky with a merry smile, as he pressed the Baroness's small hand.
'You are at home where you are, Baroness,' said Vronsky. 'How do you do, Kamerovsky?' he added, coldly shaking hands with the Captain.
But have a wash and smarten yourself up,' said the Baroness, again sitting down and carefully turning a small screw of the coffee-pot. 'Pierre, pass me the coffee,' she said to Petritsky whom, not concealing their relations, she called Pierre (the French for Peter), because of his surname.
And your wife?' the Baroness said suddenly, interrupting Vronsky's conversation with his comrade. 'We here have been marrying you off!
And the Baroness, instead of releasing Vronsky, began telling him her plans for the future, interspersing jokes and asking his advice.
(He was her husband.)
You see how absurd it is, that because I am supposed to be unfaithful,' she said contemptuously, 'he wishes to have the use of my property.'
Vronsky listened with pleasure to the merry prattle of the pretty young woman, agreed with what she said, and half in fun gave her advice; in a word he immediately took up his habitual manner with women of her kind.
In his Petersburg world people were divided into two quite opposite sorts.
One  the inferior sort: the paltry, stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people who believe that a husband should live with the one wife to whom he is married, that a maiden should be pure, a woman modest, and a man, manly, self-controlled and firm; that one should bring up one's children to earn their living, should pay one's debts, and other nonsense of that kind.
But there was another sort of people: the real people to which all his set belonged, who had above all to be well-bred, generous, bold, gay, and to abandon themselves unblushingly to all their passions and laugh at everything else.
Just for a moment Vronsky was staggered; having brought back from Moscow the impression of a totally different world, but immediately, as though he had put his foot into an old slipper, he re-entered his former gay and pleasant world.
So you advise me to put a knife to his throat?'
'Most certainly, and hold it so that your hand will be near his lips.
'Then we meet at the French Theatre to-night?' and, her dress rustling, she vanished.
Kamerovsky rose also, and, without waiting for him to go, Vronsky shook hands with him and went to his dressing-room.
While he was washing, Petritsky in a few words described his own position in so far as it had changed since Vronsky went away.
His father had said he would not give him any and would not pay his debts.
His C.O. had announced to him that if these scandals continued he (Petritsky) would have to resign.
He was sick to death of the Baroness, especially because she was always wanting to give him money; but there was another  he would let Vronsky see her  who was charming, wonderful, of severely Oriental type, in the style of "The Slave Rebecca," you know!' He had also had a quarrel with Berkashev, who wished to send his seconds, but of course nothing would come of it.
But, in general, everything was first-rate and extremely jolly; and without letting his friend go into the details of his position Petritsky began telling him all the interesting news.
Listening to Petritsky's familiar tales, in the familiar surroundings of the house he had lived in for three years, Vronsky experienced the satisfaction of returning to his customary careless Petersburg life.
'Impossible!' he cried, releasing the pedal of his washstand, which controlled a jet of water under which he was bathing his healthy, ruddy neck. 'Impossible!' he cried, at the news that Laura was under the protection of Mileyev and had thrown up Fertinhof.
'And he is still as stupid and self-satisfied? And what of Buzulukov?'
'Oh, about Buzulukov there is such a tale  splendid!' shouted Petritsky. 'You know his passion for balls?
They're very good, much lighter.  Well, he stood...
'The Grand Duchess passed by with one of the Ambassadors, and as his ill-luck would have it they were discussing the new helmets.
She sees our dear Buzulukov standing there'  Petritsky imitated the pose 'the Grand Duchess asks him for his helmet, but he won't let her have it!
That  what's his name? wishes to take it from him, but he won't let go...
"Here, this is one of the new ones," says the Grand Duchess, turning it over, and  just fancy!  out tumbles a pear and sweets  two pounds of them!... The dear fellow had collected them in his helmet!'
Vronsky shook with laughter, and long after, when he was already talking of other things, he again went off into roars of hearty laughter, showing his compact row of strong teeth, at the remembrance of the helmet.
Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the help of his valet, put on his uniform and went to report himself.
After that he intended to go to see his brother and to see Betsy, and to pay a few calls in order to begin visiting the set in which he could meet Anna Karenina.
As usual in Petersburg, he left the house not to return till late at night.
TOWARD THE END OF THE WINTER a consultation was held at the Shcherbatskys' which was intended to ascertain the state of Kitty's health and to decide what should be done to restore her failing strength. She was ill, and with the approach of spring grew worse.
Their own doctor prescribed cod-liver oil, then iron, and then nitrate of silver, but as none of them did her any good and as he advised her to go abroad for the spring they sent for a celebrated specialist.
The celebrated specialist, a very handsome man and by no means old, insisted on sounding the invalid. He, with particular pleasure as it seemed, insisted that a maidenly sense of shame is only a relic of barbarism, and that nothing is more natural than for a man still in his prime to handle a young woman's naked body.
He considered this natural because he did it every day, and did not, it seemed to him, either feel or think anything wrong when he did it. He therefore considered the feeling of shame in a girl to be not only a relic of barbarism but an insult to him.
They had to submit, for although all the doctors studied in the same schools and from the same books and knew the same sciences, and though some said that this celebrated man was a bad doctor, at the Princess Shcherbatskaya's and in her set it was for some reason assumed that he alone had a quite special knowledge and he alone could save Kitty.
After having carefully examined and sounded the agitated invalid, who was stupefied with shame, the celebrity, having carefully washed his hands, stood in the drawing-room talking to the Prince.
The Prince frowned and coughed as he listened to the doctor.
As a man who had lived in the world and was neither stupid nor ill, the Prince did not believe in medicine, and in his heart was vexed at this farce, especially as he himself was probably the only one who thoroughly understood the cause of Kitty's illness. 'What a windbag,' he thought as he listened to the celebrated doctor's chatter about Kitty's symptoms.
The doctor meanwhile found it hard not to show his contempt for the old fellow, and with difficulty descended to the level of his comprehension.
He saw that it was waste of time to talk to him, and that the head in this house was the mother.
It was before her that he meant to spread his pearls.
The Prince moved away, trying not to show how absurd he thought the whole farce.
'Tell me everything... Is there any hope?' she meant to ask, but her lips trembled and she could not utter that question, and only added: 'Well, doctor?'
When the doctors were alone, the family doctor began timidly to express his opinion, which was that a tuberculous process had begun, but... etc.
The celebrity listened, but in the midst of the speech looked at his large gold watch.
'Yes,' said he, 'but...'
The family doctor stopped respectfully in the middle of what he was saying.
'Yes, that goes without saying,' replied the celebrity, and again looked at his watch. 'Excuse me, has the bridge over the Yauza been repaired, or has one still to drive round?' he asked.
And the celebrity explained his plan of a treatment with Soden Water, the chief reason for prescribing this evidently being that it could do no harm.
Besides which, the mother wishes it,' said he.
He again glanced at his watch.
'I must be going!' he said, moving toward the door.
The celebrity informed the Princess (his sense of what was fitting suggested this to him) that he would have to see the patient again.
'What, another examination?' exclaimed the mother, horror-struck.
And the mother, followed by the doctor, entered the room in the middle of which Kitty was standing. Her thin cheeks were flushed and her eyes were burning after the ordeal she had endured.
When the doctor entered she blushed all over and her eyes filled with tears.
Her whole illness and the treatment appeared to her stupid and even ridiculous.
Her treatment seemed to her as absurd as piecing together the bits of a smashed vase.
Why did they want to dose her with pills and powders?
But she did not want to pain her mother, especially as her mother considered herself to blame.
He sat down opposite to her, smiling, felt her pulse and again began asking tiresome questions.
'It's only the excitability of an invalid,' he said to the mother after Kitty had gone out. 'And I had finished.'
And to the Princess, as to an exceptionally intelligent woman, the doctor diagnosed Kitty's condition in learned language, and concluded with directions how the unnecessary waters were to be drunk.
In reply to the question whether they should go abroad, the doctor thought deeply, as if solving a difficult problem, and at last he decided that they should go, but should not believe the quacks, and when in doubt should always refer to him.
But if you wish to travel, let us go!' and trying to appear interested in the journey she began to talk about the preparations for it.
She knew that there was to be a consultation that day, and though she had only recently got up after a confinement (she had given birth to a daughter at the end of the winter), and though she had many troubles and cares of her own, she left her baby and another little girl of hers who was ill, and called to hear Kitty's fate, which was to be decided that day.
'Well, how is she?' she said, entering the drawing-room without removing her bonnet.
They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it turned out that though he had spoken very fluently and at great length, it was impossible to reproduce what he had said.
Dolly could not suppress a sigh. Her best friend, her sister, was going away; and as it was, her life was not a bright one.
Her relations with her husband after their reconciliation had become humiliating.
There was nothing definite, but Oblonsky was hardly ever at home, there was hardly ever any money, and suspicions of his infidelity continually tormented Dolly, who tried to repel them, fearing the already familiar pangs of jealousy.
The first explosion of jealousy, once past, could not be repeated. Not even the discovery of an act of infidelity could again affect her as it had done the first time.
Such a discovery could now only deprive her of her accustomed family life, and she let herself be deceived, despising him, and especially herself, for such weakness.
Added to this the care of a large family worried her continually: either something went wrong with the feeding of the baby or the nurse left, or, as now, one of the children fell ill.
'And how are you all getting on?' asked her mother.
The old Prince came out of his study after the doctor had gone, and after giving his cheek to Dolly and greeting her he turned to his wife:
'I think you should stay behind, Alexander,' replied his wife.
She lifted her face and, forcing a smile, looked up at him.
She always felt that he understood her better than anyone else in the family, though he did not speak much to her.
Being the youngest she was his favourite, and it seemed to her that his affection gave him insight.
When her gaze now met his kindly blue eyes looking steadily at her, it seemed to her that he saw right through her, and knew all the trouble that was in her.
She bent toward him, blushing, and expecting a kiss, but he only patted her on the head and remarked:
One can't get at one's real daughter, but only caresses the hair of expired females.
Well, Dolly,' he said, turning to his eldest daughter, 'and what is your prodigal about?'
'Nothing particular, Papa,' answered Dolly, understanding that he referred to her husband.
'He is always out, I hardly see him,'  she could not resist adding with an ironical smile.
'And has he not yet gone to the country to sell the forest?'
'No, he is always preparing to go.'
I'm all obedience,' he said to his wife, as he sat down again. 'And look here, Kate,' he went on, turning to his youngest daughter: 'You must wake up one fine morning and say to yourself "Why, I am quite well and happy, and will go out to walk in the frost again with Papa."
Her father's words seemed very simple, but they made Kitty feel as confused and flurried as a detected criminal. 'Yes, he knows and understands it all, and in these words is telling me that, though I am ashamed, I must get over my shame.'
The Princess flew at her husband: 'That comes of your jokes. You always...' and she began reproaching him.
The Prince listened for some time to her rebukes in silence, but his face frowned more and more.
'She is so pitiful, poor thing, so pitiful, and you don't feel that every allusion to what has caused it hurts her.
Oh dear, oh dear, to be so mistaken in anyone!' said the Princess, and from the change in her tone both Dolly and the Prince knew that she was thinking of Vronsky. 'I can't think why we have no laws to punish such horrid, ignoble people.'
'Oh, it makes me sick to hear it!' muttered the Prince gloomily, rising as if he meant to go away, but stopping at the door. 'The laws are there, my dear, and since you have invited it I will tell you who is at fault for it all: you, and you, and no one but you!
Yes, now go and dose her, and call in these quacks!'
The Prince appeared to have much more to say, but as soon as the Princess heard his tone she, as always happened in serious cases, gave in and became repentant.
'Alexander, Alexander,' she whispered, moving nearer and bursting into tears.
As soon as she began to cry the Prince quieted down, and came up to her.
God is merciful... thank you...' he went on, no longer knowing what he was saying, and after responding to his wife's wet kiss which he felt on his hand, he went out.
When Kitty, in tears, had left the room, Dolly, with her motherly habit of mind, at once saw that here a woman's task lay before her, and prepared to fulfil it.
She took off her bonnet and, having mentally rolled up her sleeves, prepared for action.
While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to restrain the former as far as filial respect permitted.
When the Prince flared up she kept silent, feeling shame for her mother and tenderness toward her father because of his immediate return to kindliness; but when her father left the room she was ready for the chief thing needful, which was to go to Kitty and comfort her.
'I wanted to tell you something long ago, Mama. Do you know that Levin wished to propose to Kitty when he was here last?
Did she not tell you...?'
'No, she told me nothing about either  she is too proud.
'Yes, and just imagine if she refused Levin  and she would not have refused him if it had not been for that other. I know...
And then the other deceived her so dreadfully.'
It was too dreadful for the Princess to think how much she was to blame in regard to her daughter, and she grew angry.
'Mama, I will go to her.'
Am I preventing you?' said the mother.
Her heart grew chill when she saw Kitty sitting on the low chair nearest the door, her eyes fixed on a corner of the carpet.
Kitty glanced at her sister, but the cold and rather severe expression of her face did not change.
'I am going home now and shall have to shut myself up, and you won't be able to come to me,' said Dolly, sitting down beside her sister. 'I want to talk to you.'
'What about?' asked Kitty quickly, lifting her face in alarm.
Kitty was silent and her face looked stern.
'No, because he has despised me,' said Kitty with a shaking voice. 'Don't speak!
I am sure he was in love with you and is still in love, but...'
She turned on her chair, blushed, and began rapidly moving her fingers, pressing now with one hand and now with the other the buckle of a belt she was holding.
Dolly knew her sister's habit of fingering something when she was heated, and she knew how apt Kitty was to forget herself when in a passion and to say much that was unpleasant and had better not have been said. She tried to pacify her; but it was too late.
'What do you want me to feel, what?' said Kitty quickly. 'That I was in love with a man who wouldn't have anything to do with me, and that I am dying for love of him?
And it is my sister who says that to me. My sister who imagines... that... that she sympathizes with me!...
But Kitty in her excitement did not listen to her.
I have enough pride never to let myself love a man who does not love me.'
'But I am not suggesting it... Only, tell me frankly,' said Dolly, taking her by the hand, 'did Levin speak to you?'
The mention of Levin seemed to deprive Kitty of the last fragments of self-control: she jumped up from her chair, threw the buckle on the floor, and rapidly gesticulating with her hands she began:
I have said and I repeat I will never, never do what you are doing  returning to a man who has betrayed you and has loved another woman.
Having said these words she looked at her sister and, seeing that Dolly remained silent with her head bowed sadly, Kitty, instead of leaving the room as she had intended to do, sat down by the door, and hiding her face in her handkerchief let her head sink down.
The humiliation of which she was always conscious was peculiarly painful when her sister touched on it.
She had not expected such cruelty from her, and was angry with her.
But suddenly she heard the rustle of a dress and a burst of suppressed sobbing. A pair of arms encircled her neck from below and Kitty was kneeling before her.
'Dolly dear, I am so, so unhappy!' she whispered guiltily.
Kitty knew that what she had said in her anger about the unfaithfulness of Dolly's husband and about her humiliation had cut her poor sister to the depths of her heart, but that she was forgiven; while Dolly on her side learnt all that she wanted to know, her suspicions were confirmed and she understood that Kitty's grief, her hopeless grief, was really caused by the fact that Levin had proposed to her and that she had rejected him, and now that Vronsky had deceived her, she was prepared to love Levin and to hate Vronsky.
Kitty did not say a word of this; she spoke only of her state of mind.
'I have no troubles whatever,' she said when she had grown calm,  'but can you understand that everything has become horrid, disgusting and coarse to me, and above all I myself?
How am I to tell you?'  she continued, noticing perplexity in her sister's eyes:  'Papa began to speak to me just now... It seems to me that he thinks that all I need is to get married.
Mama takes me to a ball: and it seems to me she only takes me there to marry me off as quickly as possible and get rid of me.
Kitty became confused; she was going to say that since this change had come over her, Oblonsky had become intolerably disagreeable to her, and that she could not see him without having the coarsest and most monstrous fancies.
'Well, you see, everything appears to me in the coarsest and most horrid aspect,' she continued.
And Kitty insisted on having her own way, went to her sister's, and nursed the children all through the scarlet fever that really attacked them.
One of these was her husband's official set, consisting of his colleagues and subordinates, who in most varied and capricious ways were connected and separated by social conditions.
Anna found it hard now to recall the feeling of almost religious respect she had at first felt for these people.
Now she knew them all as well as the inhabitants of a provincial town know one another; she knew the habits and weaknesses of each of them, and where the shoe pinched this or that foot; she knew their relations to one another and to the governing centre; she knew who sided with whom, and how and by what means each supported himself, and who agreed or disagreed with whom and about what; but (in spite of admonitions and advice from the Countess Lydia Ivanovna) this bureaucratic circle of male interests could not interest Anna, and she avoided it.
Another circle with which Anna was intimate was that through which Karenin had made his career.
Karenin set great value on this circle, and Anna, who knew how to get on with every one, had during the first part of her life in Petersburg made friends in it too.
But now, on her return from Moscow, that circle became unbearable to her.
It seemed to her that she, and all of them, were only pretending, and she felt so bored and uncomfortable in that Society that she visited Lydia Ivanovna as rarely as possible.
Anna was connected with this set through the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, the wife of her cousin, who had an income of Rs.
12o,ooo a year, and who, from the time Anna first appeared in Society, had particularly liked her, made much of her, and drawn her into her own set, making fun of that to which the Countess Lydia Ivanova belonged.
'When I am old and ugly I will become like that,' Betsy used to say, 'but for you, a young and beautiful woman, it is too early to settle down in that alms-house.'
At first Anna had avoided the Princess Tverskaya's set as much as she could, because it demanded more expense than she could afford; and also because she really approved more of the other set; but after her visit to Moscow all this was reversed.
She avoided her moral friends and went into grand Society.
There she saw Vronsky, and experienced a tremulous joy when meeting him.
She met him most frequently at Betsy's, who was a Vronsky herself and his cousin.
Vronsky went everywhere where he had a chance of meeting Anna, and spoke to her of his love whenever he could.
She gave him no encouragement, but every time they met there sprang up that feeling of animation which had seized her in the train on the morning when she first saw him.
She was aware that when they met joy lit up her eyes and drew her lips into a smile, but she could not hide the expression of that joy.
At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for allowing himself to persecute her; but soon after her return from Moscow, having gone to a party where she expected to meet him but to which he did not come, she clearly realized, by the sadness that overcame her, that she had been deceiving herself and that his persecution supplied the whole interest of her life.
A famous prima donna was giving her second performance and all high Society was at the Opera House.
Vronsky, from the front row of the stalls, seeing his cousin, went to her box without waiting for the interval.
'Why did you not come to dinner?' she said, adding with a smile and so that only he could hear her: 'I am amazed at the clairvoyance of lovers! She was not there!
Vronsky looked at her inquiringly.
She nodded, and he thanked her by a smile and sat down beside her.
'I wish for nothing better than to be caught,' replied Vronsky with his calm good-natured smile. 'To tell the truth, if I complain at all, it is only of not being caught enough!
'What hope can you have?' said Betsy, offended on her friend's behalf: 'entendons nous!' But in her eyes little sparks twinkled which said that she understood very well, and just as he did, what hope he might have.
'None whatever,' said Vronsky, laughing and showing his close-set teeth. 'Excuse me!' he added, taking from her hand the opera-glasses, and he set to work to scan across her bare shoulder the row of boxes opposite.
He knew very well that he ran no risk of appearing ridiculous either in Betsy's eyes or in the eyes of Society people generally.
He knew very well that in their eyes, the role of the disappointed lover of a maiden or of any single woman might be ridiculous; but the role of a man who was pursuing a married woman, and who made it the purpose of his life at all cost to draw her into adultery, was one which had in it something beautiful and dignified and could never be ridiculous; so it was with a proud, glad smile lurking under his moustache that he put down the opera-glasses and looked at his cousin.
'And why did you not come to dinner?' she said admiringly.
I was making peace between a husband and a fellow who had insulted his wife.
'You must tell me all about it,' she said, rising. 'Come back in the next interval.'
'What? From Nilsson?' asked Betsy, quite horrified, though she could not have distinguished Nilsson's voice from that of a chorus girl.
'-"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be saved!"-' said Betsy, remembering that she had heard some one say something like that. 'Well, then, sit down and tell me about it.'
And she sat down again.
'IT'S RATHER IMPROPER but so charming that I long to tell it,' said Vronsky, gazing at her with laughing eyes. 'I shan't mention names.'
They see that a pretty woman in a hired sledge is passing them, looking at them, and laughing and nodding to them  at any rate they think so.
Of course off they go after her, galloping full speed.
A maid opens the door; they give her the letter and assure her that they are both so much in love that they will die at once on the doorstep.
Suddenly a gentleman with sausage-shaped whiskers, and as red as a lobster, appears, announces that no one but his wife lives in that flat and turns them both out...'
'How do you know he had "sausage-shaped whiskers," as you say?'
The Titular Councillor with his sausages begins to thaw, but also wishes to express his feelings, and as soon as he begins to express them he begins to get excited and grows insulting, and again I have to set all my diplomatic talents in motion. "I agree that they acted badly, but beg you to consider that it was a mistake; consider their youth; besides which the young men had just dined.
The Titular Councillor again softens. "I am willing to forgive them, Count, but you must understand that my wife, a respectable woman, has been subjected to the rudeness and insults of these hobbledehoys, these scound...'
'Well, bonne chance!' she added, giving Vronsky a finger that was not engaged in holding her fan, and with a movement of her shoulders making the bodice of her dress, that had risen a little, slip down again that she might be befittingly nude on returning to the front of the box into the glare of gas-light and the gaze of all eyes.
Vronsky went to the French Theatre, where he really had to see the Commander of his regiment (who never omitted a single performance there) to talk over this reconciliation business which had occupied and amused him for the last three days.
Titular Councillor Wenden had been to see the Commander and had lodged a complaint against the officers who had insulted his wife.
His young wife, so Wenden declared (he had been married six months), had been to church with her mother, and suddenly feeling unwell as a result of her interesting condition, was unable to stand any longer and took the first good sledge she could find.
These officers, in their sledge, raced after her; she became frightened, and feeling still more unwell ran up the stairs to her flat.
Wenden himself, having returned from his office and hearing the front-door bell and voices, went out, saw the tipsy officers with the letter, and hustled them out.
'No, say what you like,' the Commander remarked to Vronsky, whom he had invited to his house, 'Petritsky is becoming impossible.
That Councillor will not let the matter rest: he will go further with it.'
The C.O. had called Vronsky in just because he knew him to be honourable and able, and above all a man who valued the honour of the regiment.
Both the Commander and Vronsky were aware that Vronsky's name and his badge as aide-de-camp to the Emperor ought greatly to help in softening the Titular Councillor's feelings, and really these things had a partial effect; but the result of the peacemaking still remained doubtful, as Vronsky had explained.
Having reached the French Theatre, Vronsky went out into the foyer with the C.O., and informed him of his success or lack of success.
After considering the whole question, the Commander decided to let the matter drop; but, for amusement, he asked Vronsky for particulars of the interview, and could not help laughing for a long time as he listened to the description of how the Titular Councillor suddenly again flared up at the recollection of some incident of the affair, and how Vronsky manoeuvred so as to retire just at the last half-word of reconciliation, pushing Petritsky before him.
Kedrov cannot fight that good man!
And so he was in a great rage?' repeated the Commander, laughing. 'But what do you think of Clare this evening?
Wonderful!' he went on, referring to the new French actress. 'However often one sees her, she is new each day.
She had scarcely time to go to her dressing-room, put powder on her long pale face and rub it off again, smarten herself up, and order tea to be served in the big drawing-room, before one carriage after another began to arrive at the door of her immense house on the Great Morskaya.
Almost at one and the same time the hostess, her hair rearranged and her face freshened up, entered at one door and the visitors at another of the large, dark-walled drawing-room, with its thick carpets and brightly-lit table, shining in the candle-light with white tablecloth, silver samovar and translucent china.
The hostess sat down beside the samovar and took off her gloves.
The chairs being moved by the aid of unobtrusive footmen, the company settled down, separating into two circles: one with the hostess round the samovar, the other, at the opposite end of the room round the wife of an ambassador, a beautiful woman with black sharply-outlined eyebrows, in a black velvet dress.
'She is wonderfully good as an actress, one sees that she has studied Kaulbach,' remarked an attach in the circle round the ambassador's wife. 'Did you notice how she fell...'
It's impossible to say anything new about her,' said a stout, red-faced, fair-haired lady who wore an old silk dress and had no eyebrows and no chignon.
This was the Princess Myagkaya, notorious for her simplicity and the roughness of her manners, and nicknamed l'enfant terrible.
'People say that is very difficult, and that only what is malicious is amusing,' he began with a smile.
'Don't you think there is something Louis Quinze about Tushkevich?' said the attach, glancing at a handsome, fair-haired young man who stood by the tea-table.
He matches the drawing-room; that is why he comes here so often!'
'Have you heard? That that Maltyshcheva woman also  not the daughter but the mother  is having a diable rose costume made for herself?'
'I wonder that she, with her common sense  for she is not stupid  does not see how ridiculous she makes herself.'
The Princess Betsy's husband, a fat, good-natured man, an enthusiastic collector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, entered the drawing-room before going to his club.
Stepping silently on the thick carpet, he approached the Princess Myagkaya.
'How did you like Nilsson?' he inquired.
How you frightened me!' said she in reply. 'Please don't talk to me about the opera  you know nothing of music.
'What? Have you been to the Schuzburgs?' asked the hostess from her place by the samovar.
The effect produced by the Princess Myagkaya's words was always the same; and the secret of that effect lay in the fact that although she often  as at that moment  spoke not quite to the point, her words were simple and had a meaning.
In the Society in which she lived words of that kind produced the effect of a most witty joke.
The Princess Myagkaya did not understand why her words had such an effect, but was aware that they did and availed herself of it.
As while she was speaking everybody listened to her and the conversation in the circle round the ambassador's wife stopped, the hostess wished to make one circle of the whole company, and turning to the ambassador's wife, said:
'No, we are very comfortable here,' replied the ambassador's wife smiling, and she continued the interrupted conversation.
'Anna has changed very much since her trip to Moscow.
There is something strange about her,' said a friend of Anna's.
'The chief change is that she has brought back with her the shadow of Alexis Vronsky,' said the ambassador's wife.
'Well, why not? Grimm has a fable called "The Man Without a Shadow"  about a man who lost his shadow as a punishment for something or other.
But for a woman to be without a shadow can't be pleasant.'
'Yes, but a woman with a shadow generally ends badly,' said Anna's friend.
'A murrain on your tongue!' suddenly remarked the Princess Myagkaya, hearing these words. 'Anna Karenina is a splendid woman.
I don't like her husband, but I am very fond of her.'
'Why don't you like her husband? He is such a remarkable man,' said the ambassador's wife.
Formerly, when I was told to consider him wise, I kept trying to, and thought I was stupid myself because I was unable to perceive his wisdom; but as soon as I said to myself, he's stupid (only in a whisper of course), it all became quite clear!
'No one is satisfied with his position, but every one is satisfied with his wit,' remarked the attach, quoting some French lines.
What is she to do, if every one is in love with her and follows her about like a shadow?'
'But I don't even think of blaming her!' Anna's friend said, justifying herself.
'If no one follows us about like a shadow, that does not prove that we have a right to judge her.'
'Ah! Here you are at last!' she added, smilingly addressing Vronsky as he entered the room.
Vronsky not only knew everybody in the room, but saw them all every day, so he entered in the calm manner of one who rejoins those from whom he has parted only a short time before.
'Where do I come from?' he said in reply to the ambassador's wife. 'There's no help for it, I must confess that I come from the Theatre Bouffe.
And he named a French actress and was about to tell them something about her when the ambassador's wife stopped him with mock alarm.
He was looking at the door with a strange new expression on his face.
He gazed joyfully, intently, and yet timidly at the lady who was entering, and slowly rose from his seat.
Anna entered the room holding herself, as usual, very erect, and without changing the direction of her eyes approached her hostess, walking with that quick, firm yet light step which distinguished her from other Society women. She shook hands; smilingly, and with the same smile looked round at Vronsky.
He bowed low and moved a chair toward her.
Anna responded only by an inclination of the head, though she blushed and frowned.
But immediately, nodding rapidly to her acquaintances and pressing the hands extended to her, she turned again to her hostess:
Sir John was there  he is very interesting.'
'Yes, he was telling us about Indian life. It was very interesting.'
The conversation, interrupted by her entrance, again burnt up like the flame of a lamp that has been blown about.
'I am surprised at her parents.
What do you think?' she asked, addressing Anna, who with a scarcely discernible resolute smile was listening to this conversation.
'I think,' replied Anna, toying with the glove she had pulled off, 'I think... if it is true that there are as many minds as there are heads, then there are as many kinds of love as there are hearts.'
Vronsky had gazed at Anna and with sinking heart waited to hear what she would say.
He sighed, as after a danger averted, when she had uttered these words.
'On the contrary, it interests me very much! What exactly do they write, if I may ask?' he inquired.
'Give me a cup of tea,' she said, stopping behind Betsy's chair.
'What do they write?' he asked again.
'I often think men don't understand honour, though they are always talking about it,' said Anna, without answering his question. 'I have long wanted to tell you,' she added, and, moving a few steps to a side table on which lay some albums, she sat down.
'I don't quite understand your meaning,' he said, handing her the cup.
'I wanted to tell you,' she began again, without looking at him, 'that you have behaved badly, very badly.'
'Why say that to me?' she asked, looking severely at him.
'You know why,' he answered boldly and joyously, meeting her look and continuing to gaze at her.
It was not he, but she, who became abashed.
'That only proves you have no heart,' she said.
But her look said that she knew he had a heart and that she therefore feared him.
But then she felt that the one word forbade showed that she claimed certain rights over him, thereby encouraging him to speak of love. 'I have long wanted to say that to you,' she went on, looking resolutely into his eyes, her face all aglow and suffused with a burning blush, 'and today I came on purpose, knowing I should meet you here.
He looked at her, and was struck by the new, spiritual beauty of her face.
'What do you want of me?' he asked, simply and seriously.
'I want you to go to Moscow and beg Kitty's pardon,' said she.
'You don't want that,' he replied.
He saw that she was saying what she forced herself to utter and not what she wished to say.
'If you love me as you say you do,' she whispered, 'behave so that I may be at peace.'
I see the possibility of despair, misfortune... or of happiness  what happiness!... Is it impossible?' he added with his lips only, but she heard.
She exerted all the powers of her mind to say what she ought; but instead she fixed on him her eyes filled with love and did not answer at all.
'This is it!' he thought with rapture. 'Just as I was beginning to despair, and when it seemed as though the end would never come... here it is!
'Do this for me: never say such words to me, and let us be good friends.' These were her words, but her eyes said something very different.
She wished to say something, but he interrupted her.
'Only don't change anything. Leave everything as it is!' he said with trembling voice.
Indeed, just at that moment Karenin, with his deliberate, ungraceful gait, entered the drawing-room.
He glanced at his wife and Vronsky, went up to the hostess, and having sat down with a cup of tea began talking in his deliberate and always clear tones, in his usual ironical way ridiculing somebody.
'Your Hotel Rambouillet is in full muster,' said he, glancing round the whole company, 'the Graces and the Muses.'
But the Princess Betsy could not bear that tone of his: 'sneering,' she called it in English: so, like a clever hostess, she at once led him into a serious conversation on universal military service.
Only Karenin did not once glance that way and was not distracted from the interesting conversation in which he was engaged.
Noticing the unpleasant impression produced on every one, the Princess Betsy manoeuvred for some one else to take her place and to listen to Karenin, and she herself went up to Anna.
'I am always amazed at your husband's clearness and exactitude of expression,' she said. 'The most transcendental ideas become accessible to me when he speaks.'
'Oh yes!' said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness and not understanding a single word of what Betsy was saying; and going across to the big table she joined in the general conversation.
After half an hour's stay Karenin went up to his wife and suggested that they should go home together; but, without looking at him, she answered that she would stay to supper.
The Karenins' fat old Tartar coachman, in his shiny leather coat, was finding it hard to control the near grey horse that had grown restive with cold, waiting before the portico.
The hall-porter stood with his hand on the outer front door, Anna with her deft little hand was disengaging the lace of her sleeve which had caught on a hook of her fur coat, and with bent head was listening with delight to what Vronsky, who accompanied her, was saying.
'Granted that you have not said anything! I don't demand anything,' he was saying, 'but you know that it is not friendship I want!
'Love,' she slowly repeated to herself, and suddenly while releasing the lace, she added aloud: 'The reason I dislike that word is that it means too much for me, far more than you can understand,' and she looked him in the face. 'Au revoir!'
She gave him her hand, and with her quick elastic step went past the hall-porter and vanished into the carriage.
Her glance and the touch of her hand burnt him.
He kissed the palm of his hand where she had touched it, and went home happy in the knowledge that in this one evening he had made more progress toward his aim than he had during the previous two months.
KARENIN DID NOT SEE ANYTHING PECULIAR Or improper in his wife's conversing animatedly with Vronsky at a separate table, but he noticed that others in the drawing-room considered it peculiar and improper, therefore he also considered it improper, and decided to speak to his wife about it.
When he reached home he went to his study as usual, seated himself in his easy-chair, and opened a book on the Papacy at the place where his paper-knife was inserted. He read till one o'clock as was his wont, only now and then rubbing his high forehead and jerking his head as if driving something away.
At the usual hour he rose and prepared for bed.
With the book under his arm he went upstairs; but to-night, instead of his usual thoughts and calculations about his official affairs, his mind was full of his wife and of something unpleasant that had happened concerning her. Contrary to his habit he did not go to bed, but with his hands clasped behind his back started pacing up and down the rooms.
He felt that he could not lie down, till he had thought over these newly-arisen circumstances. When Karenin had decided to talk the matter over with his wife, it had seemed to him quite easy and simple to do so; but now, when he began considering how to approach her, the matter appeared very difficult and complicated.
Jealousy in his opinion insulted a wife, and a man should have confidence in his wife.
Why he should have confidence  that is, a full conviction that his young wife would always love him  he never asked himself; but he felt no distrust, and therefore had confidence, and assured himself that it was right to have it.
Now, though his conviction that jealousy is a shameful feeling, and that one ought to have confidence, had not been destroyed, he felt that he was face to face with something illogical and stupid, and he did not know what to do.
Karenin was being confronted with life  with the possibility of his wife's loving somebody else, and this seemed stupid and incomprehensible to him, because it was life itself.
He had lived and worked all his days in official spheres, which deal with reflections of life, and every time he had knocked up against life itself he had stepped out of its way.
He now experienced a sensation such as a man might feel who, while quietly crossing a bridge over an abyss, suddenly sees that the bridge is being taken to pieces and that he is facing the abyss.
It was the first time that the possibility of his wife's falling in love with anybody had occurred to him, and he was horrified.
He did not undress, but paced up and down with his even step on the resounding parquet floor of the dining-room, which was lit by one lamp, over the carpet of the dark drawing-room, where a light was reflected only from a recently painted portrait of himself which hung above the sofa, and on through her sitting-room, where two candles were burning, lighting up the portraits of her relatives and friends and the elegant knick-knacks, long familiar to him, on her writing-table.
Through her room he reached the door of their bedroom and then turned back again.
From time to time he stopped, generally on the parquet floor of the lamp-lit dining-room, and thought: 'Yes, it is necessary to decide and to stop it: to express my opinion of it and my decision.' Then he turned back again.
What decision?' he asked himself in the drawing-room, and could find no answer. 'But after all,' he reflected before turning into her room, 'what is it that has happened?
Are there not plenty of men with whom a woman may talk?
Besides... to be jealous is to degrade myself and her,' he said to himself as he entered her sitting-room.
At the bedroom door he turned back, and as soon as he re-entered the dark drawing-room a voice seemed to whisper that it was not so, and that if others noticed, that showed that there must have been something for them to notice.
And again he repeated to himself in the dining-room: 'Yes, it is necessary to decide, and stop it, and express my opinion...' And again in the drawing-room, at the turn into her room, he asked himself 'Decide what?' and then, 'What has happened?' and he replied 'Nothing,' and remembered that jealousy is a feeling which insults a wife; but in the drawing-room he came again to the conviction that something had happened.
His mind as well as his body performed a complete circle each time without arriving at anything new.
He noticed this, rubbed his forehead, and sat down in her room.
Here as he looked at her table, at the malachite cover of her blotting-book and an unfinished letter that lay there, his thoughts suddenly underwent a change.
He began thinking about her: of what she thought and felt.
For the first time he vividly pictured to himself her personal life, her thoughts, her wishes; but the idea that she might and should have her own independent life appeared to him so dreadful that he hastened to drive it away.
That was the abyss into which he feared to look.
'And what is most terrible of all,' thought he, 'is that, just now, when my work is coming to completion' (he was thinking of the project he was then carrying through), 'when I need peace and all my powers of mind, just now this stupid anxiety falls on me.
'I must think it over, come to a decision, and throw it off,' he said aloud.
'The question of her feelings, of what has taken place or may take place in her soul, is not my business; it is the business of her conscience and belongs to religion,' said he, feeling relieved at having found the formal category to which the newly-arisen circumstance rightly belonged.
'Well then,' thought he, 'the question of her feelings and so on are questions for her conscience, which cannot concern me.
As head of the family I am the person whose duty it is to guide her, and who is therefore partly responsible; I must show her the danger which I see, warn her, and even use my authority.
I must speak plainly to her.'
What he would say to his wife took clear shape in Karenin's head.
Thinking it over, he regretted having to spend his time and powers of mind on inconspicuous domestic affairs; but nevertheless, clearly and definitely, as though it were an official report, the form and sequence of the speech he had to make shaped itself in his mind. 'I must make the following quite clear: First, the importance of public opinion and propriety; secondly, the religious meaning of marriage; thirdly, if necessary, I must refer to the harm that may result to our son; fourthly, allude to her own unhappiness.'
That movement  a bad habit of cracking his fingers  always tranquillized him and brought him back to that precision of mind which he now so needed.
A woman's steps were heard ascending the stairs.
Karenin, ready to deliver his speech, stood pressing his interlaced fingers together, trying whether some of them would not crack again.
By the sound of her light step on the stair he was aware of her approach and, though he was satisfied with his speech, he felt some apprehension of the coming explanations.
ANNA WALKED IN WITH BOWED HEAD, playing with the tassels of her hood.
On seeing her husband she lifted her head and, as if awaking from sleep, smiled.
What a wonder!' she said, throwing off her hood, and without pausing she went on to her dressing-room. 'Alexis Alexandrovich, it's high time!' she added from beyond the door.
'With me?' she said with surprise, coming back from the other room and looking at him. 'What is it?
What about?' she asked, seating herself. 'Well, let us have a talk, if it is so important.
Anna said what came into her head, and hearing her own words was astonished at her capacity for deception.
How simple and natural her words sounded and how really it seemed as if she were merely sleepy!
She felt herself clothed in an impenetrable armour of lies and that some unseen power was helping and supporting her.
'Anna, I must warn you,' said he.
'Warn me?' she asked, 'what about?'
She looked so naturally and gaily at him, that one who did not know her as her husband did could not have noticed anything strange either in the intonation or the meaning of her words.
But for him, who knew her  knew that when he went to bed five minutes late she noticed it and asked the reason  knew that she had always immediately told him all her joys, pleasures and sorrows  for him, her reluctance to notice his state of mind, or to say a word about herself, meant much. He saw that the depths of her soul, till now always open, were closed to him.
More than that, he knew from her tone that she was not ashamed of this, but seemed to be saying frankly: 'Yes, it is closed, and so it should be and will be in future.'
He now felt like a man who on coming home finds his house locked against him. 'But perhaps the key can still be found,' thought Karenin.
'I wish to warn you,' he said in low tones, 'that you may, by indiscretion and carelessness, give the world occasion to talk about you.
As he spoke he looked at her laughing eyes, terrible to him now in their impenetrability, and felt the uselessness and idleness of his words.
'You are always like that,' she replied, as if not understanding him at all, and intentionally taking notice only of his last words. 'One day you dislike my being dull, another day my being happy.
Karenin started and bent his hands to crack his fingers.
'Oh, please don't crack your fingers! I dislike it so!' she said.
'Anna, is this you?' said he softly, making an effort and refraining from moving his hands.
'But whatever is the matter?' she asked in a tone of comical surprise and sincerity. 'What do you want of me?'
Karenin paused and rubbed his forehead and eyes.
He felt that instead of doing what he had meant to do and warning his wife that she was making a mistake in the eyes of the world, he was involuntarily getting excited about a matter which concerned her conscience, and was struggling against some barrier of his imagination.
'This is what I intended to say,' he continued coldly and calmly, 'and I ask you to listen to me.
'But Society noticed, and that disturbs him! You are not well, Alexis Alexandrovich!' she added, rose and was about to pass out of the room, but he moved forward as if wishing to stop her.
His face looked plainer and gloomier than she had ever yet seen it.
Anna stopped and, throwing back her head and bending it to one side, she began with her quick hands to take out her hairpins.
What next?' said she quietly and mockingly. 'I am even listening with interest because I should like to understand what it is all about.'
As she spoke she wondered at her quietly natural tone and at her correct choice of words.
And as ill-luck will have it, I am dreadfully sleepy!' said she, while with deft fingers she felt for the remaining pins in her hair.
'Anna, for God's sake don't talk like that!' he said mildly. 'Perhaps I am mistaken, but believe me that what I am saying I say equally for my own sake and for yours.
For an instant her head had drooped and the mocking spark in her eyes had died away, but the word 'love' aroused her again.
'Love!' she thought, 'as if he can love!
If he had never heard people talk of love, he would never have wanted that word.
'Alexis Alexandrovich, I really do not understand,' she replied. 'Explain what you consider...'
But I am not talking of myself. The chief persons concerned are our son and yourself.
Karenin did not notice that he was saying something quite different from what he had prepared.
Besides...' she added, rapidly, and hardly repressing a smile, 'it really is bedtime.'
When she went there he was already in bed.
His lips were sternly compressed and his eyes did not look at her.
Anna got into her bed, and every moment expected that he would address her.
She was afraid of what he would say, and yet wished to hear it.
But he remained silent.
She was thinking of another; she saw him, and felt her heart fill with excitement and guilty joy at the thought.
Suddenly she heard an even, quiet, nasal sound like whistling.
For a moment the sound he emitted seemed to have startled Karenin, and he stopped; but, after he had breathed twice, the whistling recommenced with fresh and calm regularity.
'It's late, it's late,' she whispered to herself, and smiled.
For a long time she lay still with wide-open eyes, the brightness of which it seemed to her she could herself see in the darkness.
FROM THAT TIME a new life began for Karenin and his wife.
Anna went into Society as before, frequently visiting the Princess Betsy, and she met Vronsky everywhere.
She met all his efforts to bring about an explanation by presenting an impenetrable wall of merry perplexity.
Karenin, strong as he was in his official activities, felt himself powerless here.
Like an ox he waited submissively with bowed head for the pole-axe which he felt was raised above him.
Each time he began to think about it, he felt that he must try again, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was still a hope of saving her and obliging her to bethink herself. Every day he prepared himself to have a talk with her.
But each time he began to speak with her he felt the same spirit of evil and falsehood which had taken possession of her master him also, and he neither said the things he meant to, nor spoke in the tone he had meant to adopt.
He spoke involuntarily in his habitual half-bantering tone which seemed to make fun of those who said such things seriously; and in that tone it was impossible to say what had to be said to her.
THAT WHICH FOR NEARLY A YEAR had been Vronsky's sole and exclusive desire, supplanting all his former desire: that which for Anna had been an impossible, dreadful, but all the more bewitching dream of happiness, had come to pass.
Pale, with trembling lower jaw, he stood over her, entreating her to be calm, himself not knowing why or how.
'Anna, Anna,' he said in trembling voice, 'Anna, for God's sake!...'
But the louder he spoke the lower she drooped her once proud, bright, but now dishonoured head, and she writhed, slipping down from the sofa on which she sat to the floor at his feet. She would have fallen on the carpet if he had not held her.
Forgive me!' she said, sobbing and pressing Vronsky's hand to her breast.
She felt so guilty, so much to blame, that it only remained for her to humble herself and ask to be forgiven; but she had no one in the world now except him, so that even her prayer for forgiveness was addressed to him.
Looking at him, she felt her degradation physically, and could say nothing more.
He felt what a murderer must feel when looking at the body he has deprived of life.
The body he had deprived of life was their love, the first period of their love.
The shame she felt at her spiritual nakedness communicated itself to him.
But in spite of the murderer's horror of the body of his victim, that body must be cut in pieces and hidden away, and he must make use of what he has obtained by the murder.
Then, as the murderer desperately throws himself on the body, as though with passion, and drags it and hacks it, so Vronsky covered her face and shoulders with kisses. She held his hand and did not move.
'Yes, and this hand, which will always be mine, is the hand of my accomplice.' She lifted his hand and kissed it.
He knelt down and tried to see her face, but she hid it and did not speak.
At last, as though mastering herself, she sat up and pushed him away.
'It's all over,' she said. 'I have nothing but you left.
'What bliss?' she said with disgust and horror, and the horror was involuntarily communicated to him. 'For heaven's sake, not another word!'
She rose quickly and moved away from him. 'Not another word!' she repeated, and with a look of cold despair, strange to him, she left him.
She felt that at that moment she could not express in words her feeling of shame, joy, and horror at this entrance on a new life, and she did not wish to vulgarize that feeling by inadequate words.
Later on, the next day and the next, she still could not find words to describe all the complexity of those feelings, and could not even find thoughts with which to reflect on all that was in her soul.
But that calm, necessary for reflection, never came. Every time the thought of what she had done, and of what was to become of her and of what she should do, came to her mind, she was seized with horror and drove these thoughts away.
'Not now; later, when I am calmer!' she said to herself.
But in her dreams, when she had no control over her thoughts, her position appeared to her in all its shocking nakedness.
One dream she had almost every night.
She dreamt that both at once were her husbands, and lavished their caresses on her.
Alexis Alexandrovich wept, kissing her hands, saying: 'How beautiful it is now!' and Alexis Vronsky was there too, and he also was her husband.
And she was surprised that formerly this had seemed impossible to her, and laughingly explained to them how much simpler it really was, and that they were both now contented and happy.
But this dream weighed on her like a nightmare, and she woke from it filled with horror.
WHEN LEVIN FIRST RETURNED FROM MOSCOW, and while he still started and blushed every time he remembered the disgrace of the refusal, he had said to himself, 'I blushed and started like this when I was ploughed in physics and had to remain in the second class; and in the same way I felt myself lost when I made a mess of my sister's affair that had been entrusted to me.
But three months passed and he had not become indifferent to it, and to think of it still hurt him as it had done in the first days.
He could not find peace, because he had so long dreamed of family life and felt so ripe for it, but was still unmarried and further than ever from marriage.
He himself felt painfully what all those around him felt too, that it is not good for a man of his age to be alone.
He remembered how, just before leaving for Moscow, he had said to Nicholas, his cowman, a naive peasant with whom he liked to talk: 'Well, Nicholas, I want to get married,' and how Nicholas had promptly replied, as on a matter about which there could be no doubt: 'And it's high time, Constantine Dmitrich.' But now he was further from marriage than ever.
The place was unoccupied, and when in imagination he tried to put one of the girls he knew there, he felt that it was quite impossible.
Moreover, the memory of her refusal, and the part he had played in it, tormented him with shame.
However much he told himself that he was not at all to blame in that matter, the memory of it, together with other shameful memories, made him start and blush.
There had been in his past, as in that of every man, actions which he realized were bad, and for which his conscience ought to have tormented him: but the recollections of those bad actions did not torment him nearly as much as these trivial yet shameful memories.
And among these recollections stood the memory of her refusal and the pitiful role he must have played in the eyes of the others that evening.
Every week he thought less and less about Kitty.
He waited impatiently to hear that she was married or was getting married soon, hoping that such news, like the drawing of an aching tooth, would quite cure him.
This lovely spring roused Levin still more and confirmed him in the determination completely to renounce the past in order to fashion his solitary life firmly and independently.
Though he had not carried out many of the plans with which he had returned to the country from Moscow, he had held to the most important one, that of living a pure life, and he was not experiencing the shame which used to torment him when he had fallen, but was able to look people boldly in the face.
Already in February he had received a letter from Mary Nikolavna to say that his brother Nicholas's health was getting worse, but that he would not submit to any treatment.
In consequence of this news Levin went to Moscow, saw his brother, and managed to persuade him to consult a doctor and go to a watering-place abroad.
He was so successful in persuading his brother, and in lending him money for the journey without irritating him, that he was satisfied with himself in this respect.
Besides his agricultural pursuits, which required special attention in spring, and besides reading, Levin had another occupation. He had that winter begun writing a book on agriculture, the basis of which was that the character of the labourer was treated as a definite factor, like climate and soil, and that therefore the conclusions of agricultural science should be deduced not from data supplied by climate and soil only, but from data of climate, soil, and the immutable character of the labourer.
So that in spite of his solitary life, or rather because of it, his time was completely filled up; only occasionally he felt an unsatisfied desire to share with some one besides Agatha Mikhaylovna the thoughts that wandered through his brain  for even with her he often discussed physics, agricultural theories, and especially philosophy, which last was her favourite subject.
LEVIN PUT ON HIS HIGH BOOTS and, for the first time, a cloth coat instead of a fur, and went out to attend to his farm. Stepping now on a piece of ice, now into the sticky mud, he crossed the stream of dazzling water.
Spring is the time for making plans and resolutions, and Levin, like a tree which in the spring-time does not yet know in which direction and in what manner its young shoots and twigs (still imprisoned in their buds) will develop, did not quite know what work on his beloved land he was going to take in hand, but he felt that his mind was full of the finest plans and resolutions.
First of all he went to the cattle-yard.
After he had for a while admired his cows, all familiar to him to the minutest detail, Levin gave orders for them to be driven into the field and for the calves to be let out into the yard.
He sent for the carpenter, who was under contract to be with the threshing-machine, but it turned out that he was mending the harrows, which should have been mended the week before Lent.
It was vexing that the careless farm management, against which he had struggled so many years with all his might, still continued.
Besides this, it proved that the harrows and all the agricultural implements which he had ordered to be examined and mended in winter, for which purpose three carpenters had been specially engaged, had not been seen to, and that the harrows were now being mended when it was time to start harrowing.
The steward, in his astrakhan-trimmed coat, as radiant as everything else that day, was coming from the threshing-ground breaking a bit of straw in his hands.
What is one to do with such people!' said the steward, waving his arm.
'Tell me what I keep you for!' he shouted; but remembering that this would not help matters, he stopped in the middle of what he was saying and only sighed.
'Well, can we begin sowing?' he asked after a pause.
'I have sent Vasily, he and Mishka are sowing.
To grow clover successfully it was necessary according to both theory and his own experience to sow it as early as possible, almost before the snow had finished melting, and Levin could never get this done.
Levin understood very well that 'might begin sprouting' meant that the English seed-oats were already spoiling. Here again his orders had not been obeyed.
Levin waved his hand angrily and went to the barn to look at the oats, then he came back to the stable.
The oats were not yet spoilt, but the men were turning them over with shovels whereas they should have let them run down from the loft. Levin ordered them to do this, told off two of the men to help sow the clover, and got over his vexation with the foreman.
'Ignat!' he called to the coachman, who with sleeves rolled up was washing a carriage at the pump, 'saddle me...'
While the horse was being saddled Levin again called the steward, who was hanging about within sight, in order to make it up with him, and began to talk about the spring work that lay before them and his plans for the estate.
The foreman listened attentively and evidently tried to approve of his master's plans: but his face still wore that hopeless and despondent expression so familiar to Levin.
Nothing grieved Levin so much as this manner, but it was a manner common to all the numerous stewards he had employed.
They all took up the same attitude toward his plans, and therefore he now no longer grew angry with them, but he was grieved, feeling all the more stimulated to resist this, so to say, elemental force for which he could find no other name but 'as God wills,' which always obstructed him.
Yet all the same he could not but continue the struggle.
But don't I know,' he added laughing, 'that you always want less of everything and worse? However, this year I will not let you have your way.
And Levin rode across the muddy yard and out of the gate into the field at a brisk amble, his fresh little horse snorting at the puddles and pulling at the bridle.
If he had felt light-hearted in the cattle and farm yards, he felt still more so in the fields.
Gently swayed by the ambling pace of his good little horse, and drinking in the warm smell with the freshness of snow and air in it, he rode through the forest over the crumbling sinking snow that melted at each footstep, and rejoiced at the sight of each one of his trees with its swelling buds and the moss reviving on its bark.
When he had passed the forest, a vast expanse of velvety green unrolled before him without a single bare spot, and only sprinkled here and there in the hollows with patches of unmelted snow.
He was not irritated either by the sight of a peasant's horse and colt treading down the young growth (he told a peasant he met to drive them off), nor by the jeering and stupid answer the peasant, Ipat, whom he happened to meet, gave him in reply to his question: 'Well, Ipat, will it soon be time to sow?' 'We must plough first, Constantine Dmitrich,' said Ipat.
The further he went the happier he felt and all sorts of plans for his estate, each better than the last, presented themselves to him: to plant rows of willows with a southern aspect on all the fields, so that the snow should not remain long under them; to divide the fields, tilling six and keeping three under grass; to build a new cattle-yard at the further end of the field, to dig a pond, and to make folds for the cattle for manuring purposes.
Then he would have three hundred desyatinas of wheat, one hundred of potatoes, and one hundred and fifty of clover, and not a single desyatina exhausted.
Dreaming such dreams, carefully guiding his horse so as not to trample down his young growth, he rode up to the labourers who were sowing the clover.
'But the sowing, Constantine Dmitrich, is getting on first-rate,' he said making up to the master.
'Oh, but we crumble it up,' said Vasily, taking a handful and rubbing the earth between his palms.
He looked at the strides Mishka took dragging the enormous lumps of earth that stuck to his feet, dismounted, took the seed-basket from Vasily, and prepared to sow.
Vasily pointed to a mark with his foot and Levin began scattering the seeds and earth as best he could.
'Why?' said Levin merrily, feeling that his remedy was acting well.
Why, Constantine Dmitrich, I don't think I could try harder if I was working for my own father.
I've been home, and my old father also has sown three measures of wheat.
'Well, mind and rub the lumps,' said Levin, going up to his horse, 'and keep an eye on Mishka, and if the clover comes up well you shall have fifty kopeks for each desyatina.'
Levin mounted his horse and rode to the field where clover had been sown the year before, and to another which was deeply ploughed and ready for sowing the spring wheat.
Levin rode back by the way that led across the brook, hoping that the water would have gone down, and he did manage to ford the stream, scaring two ducks in so doing. 'There must be some snipe too,' he thought, and just at the turning to his house he met the keeper, who confirmed his supposition.
Levin rode on at a trot, so as to have dinner and get his gun ready for the evening.
AS LEVIN, IN THE HIGHEST SPIRITS, was nearing the house he heard the sound of a tinkling bell approaching the main entrance.
'Why, that must be some one from the station,' he thought. 'They would just have had time to get here from the Moscow train.
He did say, "Perhaps I'll go to a watering place, or perhaps I'll come to you."-' For a moment he felt frightened and disturbed lest his brother's presence should destroy the happy frame of mind that the spring had aroused in him.
But he was ashamed of that feeling, and immediately, as it were, opened out his spiritual arms and with tender joy expected, and now hoped with his whole soul, that it was his brother.
He touched up his horse and, having passed the acacia trees, saw a hired three-horse sledge coming from the station and in it a gentleman in a fur coat.
It was not his brother. 'Oh, if only it's some nice fellow with whom one can have a talk,' he thought.
'Ah,' he cried, joyfully lifting both arms, 'here's a welcome guest!
Well, I am glad to see you!' he exclaimed, recognizing Oblonsky.
'I shall know now for certain whether she is married or when she will be,' thought Levin.
And on this lovely day he felt that the memory of her did not hurt him at all.
'You did not expect me, eh?' said Oblonsky, getting out of the sledge with mud on his nose, cheek, and eyebrows, but beaming with cheerfulness and health. 'I have come to see you, that's one thing,' he said embracing and kissing Levin, 'to get some shooting, that's two, and to sell the Ergushevo forest, that's three.'
He showed his guest into the spare bedroom, where Oblonsky's things, his bag, a gun in a case, and a satchel with cigars, were also brought, and leaving him to wash and change Levin went to the office to give orders about the ploughing and the clover.
'Do just as you please, only be quick,' he said and went out to see the steward.
When he returned, Oblonsky, fresh and clean, with hair brushed, and face radiant with smiles, was just coming out of his room, and they went upstairs together.
Oblonsky had much interesting news to tell, and one item of special interest to Levin was that his brother, Sergius Ivanich, intended to come and stay in the country with him that summer.
Not a word did Oblonsky say about Kitty or about any of the Shcherbatskys; he only delivered greetings from his wife.
Levin was grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visit.
As usual during his solitude a mass of thoughts and feelings he could not express to those around had collected in his mind, and now he poured out to Oblonsky the poetic joy of spring, his failures, his plans concerning the estate, his thoughts and remarks about the books he had read, and especially the idea of his own book, the basis of which, though he did not notice it himself, was a criticism of all previous works on agriculture.
'Splendid, splendid!' he said, lighting a thick cigarette after the joint 'I seem to have come to you as one lands from a noisy steamer on to a peaceful shore. So you maintain that the labourer should be studied as one of the factors which should decide the choice of agricultural methods?
It should resemble the natural sciences and should examine existing phenomena, including the labourer with his economic and ethnographic...'
'Ah, Agatha Mikhaylovna,' said Oblonsky, kissing the tips of his plump fingers; 'what smoked goose you have, what herb brandy!... But what d'you think, Constantine, is it not time?' he added.
'High time, high time! Kuzma, tell them to harness the trap,' he said, and ran downstairs.
Oblonsky went down and himself carefully took the canvas cover off the varnished case, opened it, and set to work to put together his valuable gun, which was of the newest type.
Kuzma, already scenting a substantial tip, did not leave Oblonsky for a moment. He put on his stockings and his boots for him, and Oblonsky willingly allowed him to do so.
'Yes, he does speak very funnily. She knows where the master is going,' he added, patting Laska, who was whining and jumping round Levin, now licking his hand, now his boots and his gun.
He sat down, wrapped a rug round his legs, and lit a cigar. 'How is it you don't smoke.?
Levin was grateful to Oblonsky because, with his usual tact, noticing that Levin was afraid of talking about the Shcherbatskys, he avoided mentioning them; but now Levin wanted to find out about the matter that tormented him, and yet feared to speak of it.
'Well, and how are your affairs?' he asked, recollecting how wrong it was of him to be thinking only of his own concerns.
'But you don't admit that one may want a roll while one gets regular rations, you consider it a crime; and I don't believe in life without love,' he answered, understanding Levin's question in his own way. 'How can I help it?
Well, you know Ossian's type of woman  such as one sees in a dream?
Levin listened in silence, but in spite of all his efforts he could not enter into his friend's soul and understand his feeling, nor the delight of studying women of that kind.
He himself went to a forked birch on the other side and, leaning his gun against the fork of the lower branch, took off his coat, tightened his girdle, and tried whether he could move his arms freely.
The old grey-haired Laska, following close on his heels, sat down warily in front of him and pricked up her ears.
One can hear and see the grass growing,' thought Levin, as he noticed a wet slate-coloured aspen leaf move close to the point of a blade of grass.
He stood listening, and gazing down now on the wet mossy ground, now at the attentive Laska, now at the sea of bare tree-tops stretched out before him at the foot of the hill, and now at the darkening sky streaked with fleecy clouds.
A tawny owl hooted near by, and Laska started, took a few careful steps, and with her head on one side again listened intently.
'Yes, I heard,' answered Levin, so reluctant to disturb the silence of the wood that his own voice sounded unpleasant to him. 'They won't be long now.'
Click! click! Oblonsky cocked his gun.
'And what's that screaming?' he asked, drawing Levin's attention to a long-drawn cry like the high-pitched whinny of a colt in play.
It's a male hare. But stop talking!
Listen, they're coming!' Levin almost shouted, cocking his gun.
They were flying straight toward him; the near sound of their cry  something like the sound made when tightly stretched cloth is steadily torn  seemed close to his ears; the long beak and neck of a bird were quite visible, and just as Levin took aim a red flash came from behind the bush where Oblonsky was standing and the bird descended like an arrow and then fluttered up again.
'Here it is!' answered Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear erect, wagging her fluffy, high-arched tail, stepping slowly as if to prolong the pleasure and seeming almost to smile, brought the dead bird to her master. 'Well, I'm glad you got it,' said Levin, and while he spoke he was already experiencing a feeling of envy at not having killed the bird himself.
Through the young birches, Venus bright and silvery, was already shining with her delicate glitter low down in the west and high up in the east flickered the red fire of the dim Arcturus.
Above his head Levin found, and again lost, stars of the Great Bear.
The snipe had ceased flying, but Levin decided to stay until Venus, which he could see underneath a branch, should rise above it [Tolstoy seems to have made a slip.
Venus had risen above the branch and the car of the Great Bear as well as its shafts showed clearly against the dark blue sky, but he still waited.
'Stephen!' said Levin suddenly and unexpectedly 'why don't you tell me whether your sister-in-law is married, or when she will be?'
Levin felt so strong and calm that he thought the answer, whatever it might be, could not agitate him, but he did not at all expect the reply Oblonsky gave him.
'She has not thought, and is not thinking, of getting married, but she is very ill and the doctors have sent her abroad.
They are even afraid for her life.'
What's the matter with her?
How did she?...'
While they were talking Laska, pricking her ears, kept looking up at the sky and then reproachfully at them.
'What a time they have chosen to talk,' thought she. 'And there it comes flying...
It belongs to both!' cried Levin, and ran into the thicket with Laska to look for the bird. 'Oh! but there was something unpleasant!' he thought.
But what can I do? I am very sorry,' he thought.
'Found? good dog!' he said, taking the warm bird from Laska's mouth and putting it into his well-filled game-bag. 'We've found it, Stephen!' he shouted.
ON THEIR WAY HOME Levin inquired the particulars of Kitty's illness and of the Shcherbatskys' plans, and though he would have been ashamed to confess it, what he heard was agreeable to him.
It was agreeable because there was still hope for him, and even more because she was suffering, she who had made him suffer so much.
Believe me, I have reckoned it all out,' continued he, 'and have sold the forest so well that I am afraid he may change his mind.
You know it's not timber but, for the most part, only fit for fuel,' said he, hoping by this remark finally to convince Levin of the injustice of his suspicions.
'And it will not yield more than ten sazhens of wood to the desyatina... and he is paying me at the rate of two hundred roubles.'
'I know this manner,' he thought, 'not his only, but all townsmen's, who visit the country two or three times in ten years; get hold of two or three expressions, use them in and out of season and are firmly convinced they know everything. "Timber," and "yield ten sazhens."
'I should not try to teach you the things you scribble about at your office,' he said, 'but in case of need would come to you for advice about them, but you are firmly convinced that you understand all this forest lore.
'How can one count the trees?' said Oblonsky, still anxious to dispel his friend's ill-humour. ' "Count grains of sand," and planets' rays E'en though a lofty mind were able..." '
I go shooting there every year, and it is worth five hundred roubles a desyatina cash down and he is paying you two hundred on long term.
'Because he and the other dealers are in league, and he has bought them off.
He would not consider a deal which would bring him in ten or fifteen per cent; he waits till he can buy at a fifth of the value.'
In the cart sat Ryabinin's clerk (who also performed a coachman's duties), his skin tightly stretched over his full-blooded face and his belt drawn tight.
He was a tall, spare, middle-aged man, with a moustache, a prominent shaven chin, and prominent dim eyes.
He wore a long-skirted blue coat with buttons very low down at the back, high boots drawn quite straight over the calves of his legs and crinkled round the ankles, and over them he had on a pair of large goloshes.
He wiped his face all round with his handkerchief, and smoothing his coat, which was already quite in order, smilingly greeted the new arrivals. He held out his hand to Oblonsky as if he were trying to catch something.
'Oh, so you have come,' said Oblonsky taking his hand. 'That's right!'
'Constantine Dmitrich, my respects to you!' he said turning to Levin and trying to catch his hand too.
What kind of bird may that be?' added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe. 'Something tasty?' and he shook his head disapprovingly as if much doubting whether this game were worth the candle.
On entering the study Ryabinin looked round by force of habit as though to find the icon, but after finding it he did not cross himself.
He glanced at the book cupboards and book-shelves with the same look of doubt as he had bestowed on the snipe, smiled contemptuously, and again shook his head disapprovingly, decidedly refusing to admit that this game could be worth the candle.
'I can do that,' said Ryabinin, sitting down and putting his arm on the back of his chair in a most uncomfortable way. 'You must let me off something, Prince.
Levin, who had been putting away his gun in a cupboard, was just going out of the door, but on hearing the dealer's words he stopped.
'As it is you are getting the forest for next to nothing,' he said. 'He came to me too late, else I would have fixed the price.'
Ryabinin rose and smiled silently, surveying Levin from his feet to his head.
'He is very close, is Constantine Dmitrich,' he said, addressing Oblonsky with a smile. 'It's absolutely impossible to buy anything of him.
With his bony fingers he rapidly unfastened his coat, exposing his braided shirt, the brass buttons of his waistcoat, and a watch-chain, and quickly took out a thick old pocket-book.
'If you please, the forest is mine,' he said, rapidly crossing himself and holding out his hand. 'Take your money, the forest is mine.
That's the way Ryabinin does business, no fussing about kopeks,' he said, frowning and flourishing his pocket-book.
Ryabinin looked at it and smiled, shaking his head.
'That's all his youthfulness, his absolute childishness.
An hour later the dealer; with his coat well lapped over, the hooks of his overcoat carefully fastened, and with the agreement in his pocket, seated himself in his little cart and drove home.
'Oh, these gentlefolks!' he remarked to his clerk while hooking up the leather apron of the cart, 'regular objects!'
OBLONSKY WENT UPSTAIRS, his pockets bulging with the treasury-bills payable in three months' time with which Ryabinin had paid him.
The forest transaction was completed, he had the money in his pocket, the shooting had been fine, Oblonsky was in the best of spirits, and therefore all the more anxious to dispel Levin's ill-humour.
He wanted to finish the day at supper as pleasantly as he had begun it.
Levin really was in a bad humour, and in spite of his desire to behave kindly and amiably to his charming guest he could not master himself.
Kitty was unmarried and ill, and ill for love of the man who had slighted her.
Vronsky had slighted her and she had slighted him, Levin.
Consequently Vronsky had a right to despise him and was therefore his enemy.
The stupid sale of the forest, the swindle Oblonsky had fallen a prey to, which had been perpetrated in his house, irritated him.
'Well, have you finished?' he said when he met Oblonsky upstairs. 'Will you have some supper?'
'Because I do not shake hands with the footman, and the footman is a hundred times better than he.'
Oblonsky wrinkled his face good-naturedly, like an innocent man who was being hurt and interfered with.
'Oh don't!' he said. 'When has a man ever sold anything without being told immediately after that it was worth much more?
But while he is trying to sell nobody offers him more... No, I see you have a grudge against that unfortunate Ryabinin.'
Oblonsky sat down to table and began joking with Agatha Mikhaylovna, assuring her that it was long since he had had such a dinner and supper as that day.
Try as Levin would to control himself, he remained morose and silent.
There was one question he wanted to put to Oblonsky, but could not bring himself to ask, nor could he find the form to put it in or the moment to ask it.
When Oblonsky had gone down to his room and, after again washing, had put on his frilled nightshirt and got into bed, Levin still lingered in his room talking about various tries and unable to ask what he wanted to know.
'What wonderful soap they make!' he said, examining and unwrapping a cake of scented soap Agatha Mikhaylovna had prepared for the visitor, but which Oblonsky had not used. 'Just look, it is quite a work of art.'
'Yes, electric light,' said Levin. 'Yes, by the by, where is Vronsky now?' he asked, suddenly putting down the soap.
And do you know, Constantine, I will tell you quite frankly,' he said, leaning his elbow on the table by his bed and supporting on his hand his good-looking, rosy face with its glittering, kind, and sleepy eyes, 'it was your own fault.
He yawned, but only with his jaw, without opening his mouth.
'Does he, or does he not know that I proposed?' thought Levin, looking at him. 'Yes, there is something sly and diplomatic in his face,' and feeling himself blush, he gazed in silence straight into Oblonsky's eyes.
'If there was anything on her side at that time, it was only the eternal attraction,' continued Oblonsky. 'You know his being a perfect aristocrat and his future position in Society had an effect, not on her but on her mother.'
The insult of the refusal he had had to face burned in his heart like a fresh, newly-received wound.
But he was at home and the walls of home are helpful.
'You talk of his being an aristocrat. But I should like to ask you what is Vronsky's or anyone else's aristocracy that I should be slighted because of it?
A man whose father crawled up from nothing by intrigues and whose mother has had relations with heaven knows whom... No, pardon me, I consider myself and people like me aristocrats: people who can point back to three or four honourable generations of their family, all with a high standard of education (talent and intelligence are a different matter), who have never cringed before anyone, never depended on anyone, but have lived as my father and my grandfather did.
I agree with you,' said Oblonsky sincerely and cheerfully, though he felt that Levin ranked him with those who could be bought for silver.
Now that he had spoken out he became once more as he had been in the morning. 'You are not angry with me, Steve?
Please don't be angry,' he said smiling, and took his hand.
THOUGH VRONSKY'S WHOLE INNER LIFE WAS ABSORBED by his passion, his external life ran unalterably and inevitably along its former customary rails of social and regimental connections and interests.
The interests of the regiment occupied an important place in his life, because he was fond of his regiment and still more because the regiment was fond of him.
Not only were they fond of him, they respected him too and were proud of him: proud that this man, with his enormous wealth and excellent education and abilities, to whom the road to success of all kinds gratifying to ambition or vanity lay open, had disregarded all this, and of all life's interests had nearest to his heart those of his regiment and his comrades.
Vronsky was aware of this attitude of his comrades toward him, and besides liking the life felt bound to justify their view of him.
It goes without saying that he spoke to none of them about his love, nor did he betray himself even in the wildest drinking-bouts (indeed, he never drank so as to lose all self-control). And he silenced any of his thoughtless comrades who tried to hint at the liaison.
But in spite of this, his love affair was known to all the town: everybody guessed more or less correctly what his relations with Anna Karenina were. Most of the young men envied him just on account of what was most trying in the affair, namely Karenin's high rank and the consequent prominence of the affair in Society.
The majority of young women, who envied Anna and had long been weary of hearing her virtues praised, were pleased at what they guessed, and only waited to be sure that public opinion had turned before throwing the whole weight of their scorn at her.
They already prepared lumps of mud to pelt her with in due time.
Vronsky's mother, on hearing of the matter, was at first pleased, both because in her opinion nothing gave such finishing touches to a brilliant young man as an intrigue in the best Society, and also because this Anna Karenina, who had so taken her fancy and who had talked so much about her little son, was after all such as the Countess Vronsky expected all handsome and well-bred women to be.
But latterly she had heard that her son had refused a post of importance for his career, merely to remain with his regiment and be able to see Anna Karenina, and that exalted persons were dissatisfied with him for it, so she changed her opinion.
She was also displeased because, from all she heard of it, this affair was not one of those brilliant, graceful, Society liaisons which she approved, but a desperate Werther-like passion which might lead him into doing something foolish.
She had not seen him since his sudden departure from Moscow, and through her eldest son she sent him word to come and see her.
He did not distinguish what kind of love it was, great or small, passionate or passionless, guilty or pure (he himself, the father of a family, kept a ballet girl, and was therefore lenient in these matters): but he knew that it was a love affair which displeased those whom it is necessary to please, and he therefore disapproved of his brother's conduct.
Besides his military and social interests Vronsky had another one, namely horses, of which he was passionately fond.
That year there was to be an officers' steeplechase, and Vronsky had put down his name, bought an English thoroughbred mare, and, in spite of his love, was passionately, though restrainedly, concerned about the coming races.
On the contrary he needed an occupation and an interest apart from his love, in which to refresh himself and find rest from the impressions which agitated him too violently.
ON THE DAY OF THE KRASNOE SELO RACES Vronsky came earlier than usual to the regimental mess-room to eat his beefsteak.
It was not necessary for him to train very strictly as his weight was just the regulation eleven-and-a-half stone, but he had to be careful not to get fatter and therefore avoided sweets and starchy foods.
He sat waiting with his elbows on the table and his coat unbuttoned over a white waistcoat, and while waiting for the beefsteak he had ordered he looked at the pages of a French novel that lay on his plate.
He only looked at the book in order not to have to talk to the officers who came in and out of the room while he was thinking.
But he had not seen her for three days and, as her husband had returned from abroad, he did not know whether she could keep the appointment to-day or not, and he did not know how to find out.
He had seen her last at his cousin Betsy's country house.
He went to the Karenins' country house* as seldom as possible, but now he meant to go there and was considering how to do it.
'Of course I can say that Betsy sent me to find out if she will be at the race.
Yes, of course I will go,' he decided, lifting his eyes from the book, and a vivid sense of the joy of seeing her made his face radiant.
'Send to my house and tell them to harness three horses to the calche at once,' he said to the waiter who had brought him a beefsteak on a hot silver plate; and drawing the plate nearer to him he began to eat.
Two officers appeared at the entrance door: one with a weak thin face, a young officer who had just joined the regiment from the Cadet Corps; the other a plump old officer with a bracelet on his arm and small eyes sunk in a bloated face.
Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and, as if he had not noticed them, turned his eyes on his book and began to eat and read at the same time.
'As you see,' said Vronsky, frowning and wiping his mouth, without looking at the speaker.
'What?' said Vronsky frowning, making a grimace of disgust and showing his regular teeth.
'Waiter, sherry!' said Vronsky without replying, and moving his book to the other side of his plate he continued to read.
The plump officer took the wine-list and turned to the young one. 'You choose what we shall drink,' said he, handing him the list and looking at him.
'Suppose we have some Rhine wine,' said the young one, turning his eyes timidly to Vronsky while his fingers tried to catch hold of his just-budding moustache.
Seeing that Vronsky did not turn round, he rose.
'Let us go into the billiard-room,' he said.
At that moment Captain Yashvin, a tall man with a fine figure, entered the room, and having given a contemptuous backward nod to the two officers he came up to Vronsky.
'Ah, here he is!' he exclaimed, and with his big hand gave Vronsky a sharp slap on his shoulder-strap.
Vronsky looked up angrily, but his face brightened at once into its characteristic look of quiet, firm kindliness.
He sat down beside Vronsky, and his legs, encased in tight riding-breeches, being too long for the size of the chair, bent at a sharp angle at the hip and knee-joints.
Yashvin, a gambler, a rake, a man not merely without principles but with bad principles, was Vronsky's best friend in the regiment.
Vronsky liked him both for his extraordinary physical strength, which he chiefly demonstrated by his ability to drink like a fish and go without sleep without its making any difference to him, and for the great mental power which was apparent in his relations with his commanding officers and comrades, who feared and respected him, and in his card-playing when he staked tens of thousands of roubles and, in spite of what he drank, always with such skill and decision that he was considered the best player in the English Club.
Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin, particularly because he felt that the latter liked him, not for his name and money but for himself.
Among all the people Vronsky knew Yashvin was the only one to whom he would have liked to talk about his love.
He felt that Yashvin, though apparently despising all emotion, was the only one who could understand the power of the passion that now filled his whole life.
Besides, he felt sure that Yashvin certainly found no pleasure in gossip and scandal, and understood his feeling in the right way  that is, knew and believed that this love was not a joke or an amusement, but something more serious and important.
Vronsky did not talk to him of his love, but was aware that he knew all about it and understood it rightly, and it was pleasant to him to read this in Yashvin's eyes.
'Ah, yes!' he said when he heard that Vronsky had been at the Tverskoys; his black eyes sparkled and he began twisting his left moustache round into his mouth  a bad habit he had.
But three of them doubtful. I do not expect he will pay up.'
'Let us go. I have finished,' said Vronsky, and he rose and moved toward the door.
Yashvin rose also and stretched his great legs and long back.
Hallo, wine!' he cried in his loud voice, which was so famous at drill, and here made the glasses tremble. 'No, I do not want any,' he shouted again.
And he and Vronsky went out together.
VRONSKY HAD his quarters in a roomy, clean, Finnish peasant cottage, divided in two by a partition.
'Get up, you've slept enough!' said Yashvin, stepping behind the partition and shaking by the shoulder the dishevelled Petritsky, who lay with his nose buried in the pillow.
Petritsky suddenly sprang to his knees and looked round.
And drawing up his blanket he threw himself back on his pillow. 'Leave me alone, Yashvin!' he said angrily to Yashvin, who was pulling the blanket off him.
'Tereshchenko! Vodka and pickled cucumbers for your master!' he shouted, evidently enjoying the sound of his own voice.
'Vodka, you think, eh?' asked Petritsky, making a face and rubbing his eyes.
He went to the partition door, held up his hands, and began singing in French, ' "There was a king in Thule!" Vronsky, will you have a drink?'
'Get away!' said Vronsky, as he put on the overcoat his servant had handed him. 'Where to now?' asked Yashvin.
He had really promised to go to Bryansky's, who lived seven miles from Peterhof, and pay him for the horses, and he hoped to make time to call there too.
But his friends understood at once that it was not only there that he was going.
Petritsky, still singing, winked his eyes and pouted as if to say, 'We know what sort of Bryansky it is.'
'Mind and don't be late!' was all Yashvin said, and to change the subject he asked, 'Is my roan doing well?' looking out of the window at the middle horse, which he had sold to Vronsky.
That is the question!' declaimed Petritsky with solemnity, moving his finger upwards from his nose.
Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.
So I lay, and so he stood.
Here it is!' and Petritsky drew the letter from under the mattress where he had put it.
Vronsky took the letter and his brother's note.
It was just what he had expected: a letter from his mother reproaching him for not having come to see her, and a note from his brother saying that they must talk things over.
Vronsky knew that it all referred to the same subject. 'What business is it of theirs?' thought he, and crumpling up the letters he pushed them in between the buttons of his coat, to be read more attentively on the way.
In the passage he met two officers, one of his own and one of another regiment.
'Yes, but I have not seen her since she came.'
'Oh, but how we finished up!' said Petritsky. 'Volkov climbed out on to the roof and said he felt melancholy.
And he fell asleep up there on the roof to the sound of the Funeral March.'
'Drink, you must drink some vodka and then some seltzer water with plenty of lemon,' said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky, like a mother urging her child to take its medicine. 'And after that a little champagne, about... a small bottle.'
He laughed merrily, showing his compact row of teeth, and drawing his cap over the bald patch, went out and got into the calche.
'To the stables!' he said, and was taking out the letter to read, but then changed his mind, not wishing to be upset before examining his horse. 'Later will do!...'
THE TEMPORARY STABLE, a wooden structure, had been built close to the racecourse, and it was there his mare was to have been brought the day before.
He had not yet been to look at her.
During these last days he had not exercised her himself, but had entrusted it to the trainer, and therefore did not in the least know in what condition she had arrived or now was.
Hardly had he stepped out of the calche before his groom, who had recognized it from a distance, had called out the trainer.
A lean Englishman in top boots and a short jacket, with only a tuft of beard left under his chin, came to meet him with the awkward gait of a jockey, swaying from side to side with his elbows sticking out.
'All right, sir,' came the answer from somewhere inside the man's throat. 'Better not go in,' he added, touching his cap.
'I have put a muzzle on her, and she is fidgetty. Better not go in, it excites the mare.'
I want to have a look at her.'
'Come along,' said the Englishman frowning and speaking as before without opening his mouth. Swaying his elbows and walking with his loose gait he led the way.
A smart, well-dressed lad in a short and clean jacket, with a broom in his hand, met them and followed them.
In the shed five horses stood in the horse-boxes, and Vronsky knew that his principal rival, Makhotin's sixteen-hand chestnut, Gladiator, was to have been brought that day and should be standing there too.
Vronsky was even more anxious to have a look at Gladiator, whom he had never seen, than at his own mare; but he knew that horse-racing etiquette not only forbade his seeing it, but made it improper for him even to ask about it.
As he went along the passage the lad opened the second horse-box to the left, and Vronsky caught sight of a big chestnut horse with white legs.
He knew it was Gladiator, but like one who avoids seeing another's open letter, he turned and went to Frou-Frou's box.
Mak... I never can pronounce his name,' said the Englishman over his shoulder, pointing with his black-nailed thumb to Gladiator's box.
'Frou-Frou is the braver, but the other is the more powerful horse,' said Vronsky, smiling at the compliment to his riding:
Vronsky felt that he not only had enough pluck (that is, energy and courage), but, what is much more important, he was firmly convinced that no one in the world could have more pluck than he had.
The mare is nervous,' he added, nodding toward the closed horsebox before which they were standing, and from which was heard the trampling of hoofs among the straw.
When he had got used to the dim light of the box, Vronsky again instinctively took in at one comprehensive glance all the points of his favourite mare.
Her hindquarters tapered rather too much, and her legs, especially her hind legs, were perceptibly bowed inwards.
Neither fore nor hind legs were particularly muscular, but on the other hand she was extremely broad in the girth, now that she was lean from her strict training.
Seen from the front, her canon bones were very fine and sharp, but unusually wide seen sideways. She appeared all the more narrow in build because so deep in the breadth.
But she possessed in the highest degree a characteristic which made one forget all her defects.
This was her thoroughbred quality  the kind of blood that tells, as they say in English.
Her lean head with the prominent, bright, sparkling eyes, broadened out to her muzzle with its wide crimson nostrils.
To Vronsky at any rate it seemed that she understood all he was feeling while looking at her.
As soon as Vronsky entered, she drew a deep breath and, turning her prominent eyes so that their whites became bloodshot, looked from the other side of the box at the new-comers, shook her muzzle, and stepped lightly from foot to foot.
'There, you see how nervous she is,' said the Englishman.
'Oh, you darling!' said Vronsky, stepping toward the horse and soothing her.
But the nearer he came the more nervous she grew.
Only when he reached to her head did she suddenly calm down, and the muscles under her fine, delicate coat vibrated.
Vronsky stroked her firm neck, adjusted a lock of her mane that had got on to the wrong side of her sharply-defined withers and brought his face close to her dilated nostrils, delicate as a bat's wing.
Her extended nostrils loudly inhaled and exhaled her breath, and she set back one of her finely-pointed ears with a start, and stretched out her black firm lips toward Vronsky, as if wishing to catch hold of his sleeve.
But remembering her muzzle she gave it a jerk, and again began stepping from one of her finely chiselled feet to the other.
'Be quiet, darling, be quiet!' he said, again stroking her flank, and left the box with a joyful conviction that the horse was in the very best condition.
The mare's excitement had communicated itself to Vronsky. He felt that the blood was rushing to his heart, and that he, like the horse, wished to move and to bite; it was both frightening and joyful.
'All right,' said the Englishman. 'And where are you going, my lord?' he asked unexpectedly, addressing him as 'my lord,' which he hardly ever did.
Vronsky raised his head in amazement and looked as he knew how to, not into the Englishman's eyes but at his forehead, surprised at the boldness of the question.
But realizing that the Englishman in asking the question regarded him not as an employer, but as a jockey, he replied:
'How often have I been asked that question to-day?' he thought, and blushed, a thing he rarely did.
The Englishman looked at him attentively and, as if he knew where he was going, added:
'All right,' said Vronsky smiling, and jumping into the calche, he told the coachman to drive to Peterhof.
'It was muddy before, but now it will be a swamp.' Sitting alone in the closed chalice he drew out his mother's letter and his brother's note and read them through.
They all, his mother and his brother and everybody, considered it necessary to interfere with his intimate affairs.
This interference roused him to anger, a feeling he rarely experienced. 'What business is it of theirs?
Why does everybody consider it his duty to look after me?
They feel that it is something different, that it is not a game, and that this woman is dearer to me than life.
Whatever our fate is or may be, we have made it and do not complain of it,' he said, joining Anna and himself in the word 'we.' 'No, they needs must teach us how to live.
They have no conception of what happiness is, and they do not know that without love there is no happiness or unhappiness for us, for there would be no life,' he thought.
He was angry with everybody for their interference, just because he felt in his soul that they were right.
He felt all the torment of his and her position, all the difficulties they were surrounded by in consequence of their station in life, which exposed them to the eyes of the whole world, obliged them to hide their love, to lie and deceive, and again to lie and deceive, to scheme and constantly think about others while the passion that bound them was so strong that they both forgot everything but their love.
The recollection of incidents often repeated rose vividly in his mind, where lies and deceptions revolting to his nature had been necessary. He remembered most vividly having more than once noticed her feeling of shame at the necessity for this deception and lying.
And he experienced a strange feeling which since his union with Anna sometimes overcame him.
It was a feeling of revulsion against something, against Karenin, or against himself or against the whole world  he hardly knew which.
But he always drove away this strange feeling.
And now too, having given himself a shake, he continued the current of his thoughts:
'Yes, formerly she was unhappy, but proud and calm; but now she cannot be calm and dignified, though she still seems so.
Yes, this must be brought to an end,' he decided.
And for the first time the clear idea occurred to him that it was necessary to put an end to all this falsehood, and the sooner the better. 'Throw up everything and let us two conceal ourselves somewhere alone with our love,' said he to himself.
THE DOWNPOUR DID NOT LAST LONG, and as Vronsky approached his destination  with his shaft-horse at full trot pulling alone, and the trace-horses galloping over the mud with the traces loose  the sun appeared again, the roofs of the houses and the old lime trees in the gardens on both sides glittered with the moisture, and the water dripped merrily from the branches and ran down from the roofs.
He no longer thought about the shower spoiling the racecourse, but was glad, because, thanks to the rain, he was sure to find Anna at home and alone, for he knew that Karenin, who had recently returned from a watering-place abroad, had not moved from Petersburg.
Hoping to find her alone, Vronsky, as usual, to attract less attention, alighted before crossing the little bridge that led to the house and walked on.
'Has your master returned?' he asked a gardener.
Go in at the front door; the servants are there and will open it,' replied the man.
Having made sure that she was alone, and wishing to take her by surprise (he had not promised to come that day and she would certainly not expect him to come before the races), he went, holding up his sword and stepping carefully along the sand-strewn flower-bordered path to the verandah facing the garden.
Vronsky had now forgotten all his thoughts on the way, about the hardness and difficulty of his situation.
He only thought that he would see her immediately, not merely in fancy, but alive, all of her  as she was in reality.
He was already ascending the shallow steps of the verandah, stepping on the whole of his foot so as not to make a noise, when he suddenly remembered what he was always forgetting, the most painful part of his relations with her, namely her son, with his questioning and, as it seemed to Vronsky, inimical look.
That boy was a more frequent hindrance to their relations than anyone else.
When he was present neither Vronsky nor Anna allowed themselves to speak about anything they could not have mentioned to every one or even to hint at things the boy would not have understood.
In his presence they talked as acquaintances.
Yet despite this caution Vronsky often noticed the child's attentive and perplexed gaze fixed upon him and a strange timidity and unevenness  now caressing, now cold and bashful  in the boy's manner toward him.
It was as if the child felt that between that man and his mother there was some important relation which he could not understand.
And the boy really felt that he could not understand this relation. He tried but could not make out what he ought to feel toward this man.
With a child's sensitiveness to indications of feeling, he clearly saw that his father, his governess, and his nurse all not only disliked Vronsky but regarded him with fear and loathing, though they said nothing about him, while his mother regarded him as her best friend.
Who is he?
If I don't understand, it is my fault, I am a silly or a bad boy,' thought the child, and that was the cause of his testing, questioning, and to some extent hostile expression and of the shyness and fitfulness Vronsky found so irksome.
It evoked both in Vronsky and in Anna a feeling such as a sailor might have who saw by the compass that the direction in which he was swiftly sailing diverged widely from the right course but was quite unable to stop, and felt that every moment was taking him farther and farther astray, and that to acknowledge to himself that he was diverging from the right direction was tantamount to acknowledging that he was lost.
This child with his naive outlook on life was the compass which showed them their degree of divergence from what they knew, but would not recognize, as the right course.
This time Serezha was not at home, and Anna was quite alone, sitting on the verandah waiting for the return of her son, who had gone for a walk and had been caught in the rain.
She had sent a man and a maidservant to look for him and sat waiting.
She wore a white dress trimmed with wide embroidery, and as she sat in a corner of the verandah behind some plants, did not hear Vronsky coming.
Bowing her curly head she pressed her forehead against a cold watering-can that stood on the balustrade, and both her beautiful hands, with the rings he knew so well, were holding the can.
The beauty of her whole figure, her head, her neck, and her arms, always struck Vronsky with new surprise.
He stopped, gazing at her with rapture.
But just as he was going to step toward her, she felt his nearness, pushed away the can, and turned her hot face toward him.
Aren't you well?' he said in French as he came up to her.
He wished to run toward her, but remembering that there might be others near, turned to look at the verandah door and blushed, as he always did when he felt that he had reason to fear and to be circumspect.
'No, I am quite well,' she said, rising and firmly pressing his outstretched hand. 'I did not expect you.'
'Oh, heavens! What cold hands!' he said.
But though she tried to be calm her lips trembled.
'Forgive me for coming, but I could not let the day pass without seeing you,' he continued in French. In Russian the word you sounded cold and it was dangerous to say thou, she always spoke French to her.
'But you are ill or in trouble,' he continued without releasing her hand, but bending over it. 'What were you thinking about?'
'Always about the same thing,' she said with a smile.
Whenever,  at whatever moment,  she was asked what she was thinking about she could have answered without fail, 'Always about my happiness and my unhappiness.'
Just now when he entered she was wondering why, for others, Betsy for instance (of whose secret relations with Tushkevich she knew), it was all easy, while for her it was so tormenting.
For certain reasons this thought troubled her more particularly to-day.
Vronsky answered her, and noticing that she was excited, in order to distract her thoughts began giving her in a very matter-of-fact way particulars of the preparations for the races.
'Shall I tell him or not?' she thought, looking at his calm, caressing eyes. 'He is so happy, so full of his races, that he won't understand it properly, won't understand all the importance of the event for us.'
'But you have not told me what you were thinking about when I came in,' he said, breaking off his narration.
She did not answer, but, slightly bowing her head, looked at him from under her brows questioningly, her eyes shining from under their long lashes.
Her hand, toying with a leaf that she had pulled off, trembled.
He noticed this, and his face assumed that submissive, slavishly-devoted expression that had such an effect on Anna.
Tell me, for Heaven's sake!' repeated he entreatingly.
'I cannot forgive him if he does not understand all the importance of it. Better not tell him,  why put him to the proof?' she thought, continuing to look at him in the same way and feeling that her hand with the leaf was trembling more and more.
'For heaven's sake!' he repeated, taking her hand.
'I am pregnant,' she said softly and slowly.
The leaf in her hand shook still more violently, but she did not move her eyes from his face, watching to see how he would take it.
He grew pale, tried to say something, but stopped, dropped her hand, and bowed his head. 'Yes, he understands its full significance,' she thought, and gratefully pressed his hand.
But she was mistaken in thinking that he understood the importance of the news as she, a woman, understood it.
It brought on with tenfold force an attack of that strange repulsion to  he knew not whom; but at the same time he felt that the crisis he had hoped for had now come, that concealment from the husband was no longer possible, and that somehow or other the unnatural situation must be quickly ended.
But, besides this, her physical agitation communicated itself to him.
He gave her a look full of emotion, humbly kissed her hand, rose, and began silently pacing up and down the verandah.
'Yes,' he said, resolutely approaching her. 'Neither you nor I looked on our union as an amusement, and now our fate is sealed.
We must end'  he went on, looking round  'this falsehood in which we are living.'
How are we to end it, Alexis?' she said softly.
She was quiet now and her face shone with a tender smile.
'They are united already,' she replied in a scarcely audible tone.
'But how, Alexis, teach me how?' she said with pathetic irony at the inevitability of her position. 'Is there any escape from such a position?
'There is a way out of every position. One has to take a decision,' he said.
Don't I see how suffer from everything  Society, your son, and your husband?'
'Oh, but not through my husband,' she said with natural irony. 'I don't know him and don't think about him.
'But he does not even know,' she said, and suddenly a vivid flush suffused her face. Her cheeks, her forehead, and her neck turned red, and tears of shame appeared in her eyes.
VRONSKY HAD TRIED SEVERAL TIMES BEFORE, though never so definitely as now, to lead her on to a discussion of her position, and had always encountered the same superficiality and lightness of judgment with which she now replied to his challenge.
It was as if there was something that she could not, and would not, make clear to herself, or as if, as soon as she began to speak about this matter, she, the real Anna, withdrew into herself and another woman appeared who was strange and alien to him, whom he feared and did not like, and who resisted him.
But to-day he decided to speak out.
'Whether he knows or not,' said Vronsky in his usual firm, calm tone, 'that is not our business.
'What would you have me do?' she asked with the same light irony.
She who had so feared that he might take her pregnancy too lightly now felt vexed that he deduced therefrom the necessity of doing something.
'Very well; suppose I do so!' she said. 'Do you know what the result will be?
I will tell it you all in advance,' and an evil light came into her eyes which a minute before had been so tender. '-"Ah, you love another and have entered into a guilty union with him?"-' (mimicking her husband, she laid just such a stress on the word guilty as Karenin himself would have done). '-"I warned you of the consequences from the religious, civil, and family points of view.
Now I cannot allow my name to be dishonoured..."-' my name and my son she was going to say but could not jest about her son... '-"my name to be dishonoured" and something else of that kind,' she added. 'In short, he will tell me clearly and precisely in his official manner that he cannot let me go, but will take what measures he can to prevent a scandal.
And he will do what he says, quietly and accurately.
He is not a man, but a machine, and a cruel machine when angry,' she added, picturing Karenin to herself with every detail of his figure and way of speaking,
setting against him everything bad she could find in him and forgiving him nothing, on account of the terrible fault toward him of which she was guilty. 'But, Anna,' said Vronsky persuasively and gently, trying to pacify her, 'he must be told, all the same, and afterwards our action will be guided by his attitude.'
'Yes, run away, and for me to live as your mistress,' she said maliciously.
'Anna,' he murmured with reproachful tenderness.
'Yes,' she continued. 'Become your mistress and ruin my... everything.'
Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong honest nature, could endure this state of deception and not wish to escape from it; but he did not guess that the chief cause lay in the one word 'son' which she could not bring herself to utter.
When she thought about her son and his future relations with the mother who had left his father, she was so terrified at what she had done that she did not reason, but woman-like only tried to comfort herself with false arguments and words in order that everything should remain as before and that she might forget the dreadful question of what would happen to her son.
'I beg you, I entreat you,' said she suddenly in quite an altered tone, sincerely and tenderly, taking him by the hand, 'never to speak to me about that!'
'I?' she said. 'Yes, I do suffer sometimes; but it will pass if you never speak to me about it.
'I don't understand...' said he.
'I know,' she interrupted him, 'how hard it is for your honest nature to lie and I pity you.
'I was just thinking the same,' he said; 'wondering how you could sacrifice everything for my sake. I cannot forgive myself for your unhappiness.'
'I unhappy?' she said, drawing near to him and gazing at him with a smile of rapturous love. 'I am like a hungry man to whom food has been given.
He may be cold, his clothes may be ragged, and he may be ashamed, but he is not unhappy.
But she heard the voice of her son approaching, and glancing quickly round the verandah she rose hurriedly.
Her eyes kindled with the light Vronsky knew so well, and with a rapid motion she raised her lovely hands covered with rings, seized his head, gave him a long look, lifted her face with parted smiling lips, quickly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and then pushed him away.
She was about to go but he held her back.
'When?' he whispered, gazing rapturously at her.
'To-night at one,' she whispered, and with her quick light step went to meet her son.
Serezha had been caught in the rain in the public gardens, and he and his nurse had taken shelter in the pavilion.
'Well, au revoir,' she said to Vronsky. 'It will soon be time to start for the races.
Vronsky looked at his watch and hurried away.
WHEN VRONSKY LOOKED AT HIS WATCH on the Karenins' verandah he was so agitated and so preoccupied that he saw the hands and face of the watch without realizing the time.
He went to the high road, stepping carefully over the mud, and made his way to his calche.
He was so full of his feeling for Anna that he did not consider what o'clock it was or whether he still had time to call on Bryansky.
He only retained, as often happens, the external capacity of memory which indicated what he had decided to do next.
He approached his coachman, who was dozing on the box, in the already slanting shadow of a large lime tree, looked with pleasure at the swaying swarms of midgets that whirled above the perspiring horses, and having roused the coachman jumped into the calche and told him to drive to Bryansky's.
Only after going some five miles did he recollect himself sufficiently to look at his watch and to realize that it was already half-past five, and that he was late.
There were to be several races that day: a Life-Guards' race, then an officers' two-verst race, a four-verst race, and then the one for which he had entered.
He could be in time for his own race, but, if he called on Bryansky first he could only just manage it, and the whole Court would already be at the racecourse.
But he had promised Bryansky to call and therefore he decided to go on, telling the coachman not to spare the horses.
He saw Bryansky, stayed with him five minutes, and drove back at a gallop.
All that was depressing in his relations with Anna, the indefiniteness that remained after their conversation, escaped from his mind.
He now thought with enjoyment and agitation of the race, and that after all he would be there in time, and occasionally the expectation of that night's meeting flashed brightly in his imagination.
The spirit of the coming races overcame him more and more as he drove further and further into their atmosphere and overtook carriages making their way to the course from Petersburg and from outlying country places.
When he reached his quarters he found no one there  they had all gone to the races and his valet was waiting at the gate.
While he was changing his things, the valet told him that the second race had already begun and that many gentlemen had been to inquire for him, and a lad had run over twice from the stables.
Having changed without hurrying (he never hurried or lost his self-control), Vronsky ordered the coachman to drive him to the stables.
From there he could see the sea of carriages, pedestrians, and soldiers surrounding the racecourse, and the stands, which were thronged with people.
Probably the second race was just taking place, for as he entered the stables he heard the bell ring.
On his way he met Makhotin's white-legged chestnut Gladiator, which in a blue-bordered orange covering, with his ears looking enormous in their blue-trimmed cloth, was being led to the course.
'Where is Cord?' he asked the groom.
In her open box Frou-Frou stood ready saddled. They were just going to lead her out.
Vronsky once again glanced at the beautiful fascinating shape of the mare, whose whole body was trembling, and tearing himself with difficulty from this sight he left the shed.
Vronsky joined the crowd unnoticed, almost at the moment that the bell rang to announce the end of the race, and the tall officer of the horse-guards all bespattered with mud, who had come in first; was bending down in his saddle, loosening the reins of his grey gelding, which was dark with perspiration and panting heavily.
He ascertained that Anna, Betsy, and his brother's wife were there, but in order not to agitate himself, intentionally avoided going near them.
But he continually met acquaintances who stopped him, told him about the races that had been run, and asked him why he was so late.
'Did you get my note?' he asked. 'One can never find you.'
Alexander Vronsky, despite the loose and, in particular, drunken life for which he was noted, was quite a courtier.
While speaking to his brother of a matter very unpleasant to him he, knowing that many eyes might be fixed on them, wore a smiling expression, as if he were joking with him about some unimportant matter.
Alexis Vronsky's frowning face turned pale, and his prominent lower jaw twitched, a thing that rarely happened to him.
Being a very kind-hearted man he seldom got angry, but when he did, and when his chin twitched, then he was dangerous, as Alexander Vronsky knew.
'I only wanted to deliver mother's letter.
Answer her, and don't upset yourself before the race.
Bonne chance!' he added smiling and went away.
How do you do, mon cher?' said Oblonsky, shining here, amid all this Petersburg brilliancy, no less than he shone in Moscow, with his rosy face and glistening, well-brushed whiskers. 'I came yesterday and, am very glad that I shall witness your triumph.
'Come to the mess-room to-morrow,' said Vronsky, and apologetically pressing the sleeve of Oblonsky's overcoat, he went to the centre of the racecourse where the horses were already being led out for the steeplechase.
To the right the slender and beautiful Frou-Frou was being led up and down, stepping as on springs with her rather long elastic pasterns.
Not far from her they were taking the horse-cloth off the big-eared Gladiator.
The large, beautiful, perfectly regular shape of the horse, with his wonderful hindquarters and his exceptionally short pasterns just above his hoofs, involuntarily arrested Vronsky's attention.
He wished to go up to his own horse, but was again stopped by an acquaintance.
'Ah, there is Karenin!' said the acquaintance with whom he was talking. 'He is looking for his wife, and she is in the centre of the pavilion.
Have you not seen her?'
'No, I have not,' said Vronsky, and without even glancing at the pavilion where Anna was pointed out to him, he went to his horse.
He had not had time to examine the saddle, about which he wished to give some directions, when the riders were summoned to the pavilion to draw their numbers and places.
Feeling that he and the other riders were the centre toward which all eyes were turned, Vronsky, in the highly-strung state which generally made his movements calm and deliberate, approached his horse.
Cord, in honour of the races, was dressed in his best clothes: a black buttoned-up coat, a stiff starched collar that pressed against his cheeks, a bowler hat, and top boots.
Vronsky pushed his fingers under the girths.
The mare turned her eyes still further back, showed her teeth, and set back an ear.
The Englishman puckered his lip, wishing to express a smile at anyone testing his saddling.
Vronsky glanced round at his rivals for the last time.
He knew that he would not see them during the race.
A short hussar in tight riding-breeches was galloping along bunched up like a cat in his desire to imitate an English jockey.
Prince Kusovlev sat pale-faced on his thoroughbred mare from the Grabov stud farm, which an Englishman was leading by the bridle.
Vronsky and all his set knew Kusovlev and his peculiarities, which were weak nerves and terrible vanity.
They knew he was afraid of everything, even of riding an army horse, but now, just because it was dangerous, because necks might be broken and at each obstacle there was a doctor in attendance, an ambulance wagon with a red cross sewn on it, and a nurse, he had determined to ride.
The only one Vronsky did not see was his chief rival Makhotin on his Gladiator.
'Don't hurry,' said Cord to Vronsky, 'and remember one thing: do not hold back or urge on your horse at an obstacle. Let her have her way.'
The mare had not time to stir before Vronsky with a powerful and agile movement put his foot in the notched steel stirrup and seated himself lightly but firmly on the creaking leather of the saddle.
Having got his right foot also in its stirrup he straightened out the double reins between his practised fingers, and Cord removed his hand.
As if not knowing which foot to step on first, Frou-Frou stretched the reins with her long neck, and started as if on springs, shaking her rider on her flexible back.
Cord, quickening his step, followed them.
The restive horse tugged at the reins, now to one side, now to the other, trying to deceive her rider, and Vronsky vainly sought by voice and hand to soothe her.
Some of the riders were in front, some behind, when Vronsky suddenly heard a horse galloping through the mud behind him, and Makhotin on his white-legged, large-eared Gladiator went past him.
Makhotin smiled, showing his long teeth, but Vronsky looked at him angrily.
Vronsky always disliked him and now considered him his most dangerous rival, and he was vexed with him for galloping past and so exciting Frou-Frou.
She broke into a canter, gave two leaps, and, angry at the tightened rein, changed back into a jerky trot, jolting her rider.
Colonel Sestrin, an expert starter, was already getting angry, but at last, at the fourth try, he shouted 'Go!' and the race began.
The excited and over-nervous Frou-Frou lost in the first moment, and several horses started ahead of her, but before reaching the brook Vronsky, who with all his strength was holding back the mare that was tugging at the reins, had easily passed three riders, and ahead of him there was only Makhotin's chestnut Gladiator (whose hind-quarters moved regularly and lightly just in front of him), and in front of all, the exquisite Diana, carrying Kusovlev, who was more dead than alive.
In the first moments Vronsky was master neither of himself nor of his mare.
Up to the first obstacle, the brook, he could not control her movements.
Gladiator and Diana approached the stream together, and almost at the same moment rose above it and flew across to the other side; lightly as if on wings Frou-Frou rose up behind them; but at the moment when Vronsky felt himself raised in the air he suddenly saw, almost under his horse's feet, Kusovlev, who was floundering on the other side of the stream with his Diana (Kusovlev had let go of the reins at the jump and the horse fell throwing him over her head).
These particulars Vronsky learned later, now he only saw that Diana's head or legs might come just where Frou-Frou had to alight.
But Frou-Frou, like a falling cat, made an effort with her legs and back while in the air, and clearing the other horse rushed on.
After crossing the brook Vronsky had the mare quite under control, and held her in, intending to cross the big barrier behind Makhotin and then to try and pass him on the flat 300 yards before the next obstacle.
Vronsky felt eyes directed toward him from all sides, but he saw nothing except the ears and neck of his mare, the ground racing toward him, and Gladiator's hind-quarters and white legs rapidly striding before him, and keeping always the same distance ahead.
Gladiator rose without touching anything, swished his short tail, and disappeared from Vronsky's sight.
Without the least change in her action his mare rose under him; the boards disappeared, only behind him there was a knock.
But her pace did not change, and Vronsky, hit in the face by a lump of mud, realized that he was again at the same distance behind Gladiator.
At the very moment that Vronsky thought it time to pass Makhotin, Frou-Frou, understanding what was in his mind, without any urging, considerably increased her speed and began to draw nearer to Makhotin on the side where it was most advantageous to pass him  the side of the rope, Makhotin would not let her pass that side.
Vronsky had just time to think of coming up on the outside, when Frou-Frou changed her legs and started to do so.
They ran side by side for a few strides, but before the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky, not to lose ground, gave the mare her head and just on the declivity passed Makhotin.
He caught sight of his mud-bespattered face, and even thought he saw him smile.
He passed, but felt that Makhotin was close behind him, and continually heard just behind his back the regular beating of hoofs and the short, still fresh breathing of Gladiator's nostrils.
He urged on his mare and felt with joy that she easily increased her speed, and he heard the sound of Gladiator's hoofs again at the former distance behind.
Vronsky now had the lead, as he had wished and as Cord had advised, and he was confident of success.
His excitement and joy, and his tenderness for Frou-Frou, grew stronger and stronger.
He wished to glance round but dared not do so, and he tried to keep calm and not to urge his mare, but to let her retain a reserve of strength such as he felt that Gladiator still had.
There remained the most difficult obstacle; if he crossed it ahead of the others, he would come in first.
He was galloping up to the Irish bank.
He noticed the mare's hesitation by her ears and raised his whip, but immediately felt that his doubt was groundless: the mare knew what was wanted, and, as he expected, she increased her speed, took off exactly at the right moment, and gave a leap the force of which carried her far across the ditch. Then without effort and without changing her legs Frou-Frou continued her gallop.
'Bravo, Vronsky!' he heard the voices of a knot of people he knew  friends of his regiment who were standing by this obstacle.
He could not fail to recognize Yashvin's voice, though he did not see him.
'Oh, my beauty!' he thought of Frou-Frou, as he listened to what was happening behind. 'He is over it!' he thought, as he heard Gladiator again galloping behind him.
Vronsky did not even look at it, but hoping to win by a distance, began working the reins with a circular movement, raising and dropping the mare's head in time with her stride.
He felt the mare was using her last reserve of strength; not only her neck and shoulders were wet, but on her withers, her head, and her pointed ears the sweat stood in drops, and she was breathing short and sharp.
But he knew that her reserve of strength was more than enough for the remaining five hundred yards.
It was only by feeling himself nearer to the ground and by the smoothness of the pace that Vronsky knew how much the mare had increased her speed.
She leapt the ditch as if she did not notice it, seeming to fly across it like a bird. But at that very moment Vronsky, to his horror, felt that something terrible had happened.
He himself, without knowing it, had made the unpardonable mistake of dropping back in his saddle and pulling up her head.
Before he could realize this, the white legs of the gelding flashed close by him and Makhotin passed at a rapid gallop.
He scarcely had time to withdraw the foot before Frou-Frou fell on her side, and snorting heavily and with her delicate damp neck making vain efforts to rise, began struggling on the ground at his feet, like a wounded, fluttering bird.
Owing to Vronsky's awkward movement she had dropped her hind legs and broken her back.
But he only understood this much later.
Now he only saw that Makhotin was quickly galloping away, while he, reeling, stood alone on the muddy, stationary ground; before him, breathing heavily, lay Frou-Frou, who, bending her head toward him, gazed at him with her beautiful eyes.
The mare again began to struggle like a fish, causing the flaps of the saddle to creak; she got her front legs free, but unable to lift her hind-quarters, struggled and immediately again fell on her side.
His face distorted with passion, pale and with quivering jaw, Vronsky kicked her with his heel in the belly and again pulled at the reins: But she did not move and, nuzzling the ground, only looked at her master with eloquent eyes.
'Ah, ah, ah!' groaned Vronsky, seizing his head.
'Ah! what have I done?' he exclaimed.
Onlookers, a doctor, an attendant, and officers of his regiment ran toward him.
To his regret he felt that he was himself sound and unhurt.
The mare had broken her back, and it was decided to shoot her.
He turned away and, without picking up the cap that had fallen from his head, left the racecourse without knowing where he was going.
For the first time in his life he experienced the worst kind of misfortune  one that was irretrievable, and caused by his own fault.
Yashvin overtook him with his cap and led him home, and in half an hour Vronsky came to himself.
But the memory of that steeplechase long remained the most painful and distressing memory of his life.
EXTERNALLY KARENIN'S RELATIONS with his wife remained as before.
The only difference was that he was even more occupied than before.
As in former years, at the beginning of the spring he went abroad to recuperate his health, which was upset each year by the winter's work.
And as usual he returned in July and at once with increased energy took up his customary work.
And as usual his wife had moved to the country house while he remained in Petersburg.
Since their conversation on the night of the Princess Tverskaya's party he had never spoken to Anna of his suspicions and jealousy, and that habitual tone of his which seemed to mock at some one was exactly suited to his present relations with her.
He was rather colder toward her.
He appeared only to be slightly dissatisfied with her for that first night's talk which she had evaded.
In his behaviour to her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. 'You did not wish to have an explanation,' he seemed to say to her in imagination, 'so much the worse for you.
So much the worse for you,' he thought, like a man who having vainly tried to extinguish a fire should be vexed at his vain exertions and say to it: 'Well, go on and burn, it is your own fault.'
He who was so wise and astute in official affairs did not realize the insanity of such an attitude toward his wife.
He did not understand it because it would have been too terrible to realize his real situation, and he had closed, locked, and sealed that compartment of his soul which contained his feelings for his family  that is, his wife and son.
He who had been a considerate father, since the end of that winter had become particularly cold toward his son, and treated him in the same bantering manner as he did his wife. 'Ah, young man!' was the way in which he addressed him.
Karenin thought and said that in no previous year had he had so much official business as this year; but he was not conscious of the fact that this year he invented work for himself, and that this was one of the means of keeping that compartment closed where lay his feelings for and thoughts of his family, which became more terrible the longer they lay there.
If anyone had ventured to ask him what he thought of his wife's conduct, the mild and gentle Karenin would not have given any answer, but would have been angry with the man who put such a question.
That was why Karenin's face bore a stern, proud expression when anyone asked about his wife's health.
He did not wish to think about his wife's conduct and feelings at all, and he really did not think about them.
Karenin stopped her severely, expressing the opinion that his wife was above suspicion, and from that time began to avoid the Countess.
He did not wish to see, and did not see, that many people in Society already looked askance at Anna; he did not wish to understand, and did not understand, why his wife particularly insisted on moving to Tsarskoe Selo, where Betsy lived and near which place Vronsky's regiment was stationed.
He did not let himself think about this and did not think about it, yet at the bottom of his soul, without admitting it to himself or having any proofs or even suspicions of it, he nevertheless knew certainly that he was a wronged husband, and was therefore profoundly unhappy.
How often during the eight years of happy married life with his wife, when he saw others who were unfaithful wives or deceived husbands, had Karenin said to himself, 'How could they let it come to that?
How is it they do not end such a hideous state of things?' But now, when the misfortune had fallen on his own head, he not only did not think of how to end it, but did not wish to recognize it at all  and did not wish to recognize it just because it was too terrible, too unnatural.
Since his return from abroad Karenin had been twice at the country house.
Once he dined there, and the other time he spent an evening with some visitors, but he had not once stayed the night, as he used to do in former years.
The day of the races was a very busy one for Karenin; but in the morning when he made his plans for the day he decided that immediately after an early dinner he would go to see his wife at the country house, and from there to the races, at which the whole Court would be present and where he ought to appear.
He would call on his wife, because he had decided to do so once a week for the sake of propriety.
Besides, he had that day to give her money for her expenses, due according to their custom by the fifteenth of each month.
Having with the mental control habitual to him considered these matters concerning his wife, he did not allow his thoughts to run on further about her.
Then he received petitioners, heard reports, gave audiences, assigned posts and ordered dismissals, apportioned rewards, pensions, and salaries, and attended to correspondence  everyday matters, as he called them, which took up so much of his time.
After that came personal matters  a visit from his doctor and one from his steward.
He only handed Karenin the money he wanted and gave him a short account of the state of his affairs, which was not quite satisfactory, for it happened that, owing to their having been from home a good deal, more had been spent that year than usual and there was a deficit.
Karenin had not expected him to-day and was surprised to see him, and yet more surprised that the doctor questioned him very particularly about his state of health, sounding his chest and tapping and feeling his liver.
Karenin did not know that his friend Lydia Ivanovna, having noticed that he was not in good health that summer, had asked the doctor to go and see his patient. 'Do it for my sake,' the Countess Lydia Ivanovna had said.
'Dear man!' the Countess Lydia Ivanovna had exclaimed.
He found him insufficiently nourished and his liver much enlarged, and that the waters had had no effect at all.
He prescribed as much physical exercise and as little mental strain as possible, and above all no worries of any kind  that is, he advised what was for Karenin as impossible as not to breathe, and he went away leaving Karenin with a disagreeable consciousness that something was wrong with him which could not be remedied.
In the porch, after leaving Karenin, the doctor met Slyudin, Karenin's private secretary, whom he knew very well.
They had been at the University together, and though they very seldom met, they respected one another and were good friends, and to no one but Slyudin would the doctor have expressed his opinion about his patient.
'It is this,' said the doctor, beckoning over Slyudin's head to his coachman to drive up. 'It's this,' and with his white hands he took a finger of his kid glove and stretched it; 'if you try to break a cord that is slack it is not easy to break it, but strain that cord to its utmost and the weight of a finger will snap it.
And he by his hard work and the conscientious way he does it, is strained to the utmost, and there is a pressure from outside, and a heavy one,' concluded the doctor, raising his eyebrows significantly. 'Will you be at the races?' he added, descending the steps to his brougham.
After the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the famous traveller, and Karenin, thanks to the pamphlet he had just read and to what he knew before, greatly impressed the traveller by the depth of his knowledge of the subject and the breadth of his enlightened outlook.
When he too had left, he had to finish his everyday business with his private secretary and had also to drive to see an important personage on a grave and serious matter.
He only managed to get back at five, his dinner-time, and having dined with his private secretary, he invited the latter to drive with him to his country house and to go to the races with him.
Without acknowledging it to himself, Karenin now looked out for opportunities of having a third person present at his interviews with his wife.
ANNA WAS UPSTAIRS standing in front of a mirror pinning, with Annushka's help, a last bow to her dress, when she heard the wheels of a carriage grating on the gravel at the entrance. 'It is too early for Betsy,' she thought, and glancing out of the window she saw the carriage, and sticking out of it a black hat and Karenin's familiar ears.
'Ah, how nice this is!' she said, giving her husband her hand and smilingly greeting Slyudin as a member of the household. 'You are staying the night, I hope?' were the first words prompted by the spirit of lies.
'Oh, I will not separate the inseparables,' he said in his usual facetious tone. 'I will go with Slyudin.
'Tea, please, and tell Serezha that his father is here.
You have not been here before; look how pretty my verandah is,' she went on, turning now to her husband, now to Slyudin.
She felt this herself, especially as by the inquisitive way Slyudin looked at her she noticed that he seemed to be watching her.
Slyudin immediately went out on to the verandah and she sat down by her husband.
'You are not looking quite well,' she said.
'No,' he replied, 'the doctor came to see me this morning and robbed me of an hour.
'Yes, but what did he say?'
She questioned him about his health and his work, persuading him to take a rest and to move out to her in the country.
He only heard her words, and gave them only their direct meaning.
And he answered simply, though jokingly. In all this conversation nothing particular passed, but never afterwards could Anna recall this short scene without being tormented by shame.
Serezha came in, preceded by his governess.
Had Karenin allowed himself to observe, he would have noticed the timid, confused look which the child cast first at his father and then at his mother.
But he did not want to see, and did not see, anything.
'Ah, young man!
He is really getting quite a man.
How do you do, young man?'
And he held out his hand to the frightened boy.
Serezha, who had always been timid with his father, now that the latter addressed him as 'young man,' and that the question whether Vronsky was a friend or a foe had entered his head, shrank from him.
He looked round at his mother, as if asking for protection.
Only with his mother he felt at ease.
Karenin meanwhile talked to the governess with his hand on his son's shoulder, and Serezha felt so extremely uncomfortable that Anna saw he was about to cry.
Anna, who had blushed when the boy came in, saw how distressed he was, and, rising, lifted Karenin's hand off her son's shoulder, kissed the boy, led him out on to the verandah, and returned at once.
'Well, it's time we were going,' she said, glancing at her watch. 'I wonder Betsy has not come...'
'Yes,' said Karenin, and interlacing his hands he cracked his fingers. 'I also came to bring you some money, since "nightingales are not fed on fables,"-' he added.
Yes, I do,' she replied without looking at him, and blushing to the roots of her hair. 'But I suppose you will call here after the races.'
'Oh, yes!' answered Karenin. 'And here is the ornament of Peterhof, the Princess Tverskaya,' he added, glancing out of the window at an approaching carriage of English build with a small body placed very high.
The Princess Tverskaya did not get out, only her footman in his black hat, cape, and gaiters jumped down at the front door.
'I am going, good-bye!' said Anna, and giving her son a kiss she went up to Karenin and held out her hand to him. 'You were very kind to come.'
Karenin kissed her hand.
You will come back for tea, that is right!' she said, and went out beaming and gay.
But as soon as she ceased to see him she became conscious of the place on her hand his lips had touched and shuddered with disgust.
She saw her husband from afar.
Two men  her husband and her lover  were the two centres of her life, and without the aid of her senses she was aware of the presence of either.
From afar she already felt the approach of her husband, and involuntarily watched him amid the surging crowd through which he was moving.
She saw how he approached the Grand Stand, now condescendingly replying to obsequious bows, now amiably and absent-mindedly greeting his equals, now watchfully waiting to catch the eye of the great ones of this world and raising his large round hat, which pressed on the tips of his ears.
She knew all these ways of his and they were all repulsive to her. 'Nothing but ambition, nothing but a wish to get on  that is all he has in his soul,' she thought; 'and lofty views, love of enlightenment, and religion, are all only means toward getting on.'
She knew by the way he looked at the Ladies' Stand that he was trying to find her (he looked straight at her, without recognizing her amid the sea of muslin, ribbons feathers, sunshades, and flowers), but she purposely disregarded him.
'Alexis Alexandrovich!' the Princess Betsy called to him, 'I am sure you don't see your wife; here she is!'
He smiled his usual cold smile.
'There is so much splendour here that my eyes are dazzled,' he replied, and approached the stand.
He smiled at Anna as a husband should smile when meeting his wife whom he has seen shortly before, and greeted the Princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due  that is to say, joking with the ladies and exchanging greetings with the men.
At the foot of the stand stood a General Aide-de-Camp respected by Karenin, and noted for his intelligence and education. With him Karenin entered into conversation.
Anna heard his high measured voice and did not miss a single word. Each word seemed to her false and grated painfully on her ear.
When the four-verst steeplechase was beginning she leaned forward, and did not take her eyes off Vronsky while he went up to his horse and mounted it, and at the same time she heard her husband's repulsive, unceasing voice.
She was tormented by anxiety for Vronsky, but suffered even more from what seemed to her the incessant flow of her husband's shrill voice with its familiar intonations.
'I am a bad woman, a ruined woman,' she thought, 'but I dislike lies. I cannot stand falsehood, but his food is falsehood.
He knows everything, sees everything  what then does he feel, if he can talk so calmly?
If he were to kill me, and if he were to kill Vronsky, I should respect him.
But no, lies and propriety is all he cares about,' said Anna to herself, without considering what she really wanted of her husband or what she would have liked him to be.
Nor did she understand that Karenin's peculiar volubility, which so irritated her, was only an expression of the anxiety and unrest within him.
As a child that has been hurt skips about, making its muscles move in order to dull its pain, so Karenin needed mental activity to smother those thoughts about his wife which in her presence and in the presence of Vronsky, and amid the continual mention of his name, forced themselves upon him.
If England can point to the most brilliant cavalry charges in military history, it is entirely due to the fact that she has historically developed this capacity in her men and horses.
Karenin smiled his usual smile, which showed his teeth but expressed nothing.
'Granted, Princess,' said he, 'that that is not external but internal.
But that is not the point,' and he again turned to the General with whom he was talking seriously: 'Do not forget that it is military men who are racing, men who have chosen that career, and one must admit that every calling has a reverse side to its medal.
Anna said nothing, but without putting down her glasses looked steadily at one point.
At that moment a highly-placed general made his way through the stand.
Interrupting his speech, Karenin rose hurriedly, but with dignity, and bowed low to this general.
And though the answer did not mean anything, the general made as though he had heard a clever reply from a clever man, and quite appreciated la pointe de la sauce.'
'I agree that unmanly sports...' he was continuing.
Karenin was not interested in races and therefore did not watch the riders, but began absent-mindedly looking at the spectators with his weary eyes.
Her hand convulsively grasped her fan, and she did not breathe.
He looked at her and hurriedly turned away, scrutinizing other faces.
'Yes, that lady  and those others  are very excited too; it is quite natural,' he said to himself. He did not wish to look at her, but his eyes were involuntarily drawn toward her.
He again watched her face, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, but against his will he read in it with horror that which he did not want to know.
The first fall  Kuzovlev's at the stream  excited every one, but Karenin saw clearly by Anna's pale, triumphant face that he whom she was watching had not fallen.
When after Makhotin and Vronsky had jumped the big barrier the officer following them fell on his head and swooned, a murmur of horror passed through the whole crowd; but Karenin saw that Anna did not even notice the fall and with difficulty understood what those around her were talking about.
He looked at her more and more often, and more intently.
Anna, though fully engrossed by the sight of the galloping Vronsky, became aware of the cold eyes of her husband bent upon her from one side.
'Oh, I don't care,' she seemed to say to him, and then did not once look at him again.
'Let us go!' she said.
But Betsy did not hear her.
Karenin approached Anna and politely offered her his arm. 'Come, if you like,' he said in French; but Anna listened to what the General was saying and did not notice her husband.
'He too has broken his leg, they say. It's too bad,' the General said.
Anna, without replying to her husband, raised her glasses and looked toward the spot where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and so many people had crowded there, that it was impossible to distinguish anything.
She put down her glasses and was about to go; but at that moment an officer galloped up and reported something to the Emperor.
'Steve! Steve!' she called to her brother.
But he did not hear her.
'I again offer you my arm if you wish to go,' said her husband, touching her arm.
With a look of repulsion she drew back, and without looking at him replied:
Betsy waved her handkerchief to him.
On hearing this Anna quickly sat down and hid her face behind her fan.
Karenin saw that she was crying, and that she was unable to keep back either her tears or the sobs that made her bosom heave.
He stepped forward so as to screen her, giving her time to recover.
'For the third time I offer you my arm,' he said after a while, turning toward her.
The Princess Betsy came to her aid.
'No, Alexis Alexandrovich,' she put in, 'I brought Anna here and I have promised to take her back again.'
'Excuse me, Princess,' he said, smiling politely but looking her firmly in the eyes, 'but I see that Anna is not very well, and I wish her to come with me.'
Anna looked round with alarm, rose obediently and put her hand on her husband's arm.
'I will send to him and find out, and will let you know,' Betsy whispered to her.
On leaving the stand Karenin as usual spoke to people he met, and Anna as usual had to reply and make conversation; but she was beside herself and walked as in a dream, holding her husband's arm.
'Is he hurt or not?
Will he come or not?
Shall I see him to-night?' she thought.
In silence she took her place in her husband's carriage, and in silence they drove out of the crowd of vehicles.
In spite of all he had seen, Karenin would still not allow himself to think of his wife's real position.
He saw that she had behaved with impropriety and he considered it his duty to tell her so.
He opened his mouth to say that she had behaved improperly, but involuntarily said something quite different.
'After all, how inclined we all are to these cruel spectacles,' he said. 'I notice...'
He was offended and at once began to tell her what he wanted to.
'I must tell you...' he said.
'It's coming  the explanation!' she thought and felt frightened.
'I must tell you that you behaved improperly to-day,' he said in French.
'How did I behave improperly?' she said aloud, quickly turning her head and looking him straight in the eyes, now without any of the former deceptive gaiety but with a determined air beneath which she had difficulty in hiding the fright she felt.
'Don't forget,' said he to her, pointing at the open window behind the coachman's box; and, slightly rising, he lifted the window.
'What did you consider improper?' she asked again.
He expected a rejoinder from her; but she remained silent, looking straight before her.
She did not hear half that he said, but felt afraid of him and wondered whether it was true that Vronsky was not hurt.
Was it of him they were speaking when they said that he was not hurt but the horse had broken its back?
She only smiled with simulated irony when he had finished; and she did not reply because she had not heard what he said.
Karenin had begun to speak boldly but when he realized clearly what he was talking about the fear she was experiencing communicated itself to him.
He saw her smile and a strange delusion possessed him.
In a moment she will tell me what she told me then: that these suspicions are groundless and ridiculous.'
Now that a complete disclosure was impending, he expected nothing so much as that she would, as before, answer him mockingly that his suspicions were ridiculous and groundless.
What he knew was so terrible that he was now prepared to believe anything.
But the expression of her frightened and gloomy face did not now even promise deception.
'Perhaps I am mistaken,' said he. 'In that case I beg your pardon.'
'No, you were not mistaken,' she said slowly, looking despairingly into his cold face. 'You were not mistaken.
I listen to you but I am thinking of him. I love him, I am his mistress, I cannot endure you, I am afraid of you, and I hate you...
And throwing herself back into the corner of the carriage she burst into sobs, hiding her face in her hands.
Karenin did not move, and did not change the direction in which he was looking, but his face suddenly assumed the solemn immobility of the dead, and that expression did not alter till they reached the house.
As they were driving up to it, he turned his face to her still with the same expression and said:
But I demand that the external conditions of propriety shall be observed till'  his voice trembled  'till I take measures to safeguard my honour and inform you of them.'
He alighted first and helped her out.
In the presence of the servants he pressed her hand, re-entered the carriage, and drove off toward Petersburg.
After he had gone the Princess Betsy's footman brought Anna a note.
'I sent to Alexis to inquire about his health. He writes that he is safe and sound, but in despair.'
'Then he will come,' thought she. 'What a good thing it is that I spoke out.'
She had three hours still to wait, and the memory of the incidents of their last meeting fired her blood.
It is dreadful, but I love to see his face, and I love this fantastic light...
As definitely and inevitably as a particle of water exposed to the cold assumes the well-known form of a snow crystal, did each new-comer on his arrival at the watering-place immediately settle into his natural position.
'Frst Shcherbatsky sammt Gemahlin und Tochter,' [Prince Shcherbatsky with his wife and daughter.] by the premises they occupied, by their name, and by the people they were acquainted with, at once crystallized into their definite and preordained place.
Princess Shcherbatskaya particularly wished to introduce her daughter to the German Royal Princess, and on the second day after their arrival performed that rite.
Kitty made a low and graceful curtsy in her very simple dress  that is to say, very stylish summer gown ordered from Paris.
They made acquaintance with the family of an English 'Lady,' with a German Countess and her son who had been wounded in the last war, with a Swedish savant and with a Mr. Canut and his sister.
But the people with whom they necessarily associated most were a Moscow lady, Mary Evgenyevna Rtishcheva, and her daughter, whom Kitty found unpleasant because her illness was due to the same cause as Kitty's  a love affair; and a Moscow Colonel, whom Kitty from childhood had seen and known in uniform with epaulettes, and who here  with his small eyes, low collar and coloured necktie  looked indescribably comical, and was also wearisome because it was impossible to get rid of him.
When all this had become firmly established, Kitty began to feel very dull, especially as her father had gone to Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother.
She was not interested in the people she knew, for she felt that nothing new would come from them.
Her chief private interest at the watering-place consisted in observing those whom she did not know and making conjectures about them.
It was a characteristic of Kitty's always to expect to find the most excellent qualities in people, especially in those she did not know.
And now, when guessing who and what kind of people the strangers were, and in what relation they stood to one another, Kitty attributed to them extraordinary and splendid characters, and found confirmation in her observations.
Among these people she was specially interested in a young Russian girl who had come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame Stahl, as every one called her.
Madame Stahl belonged to the highest Society, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on fine days occasionally appeared on the promenade in a bath-chair.
The Russian girl looked after Madame Stahl, and also, as Kitty noticed, became intimate with all those who were seriously ill (of whom there were many in the place) and waited on them in the most natural way.
This Russian girl, Kitty decided, was not related to Madame Stahl, but neither was she a paid companion.
Madame Stahl called her by the diminutive 'Varenka,' and others called her Mademoiselle Varenka.
But besides the fact that it interested Kitty to observe the relations of this girl with Madame Stahl and with others, she experienced (as often happens) an inexplicable attraction toward this Mlle Varenka, and felt, when the girl's eyes met hers, that the feeling was mutual.
This Mlle Varenka was not exactly past her early youth, but seemed to be a person destitute of youthfulness: she might be nineteen years old or she might be thirty.
If one examined her features, she was good-looking rather than plain, despite her unhealthy complexion.
Her figure would have been good had she not been too lean and her head too large for her medium height; but she was not likely to prove attractive to men.
Another reason why she could not be attractive to men was because she lacked that of which Kitty had too much  a restrained flame of vitality and consciousness of her own attractiveness.
She seemed always occupied with something there could be no doubt about, and therefore it seemed that no side issue could interest her.
She felt that in her and in her way of life could be found a model of what she herself was painfully seeking: interest in life, the worth of life  outside the social relations of girls to men, which now seemed disgusting to Kitty, who regarded them as shameful exhibitions of goods awaiting a buyer.
The more Kitty observed her unknown friend, the more she was convinced that this girl really was the perfect being she imagined her to be, and the more she wished to make her acquaintance.
But for heaven's sake'  her look added  'do not think that I shall force myself on you. I simply admire and love you.'
And Kitty saw that the girl really was always occupied: now taking the children of some Russian family home from the Wells, now carrying an invalid's plaid or wrapping it round her, now trying to soothe an irritable patient, now choosing and buying biscuits for some one's coffee.
They were a very tall, round-shouldered man with black eyes, naive and at the same time dreadful, and enormous hands, who wore an old overcoat too short for him, and a slightly pock-marked, sweet-faced woman, badly and tastelessly dressed.
But the Princess, having found out from the visitors' list that they were Nicholas Levin and Mary Ivanovna, explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her dreams about those two people vanished.
Not so much because of what her mother had told her, as because the man was Constantine's brother, these two people appeared very disagreeable to Kitty.
This Levin, by his habit of jerking his head, now inspired an irrepressible feeling of aversion in her.
It seemed to her that his large, dreadful eyes, which followed her insistently, expressed hatred and irony, and she tried to avoid encountering him.
Kitty was walking with her mother and the Moscow Colonel, who swaggered gaily in his short, German coat, bought ready-made in Frankfort.
Varenka, in her dark dress and a black hat with turned-down rim, was pacing the whole length of the gallery with a blind Frenchwoman, and each time she met Kitty they exchanged a friendly look.
'Mama, may I speak to her?' asked Kitty, following her unknown friend with her eyes and noticing that she was moving toward the Well and that they could meet her there.
'Well, if you want to so much, I will inquire about her first and will speak to her myself,' answered her mother. 'What do you see particular in her?
I expect she's a companion.
I knew her sister-in-law,' added the Princess, raising her head proudly.
Kitty knew that her mother was offended that Madame Stahl seemed to avoid making her acquaintance.
'She is wonderfully sweet!' she said, looking at Varenka. who was handing a tumbler to the Frenchwoman. 'See how naturally and sweetly she does it.'
'How absurd your infatuations are,' said the Princess. 'Come, we'd better turn back,' she added, as she noticed Levin coming toward them with his lady and a German doctor, to whom he was talking loudly and angrily.
In a few minutes he overtook Kitty and her mother.
That tall gentleman has been quarrelling with the doctor and insulting him, because he is dissatisfied with the doctor's treatment. He shook his stick at him!
'Luckily that... you know the girl with a hat like a mushroom  she's Russian, I think  intervened,' said the Colonel.
'There, Mama,' said Kitty. 'And you are surprised that I admire her.'
The next day, watching her unknown friend, Kitty noticed that she was already on the same footing with Levin and his young woman as she was with her other protgs.
She went up to them, talked to them, and acted as interpreter for the woman, who spoke nothing but Russian.
Kitty begged her mother more than ever to allow her to make Varenka's acquaintance, and, much as the Princess disliked appearing to take the first step toward getting acquainted with Madame Stahl, who allowed herself to be proud of something or other, she made inquiries about Varenka, and, having learnt particulars which allowed her to conclude that though there might be little good there would be no harm in this acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka.
Choosing a moment when her daughter had gone to the Well and Varenka had stopped in front of a baker's shop, the Princess went up to her.
'Allow me to introduce myself,' said the Princess with her dignified smile. 'My daughter has fallen in love with you.
'I don't remember; I don't think I did anything,' said she.
'Well, you see, his companion called me, and I tried to soothe him; he is very ill and was dissatisfied with his doctor.
I knew her sister-in-law.'
'No, she is not my aunt.
I call her Mama, but I am not related to her. She adopted me,' answered Varenka, and blushed again.
This was said so simply, and the frank and open expression of her face was so amiable, that the Princess understood what made Kitty so fond of this Varenka.
Just then Kitty, beaming with joy that her mother had made acquaintance with her unknown friend, returned from the Well.
Kitty blushed with joy, long and silently pressing her new friend's hand, which lay passively in hers.
But though her hand did not return the pressure, Mlle Varenka's face shone with a soft and pleased, though rather sad, smile, which disclosed her large but splendid teeth.
'I have long wished it myself,' she said.
'Oh, on the contrary, I have no occupation at all,' answered Varenka; but at that very moment she had to leave her new friends because two little Russian girls, the children of one of the invalids, ran up to her.
THE PARTICULARS THE PRINCESS SHCHERBATSKAYA LEARNT about Varenka's past and about her relations with Madame Stahl, and about Madame Stahl herself, were the following:
Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had tormented her husband to death, while others said that, by his immoral conduct, he had tormented her, had always been a sickly and ecstatic woman.
When her first baby was born, she being already divorced from her husband, it died at once; and her relations, knowing how susceptible she was and fearing that this news might kill her, changed her dead child for one who had been born that night in the same house in Petersburg, the daughter of a chef at a palace.
Madame Stahl learnt afterwards that Varenka was not her daughter, but continued to bring her up, the more readily because it happened that very soon Varenka had no relations left.
Madame Stahl had lived continuously abroad in the South for more than ten years, hardly ever leaving her bed.
Some people said that she had made for herself a position in Society by her pose as a philanthropic and highly religious woman; others said that she really was the highly moral being, living only to do good, that she seemed to be.
No one knew what her religion was: Roman Catholic, Protestant, or Greek Orthodox, but one thing was certain, namely, that she was in friendly relations with the most highly-placed personages of all the churches and denominations.
Varenka always lived with her abroad, and all who knew Madame Stahl knew and liked Mlle Varenka, as everybody called her.
Having learnt all these particulars, the Princess saw nothing to object to in a friendship between her daughter and Varenka, especially as Varenka's manners and education were excellent  she spoke French and English admirably, and, above all, she brought Madame Stahl's regrets at having been deprived through illness of the pleasure of making the Princess's acquaintance.
When she had made Varenka's acquaintance Kitty became more and more fascinated by her friend and found new virtues in her every day.
The Princess, having heard that Varenka sang very well, invited her to come and sing to them one evening.
'Kitty plays, and we have a piano,  though not a good one,  and you would give us great pleasure,' said the Princess with her feigned smile, which was especially unpleasant to Kitty now because she noticed that Varenka did not wish to sing.
Varenka, however, came in the evening and brought her music.
The Princess had also invited Mary Evgenyevna with her daughter and the Colonel.
Varenka did not seem at all abashed by the fact that strangers were present, and she went straight up to the piano.
She could not accompany herself but she sang at sight admirably.
Kitty, who played well, accompanied her.
'You have an exceptional talent,' said the Princess, after Varenka had sung her first song excellently.
Mary Evgenyevna and her daughter thanked her and praised her singing.
Kitty looked at her friend with pride.
She was enraptured by her singing, her voice, her face, and above all by her manner,  by the fact that Varenka evidently attached no importance to her own singing and was quite indifferent to the praise she got; she only seemed to ask: 'Have I to sing again or is it enough?'
But she is quite indifferent.
What is it in her?
What gives her this power to disregard everything and to be so quietly independent?
How I should like to know this, and to learn it from her!' thought Kitty, gazing into the calm face.
The Princess asked Varenka to sing again, and she sang another song just as truly, clearly, and well, standing straight at the piano, and beating time on it with her thin brown hand.
Kitty anxiously and inquiringly fixed her eyes on Varenka's face.
'Well then, another one,' she said, hurriedly turning over the pages, immediately realizing that there was something particular connected with that song.
'No, let us sing that one.' And she sang the piece just as calmly, coldly, and well as the previous ones.
When she had finished everybody again thanked her and went to drink tea.
'Am I not right, you have some memory attached to that song?' asked Kitty. 'Don't tell me about it,' she added hurriedly, 'only say if I am right!'
I loved a man and used to sing that song to him.'
'I loved him and he loved me; but his mother would not have it, and he married another.
You did not think that I too have had a romance?' she said, and on her handsome face there flickered for an instant a spark of the fire which, Kitty felt, had once lighted up her whole being.
Why, if I were a man I could not have loved anyone else after knowing you.
But I can't understand how, to satisfy his mother, he could forget you and make you unhappy. He must be quite heartless.'
'Oh no. He is a very good man, and I am not unhappy; on the contrary, I am very happy.
Well, we shan't sing any more to-day?' she added, and went toward the house.
'How good you are, how good!' exclaimed Kitty, stopping her and kissing her. 'If only I could be a little bit like you!'
You're very good as you are,' said Varenka, smiling her gentle, weary smile.
Wait a bit, let us sit down again,' said Kitty, making Varenka sit down on a garden seat beside her. 'Tell me, is it possible that you are not offended at the thought that a man despised your love?
'But he did not despise it; I believe that he loved me, but he was an obedient son...'
'Yes, but if it had not been his mother's doing, but his own?' said Kitty, feeling that she had given away her secret and that her face, burning with a blush of shame, had already betrayed her.
'Then he would have behaved badly and I should not regret him,' replied Varenka, evidently conscious that they were now speaking not about her but about Kitty.
'But the humiliation?' said Kitty. 'One cannot forget the humiliation, one cannot,' and she remembered the look she gave Vronsky at the ball, when the music stopped.
Varenka shook her head and put her hand on Kitty's.
'Shameful in what respect?' she said. 'You could not have told a man who was himself indifferent to you that you loved him?'
'Of course not; I never said a single word, but he knew it.
'Dear me, if every one were as sensitive as you are!' said Varenka. 'There is no girl who has not gone through the same sort of thing.
'Then what is important?' asked Kitty, looking into her face with surprised curiosity.
'Yes, I really must be going!' said Varenka, rising. 'I have to look in at Madame Berthe's; she asked me to.'
Kitty held her hands, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty questioned Varenka with her eyes: 'What  what is most important? What gives you such peace?
She only knew that she had to call on Madame Berthe and get home in time for Mama's midnight tea.
She went in, collected her music, and having said good-night to everybody, prepared to go.
Kitty noticed that Varenka had difficulty in suppressing a smile at the idea that she needed anyone to see her home.
'Oh no, I always go out alone and nothing ever happens to me,' she said, taking up her hat.
And kissing Kitty again, but without telling her what was most important, she went out with vigorous steps with her music under her arm, and disappeared in the semidarkness of the summer night, carrying with her the secret of what was important, and to what she owed her enviable tranquillity and dignity.
KITTY ALSO BECAME ACQUAINTED with Madame Stahl, and this acquaintanceship, together with Varenka's friendship not only had a great influence on Kitty, but comforted her in her sorrow.
What comforted her was that a perfectly new world was revealed to her, a world that had nothing in common with her past: an exalted, admirable world, from the heights of which it was possible to regard that past calmly.
It was revealed to her that besides that instinctive life she had lived hitherto there was also a spiritual life.
That life was revealed by religion, but a religion that had nothing in common with that which Kitty had known since her childhood and which found expression in Mass and vespers at the private chapel of the Widows' Almshouse where one could meet one's friends, and in learning Slavonic texts by heart with the priest.
Madame Stahl spoke with her as with a dear child who gives one pleasure by reminding one of one's own past, and only once mentioned that love and faith alone can bring relief in all human sorrows and that no sorrows are too trivial for Christ's compassion. Then she immediately changed the subject.
But in Madame Stahl's every movement, every word, every 'heavenly' look (as Kitty called it), and especially in the whole story of her life, which Kitty learnt from Varenka, she discovered what was important and what she had not known before.
But however lofty may have been Madame Stahl's character, however touching her story, and however elevated and tender her words, Kitty could not help noticing some perplexing traits in her.
And once, when Kitty met a Roman Catholic priest at the house, she observed that Madame Stahl carefully hid her face behind the lampshade and smiled in a peculiar manner.
Trifling as these things were, they disturbed Kitty, and she felt doubts about Madame Stahl.
But Varenka, lonely, without relatives or friends, with her sad disillusionment, wishing for nothing and regretting nothing, personified that perfection of which Kitty only allowed herself to dream.
In Varenka she saw that it was only necessary to forget oneself and to love others in order to be at peace, happy, and lovely.
Having now clearly understood what was most important, Kitty was not content merely to delight in it, but immediately with her whole soul devoted herself to this newly revealed life.
She formed a plan for her future life, based on what Varenka told her about the work of Madame Stahl and of others whom she named.
Like Madame Stahl's niece, Aline, of whom Varenka told her a great deal, Kitty determined, wherever she lived, to seek out the unfortunate, help them as much as she could, distribute Gospels, and read the Gospel to the sick, to criminals, and to the dying.
But all these were secret dreams, which she did not speak of either to her mother or to Varenka.
However, while waiting for the time when she could put her plans into operation on a larger scale, Kitty, imitating Varenka, here at the watering-place where there were so many sick and unhappy people, easily found opportunities to apply her new rules.
At first the Princess only noticed that Kitty was strongly influenced by her engoument, [Infatuation.] as she called it, for Madame Stahl and especially for Varenka.
She noticed that Kitty not only imitated Varenka's activities, but involuntarily copied her manner of walking, speaking, and blinking her eyes.
But afterwards the Princess also noticed that, apart from this infatuation, a serious spiritual change was taking place in her daughter.
She saw that in the evening Kitty read the Gospels in French (given her by Madame Stahl)  which she had not done before  that she avoided her Society acquaintances and made up to the invalids who were under Varenka's protection, and especially to the family of Petrov, a poor, sick artist.
This was all very well, and the Princess had nothing against it, especially as Petrov's wife was quite a well-bred woman, and the German Princess, having noticed Kitty's activities, praised her, calling her a ministering angel.
It would have been quite right had it not been overdone. But the Princess saw that her daughter was getting out of bounds and spoke to her about it.
'Il ne faut jamais rien outrer,' [You should never overdo anything.] she said to her one day.
But her daughter did not reply; she only felt in her soul that one could not speak of overdoing Christianity.
But the Princess disliked this excess, and disliked it all the more because she felt that Kitty did not wish to open her whole heart to her.
And Kitty really did hide her new views and feelings from her mother.
She kept them secret not from want of respect and love, but just because her mother was her mother.
She would have revealed them to anyone sooner than to her.
'It seems a long time since Anna Pavlovna was here,' said the Princess once, speaking of Mrs Petrova. 'I invited her and she did not seem pleased.'
'Well, go if you like,' said the Princess, looking intently into her daughter's confused face and trying to guess the cause of her confusion.
That same day Varenka came to dinner, and said that Anna Pavlovna had changed her mind about going to the mountains tomorrow.
'Kitty, have you not had some unpleasantness with the Petrovs?' the Princess asked when they were again alone together. 'Why has she stopped sending the children here and coming herself?'
Kitty replied that nothing had passed between them and that she did not at all understand why Anna Pavlovna seemed dissatisfied with her.
Kitty spoke the truth: she did not know why Anna Pavlovna had changed toward her, but she guessed it.
She guessed it to be something that she could not tell her mother and did not even say to herself.
Again and again she went over in memory all the relations she had had with that family.
She remembered the naive pleasure expressed in Anna Pavlovna's round, good-natured face whenever they met, remembered their secret consultations about the patient, and their plots to draw him away from his work which the doctor had forbidden and to take him for walks, and the attachment to her felt by the youngest boy, who called her 'my Kitty,' and did not want to go to bed without her.
Then she recalled Petrov's thin, emaciated figure in his brown coat, with his long neck, his thin, curly hair, his inquiring blue eyes  which had at first seemed to her terrible,  and his sickly efforts to appear vigorous and animated in her presence.
She remembered her first efforts to conquer the repulsion she felt for him, as for all consumptives, and her efforts to find something to say to him.
She remembered the timid look, full of emotion, with which he gazed at her, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness followed by a consciousness of her own benevolence, that she had experienced.
Anna Pavlovna now met Kitty with affected amiability and constantly watched her husband and her.
Could his touching pleasure when she drew near be the cause of Anna Pavlovna's coldness?
'Yes,' she remembered, 'there was something unnatural in Anna Pavlovna, quite unlike her usual kindness, when the day before yesterday she said crossly: '-"There, he has been waiting for you and would not drink his coffee without you, though he was growing dreadfully weak."
'Yes, and perhaps my giving him his plaid may also have been unpleasant to her.
It was such a simple thing, but he took it so awkwardly, and thanked me so much that I myself felt awkward. And then that portrait of me, which he did so well!
This doubt poisoned her delight in her new life.
QUITE TOWARD THE END OF THE SEASON Prince Shcherbatsky, who from Carlsbad had gone on to Baden and Kissingen to see some Russian friends and to 'inhale some Russian spirit,' as he expressed it, returned to his family.
The Princess found everything admirable, and, in spite of her firmly-established position in Russian Society tried when abroad to appear like a European lady, which she was not  being thoroughly Russian. She therefore became somewhat artificial, which made her feel uncomfortable.
The Prince, on the contrary, considered everything foreign detestable and life abroad oppressive, and kept to his Russian habits, purposely trying to appear more unlike a European than he really was.
He returned looking thinner, with the skin on his cheeks hanging loose, but in the brightest of spirits.
His spirits were still better when he saw Kitty completely recovered.
The news of her friendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the information the Princess gave him of the change she had observed in Kitty, disturbed him and aroused in him his usual feelings of jealousy toward anything that drew his daughter away from him and of fear lest she might escape from his influence into regions inaccessible to him.
The day after his arrival the Prince, attired in a long overcoat, and with his Russian wrinkles, and his slightly puffy cheeks supported by a stiff collar, went out in the brightest of spirits to the Springs with his daughter.
Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast. The bright sunshine, the gay glitter of the green trees, and the sounds of music had become for her the natural framework of all these familiar figures, and of the changes for better or for worse which she watched.
In spite of the pride and the sense of renewed youth which he experienced while walking arm-in-arm with his favourite daughter, he felt almost awkward and ashamed of his powerful stride and his large healthy limbs.
'Introduce me, introduce me to your new friends,' he said to his daughter, pressing her arm with his elbow. 'I have even taken a liking to your nasty Soden because it has done you so much good.
Just at the entrance to the gardens they met the blind Madame Berthe with her guide, and the Prince was pleased by the tender look on the old Frenchwoman's face when she heard Kitty's voice.
With French exaggeration she at once began talking to him, admiring him for having such a delightful daughter, and in Kitty's presence praised her up to the skies, calling her a treasure, a pearl, and a ministering angel.
'Then she must be angel No. 2,' the Prince remarked with a smile. 'She calls Mlle Varenka angel No. 1.'
She was walking hurriedly toward them with an elegant little red bag in her hand.
'See! Papa has come!' said Kitty to her.
Simply and naturally, as she did everything, Varenka made a movement between a bow and a curtsy and immediately began talking to the Prince just as she talked to everybody, easily and naturally.
'Of course I know you, I've heard all about you,' the Prince said to her with a smile, by which Kitty saw with joy that her father liked Varenka. 'Where are you hurrying so to?'
'Mama is here,' said she, turning to Kitty. 'She did not sleep all night and the doctor advised her to go out.
I am taking her her work.'
Kitty saw that he would have liked to make fun of Varenka, but was unable to do so because he liked her.
'Well, let us see all your friends,' he added, 'including Madame Stahl, if she will condescend to recognize me.'
'Oh, do you know her, Papa?' asked Kitty, alarmed by an ironical twinkle in the Prince's eyes when he mentioned Madame Stahl.
'I knew her husband and her too, slightly, before she joined the Pietists.'
'What are Pietists, Papa?' asked Kitty, frightened by the fact that what she valued so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.
I only know that she thanks God for everything, including all misfortunes,... and thanks God for her husband's death.
What a pitiful face,' he said, noticing an invalid of medium height who sat on a bench in a brown coat and white trousers which fell into strange folds over his emaciated legs.
The man raised his straw hat above his thin curly hair, uncovering a tall forehead with an unhealthy redness where the hat had pressed it.
'It is Petrov, an artist,' Kitty replied, blushing. 'And that is his wife,' she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who on their approach went away with apparent intention, following a child who had run along the path.
'Poor man, what a nice face he has!' said the Prince. 'Why did you not go up to him?
He looked as if he wished to say something to you.'
'Well, come back then,' said Kitty, turning resolutely. 'How are you to-day?' she asked Petrov.
'This is my daughter,' said the Prince, 'allow me to introduce myself.'
The artist bowed and smiled, exposing his strangely glistening white teeth.
'We were expecting you yesterday, Princess,' he said to Kitty.
He staggered as he said it, and to make it appear as if he had done this intentionally, he repeated the movement.
'Not going?' said Petrov, flushing and immediately beginning to cough and looking round for his wife.
'Annetta, Annetta!' he said loudly, and the veins in his white neck protruded like thick cords.
'How is it you sent word to the Princess that we were not going?' he said in an irritable whisper, his voice failing him.
'Good morning, Princess,' said Anna Pavlovna with a forced smile, quite unlike her former way of greeting Kitty. 'I am very pleased to make your acquaintance,' she went on, turning to the Prince.
'How is it you sent to tell the Princess we were not going?' the painter whispered hoarsely and still more angrily, evidently irritated because his voice failed him and he could not give his words the expression he desired.
I thought we were not going,' said his wife with vexation.
'How so? When...' he was interrupted by a fit of coughing, and made a hopeless gesture with his hand.
The Prince raised his hat and went away with his daughter.
'Oh, oh!' he sighed deeply. 'What poor things!'
He receives something from the Academy,' she explained animatedly, trying to stifle the excitement resulting from the strange alteration in Anna Pavlovna's manner toward her.
Behind her was a sullen-looking, robust German workman who pushed her bath-chair.
At her side stood a fair-haired Swedish Count, whom Kitty knew by name.
The Prince approached her, and Kitty immediately noticed in his eyes that ironical spark which so disturbed her.
He went up to Madame Stahl, and spoke to her extremely politely and nicely in that excellent French which so very few people speak nowadays.
'I do not know whether you will remember me, but I must recall myself to you in order to thank you for your kindness to my daughter,' he said, raising his hat and not putting it on again.
'Prince Alexander Shcherbatsky,' said Madame Stahl, lifting toward him her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty detected displeasure. 'I am very pleased.
I have grown very fond of your daughter.'
On that side!' she said irritably to Varenka, who was not wrapping the plaid round her feet the right way.
'That is not for us to judge,' said Madame Stahl, detecting a something hardly perceptible on the Prince's face. 'Then you will send me that book, dear Count Thank you very much,' she added, turning to the young Swede.
'Ah!' exclaimed the Prince, seeing the Moscow Colonel standing near by, and with a bow to Madame Stahl he moved away with his daughter and with the Moscow Colonel, who had joined them.
'That is our aristocracy, Prince!' remarked the Colonel, wishing to appear sarcastic. He had a pique against Madame Stahl because she did not wish to be acquainted with him.
'Did you know her before her illness, Prince?
I mean before she was laid up?'
'Yes, I knew her when she first became an invalid.'
'I hear she has not been up for ten years.'
'She does not get up, because her legs are too short. She has a very bad figure...'
'Evil tongues say so, my love. But your Varenka does get it,' he added.
'Varenka adores her.
And besides, she does so much good!
Ask anyone you like! Everybody knows her and Aline Stahl.'
'Perhaps,' he said, pressing her arm with his elbow. 'But it is better to do good so that, ask whom you will, no one knows anything about it.'
Kitty was silent, not because she had nothing to say but because she did not want to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father.
Yet  strange to say  though she had made up her mind not to submit to her father's opinion and not to let him enter her sanctuary, she felt that the divine image of Madame Stahl which she had carried in her bosom for a whole month had irrevocably vanished, as the figure formed by a cast-off garment vanishes when one realizes how the garment is lying.
There remained only a short-legged woman who was always lying down because she had a bad figure, and who tormented poor unresisting Varenka for not tucking her plaid the right way.
THE PRINCE IMPARTED HIS GOOD SPIRITS to his household, his friends, and even to his German landlord.
The landlord and the servants brightened up under his influence.
They knew his generosity, and in a quarter of an hour the sick Hamburg doctor, who lived upstairs, was looking with envy from his window at the merry party of healthy Russians gathered under the chestnut tree.
At the other end sat the Prince, making a substantial meal and talking loudly and merrily. He spread out his purchases before him: carved caskets, spillikins and paper-knives of all kinds, of which he had bought quantities at all the different watering-places, and he gave them away to everybody, including Lischen, the maid, and the landlord, with whom he joked in his funny broken German, assuring him that not the waters had cured Kitty but his excellent food, especially his plum soup.
The Princess laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but was livelier and brighter than she had ever been during her stay at the watering-place.
The Colonel smiled, as he always did at the Prince's jokes; but with regard to Europe (which he thought he had carefully studied) he sided with the Princess.
The good-natured Mary Evgenyevna shook with laughter at everything the amusing Prince said, and even Varenka, in a way new to Kitty, succumbed to the feeble but infectious laughter inspired by the Prince's jokes.
All this cheered Kitty up, but she could not help being troubled.
She could not solve the problem unconsciously set her by her father's jocular view of her friends and of the life she had begun to love so much.
To this problem was added the change in her relations with the Petrovs, which had been so clearly and unpleasantly demonstrated that morning.
Everybody was merry, but Kitty could not be merry, and this troubled her still more.
She felt almost as she used to feel when, as a child, she was locked up in a room for punishment and heard her sister's merry laughter.
'Now, why have you bought that mass of things?' asked the Princess, smiling and passing her husband a cup of coffee.
Stay a little longer,' he said, turning to Varenka.
When she had recovered, she took leave and went into the house for her hat.
Kitty followed her.
She was not worse, but different from what Kitty previously had imagined her to be.
'Oh dear, I have not laughed so much for a long time!' said Varenka, collecting her sunshade and bag. 'What a dear your Papa is!'
'Why not, why not, why not?' asked Kitty with wide-open eyes, and holding Varenka's sunshade to prevent her going. 'No, wait a bit, and tell me why not.'
'Well, go on,' Kitty hurried her, looking at her with a frown.
'Well, I don't know why, but Anna Pavlovna says he does not want to go, because you are here.
Kitty frowned yet more, and remained silent, and only Varenka spoke, trying to soften and soothe Kitty, and foreseeing an approaching explosion of tears or words, she knew not which.
'It serves me right, it serves me right!' Kitty began hurriedly, snatching Varenka's sunshade out of her hands, and looking past her friend's eyes.
Varenka felt like smiling at her friend's childish anger but feared to offend her.
I don't understand,' she said.
But Kitty was in one of her fits of passion. She would not let Varenka finish.
'Kitty!' came her mother's voice, 'come here and show Papa your corals.'
Kitty took from the table a little box which held the corals, and with a proud look, without having made it up with her friend, went to where her mother was.
Why are you so red?' asked both her mother and father together.
'Nothing,' she said. 'I'll come back in a minute,' and ran away.
'She is still here,' thought Kitty. 'What shall I say to her?
Why have I offended her?
What shall I say to her?' thought Kitty and stopped at the door.
Varenka, with her hat on, sat at the table examining the spring of her sunshade, which Kitty had broken.
'Varenka, forgive me, forgive me!' whispered Kitty, coming close to her. 'I don't remember what I said.'
But with her father's return the world in which she had been living completely changed for Kitty.
She did not renounce all she had learnt, but realized that she had deceived herself when thinking that she could be what she wished to be.
It was as if she had recovered consciousness; she felt the difficulty of remaining without hypocrisy or boastfulness on the level to which she had wished to rise.
Moreover, she felt the oppressiveness of that world of sorrow, sickness and death in which she was living.
The efforts she had been making to love it, now seemed tormenting, and she longed to get away quickly to the fresh air, back to Russia, to Ergushovo, where as she knew from a letter her sister Dolly had moved with the children.
But her affection for Varenka was not weakened.
When taking leave of her, Kitty tried to persuade her to come and stay with them in Russia.
She was not as careless and light-hearted as before, but she was at peace.
SERGIUS IVANICH KOZNYSHEV, wishing to take a rest from mental work, went to stay with his brother in the country instead of going abroad as usual.
According to his views country life was preferable to any other, and he had now come to his brother's house to enjoy it.
Constantine Levin was very pleased, especially as he no longer expected his brother Nicholas to come that summer.
But in spite of his affection and respect for Koznyshev, Constantine did not feel at ease with his step-brother in the country.
Koznyshev was wont to say that he knew and loved the common people: he often conversed with peasants, and was able to do it well, frankly, and without affectation, deducing from every such conversation data in the peasants' favour and proofs of his own knowledge of the people.
Constantine regarded the peasants as the chief partners in a common undertaking, and despite his respect and the feeling of a blood-tie  probably, as he said, sucked in with the milk of his peasant nurse  he as partner in their common undertaking, though often filled with admiration for the strength, meekness, and justice of these people, was very often (when the business required other qualities) exasperated with them for their carelessness, untidiness, drunkenness, and untruthfulness.
Had Constantine been asked whether he liked the peasants, he would not have known what to answer.
He both liked and disliked them, just as he liked and disliked all human beings.
With his natural kind heart he of course liked human beings more than he disliked them, and naturally the peasants were included; but he could not like or dislike the people as if they were something apart, because he not only lived among them, his interests closely bound up with theirs, but he considered himself one of the people and could not find in himself any special qualities or defects which placed him in contrast with them.
Moreover, though he had long lived in very close relations with the peasants, as their master, mediator, and above all as their adviser (the peasants trusted him, and would often come thirty miles to consult him), he had no definite opinion concerning them. Had he been asked whether he knew the people, he would have been just as much at a loss for a reply as he was for a reply to the question whether he liked them.
To say that he knew the peasants was tantamount to saying that he knew human beings.
He continually observed and learnt to know all sorts of human beings, among them human beings of the peasant class, whom he considered interesting, constantly discovering in them new traits and altering his opinions accordingly.
Koznyshev, on the other hand, just as he praised country life as a contrast to the life he disliked, liked the peasants as a contrast to the class he disliked and regarded them as a contrast to humanity in general.
He never altered his opinions about the people nor his sympathetic attitude toward them.
In the disputes which took place between the brothers when discussing the peasants, Koznyshev was always victorious, just because he had definite views about them, their character, attributes, and tastes; while Constantine had no definite and fixed views, and was often guilty of self-contradiction when arguing on that subject.
Koznyshev thought his younger brother a splendid fellow, with his heart in the right place, but with a mind which, though rather quick, was swayed by the impression of the moment and was therefore full of contradictions.
With an elder brother's condescension he sometimes explained to him the meaning of things, but could find no pleasure in discussion, because he could gain too easy a victory.
Constantine considered his brother to be a man of great intellect, noble in the highest sense of the word, and gifted with the power of working for the general welfare.
But the older he grew and the more intimately he came to know his brother, the oftener the thought occurred to him that the power of working for the general welfare  a power of which he felt himself entirely destitute  was not a virtue but rather a lack of something: not a lack of kindly honesty and noble desires and tastes, but a lack of the power of living, of what is called heart  the aspiration which makes a man choose one out of all the innumerable paths of life that present themselves, and desire that alone.
The better he knew his brother, the more he noticed that Koznyshev and many other social workers were not led to this love for the common good by their hearts, but because they had reasoned out in their minds that it was a good thing to do that kind of work, and took to it accordingly.
What further strengthened this conviction, was noticing that his brother did not take the question of the general welfare, or of the immortality of the soul, any more to heart than a game of chess.
Another thing which made Constantine Levin feel his brother's presence inconvenient was that, in the country, especially during the summer, while Levin was always busy with the farm and the long summer days were too short for doing all that had to be done, Koznyshev was resting.
But even though he was resting from mental labours and was not writing, he was so used to mental activity that he liked expressing his thoughts in an elegant, concise style, and liked having a listener.
His most usual and natural listener was his brother; and therefore, despite their friendly relations, Constantine felt uncomfortable at leaving him alone.
But it wearied Constantine to sit listening to him, particularly because he knew that during his absence the manure was being carted into the field, and it was impossible to guess where they would throw it if he were not there to see. The ploughshares too would not be screwed up properly, or taken out; and then he would be told that these ploughs were a silly invention: 'How can they be compared to our old Russian plough?' and so on.
'No; I must just look in at the counting-house for a moment,' answered Levin, and off he ran to the fields.
AT THE BEGINNING OF JUNE Levin's old nurse and housekeeper, Agatha Mikhaylovna, happened to slip as she was carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms which she had just pickled, and sprained her wrist.
A talkative young medical man who had only just qualified and been appointed doctor for the Zemstvo district arrived, examined the hand, said it was not sprained, and enjoyed a talk with the celebrated Sergius Ivanich Koznyshev. He told him all the gossip of the district to show off his enlightened views and complained of the unsatisfactory conditions prevailing there.
Koznyshev listened attentively, asked questions, and, enlivened by the presence of a new listener, became quite chatty, made some pointed and weighty remarks respectfully appreciated by the young doctor, and reached that state of animation his brother so well knew, which generally followed a brilliant and lively conversation.
After the doctor's departure Koznyshev felt inclined to go to the river with his fishing rod.
Constantine, who was obliged to go to the cornfields and meadows, offered to give his brother a lift in his trap.
Koznyshev was all the while filled with admiration for the beauty of the thickly-leaved forest, and kept pointing out to his brother the old lime trees, looking so dark on the shady side, covered with creamy buds all ready to burst into blossom; or the new shoots, sparkling like emeralds, on the trees.
Words seemed to detract from the beauty of what he was looking at.
He assented to what his brother said but could not help thinking of other things.
When they emerged from the forest his attention was arrested at the sight of a fallow field and a hillock, here and there yellow with grass or broken up and cut into squares, in some parts speckled with heaps of manure, or even ploughed.
At sight of the meadows his thoughts turned to the hay harvest.
At the roots of the thick grass the morning dew still lingered, and Koznyshev, afraid of wetting his feet, asked his brother to drive him across the meadow to the willow clump near which perch could be caught.
Though Constantine was loth to crush his grass, he drove across the meadow.
Koznyshev sat down by the willows, while Levin led away his horse, and, having tethered it, stepped into the immense grey-green sea of grass, so dense that the wind could not ruffle it.
In the meadow, which was flooded every spring, the silky grass, now scattering its seeds, reached almost to his waist.
When Constantine Levin had passed right across the meadow and reached the road, he met an old man with a swollen eye carrying a swarm of bees in a skep.
'Have you found it, Fomich?' he asked.
Levin went back to his brother.
Though he had caught nothing, Koznyshev did not feel bored and seemed in the best of spirits.
Levin saw that he had been roused by his conversation with the doctor and wanted to have a talk.
Levin, on the contrary, was impatient to get home in order to give orders about hiring the mowers on the morrow, and to decide about the hay harvest, which greatly occupied his mind.
'Well, let's go,' said he.
How lovely this steel-coloured water is!' said he.
'DO YOU know, I've been thinking about you,' said Koznyshev. 'From what the doctor told me  and he is by no means a stupid young fellow  the things going on in your district are simply disgraceful.
He did not pay much attention to what his brother was saying.
Peering into the distance across the river, he made out something black in the cornfield, and could not see whether it was only a horse or the steward on horseback.
'Ambition?' reiterated Levin, stung by his brother's words. 'I do not understand it.
'Well, and is it not very important?' said Koznyshev, stirred by the perception that his occupations were regarded as unimportant and especially by his brother's evident inattention to what he was saying.
Do what you will, they don't grip me,' replied Levin, having made out that what he saw was the steward, who was probably dismissing the peasants from their ploughing too soon, for they were turning the ploughs over. 'Is it possible they have finished ploughing?' thought he.
'Come now! After all,' continued the elder brother with a frown on his handsome, intelligent face, 'there are limits to everything!
And Koznyshev confronted his brother with this dilemma: 'Either you are so undeveloped that you don't see all that you might do, or you don't want to sacrifice your peace of mind or your vanity  I don't know which  in order to do it.'
Constantine felt that there was nothing for him but to submit or else to own to a lack of love for the common cause, and he felt wounded and grieved.
'Both the one and the other,' said he resolutely. 'I can't see how it is to be done...'
Constantine felt himself morally cornered, and in consequence became excited and involuntarily betrayed the chief cause of his indifference to social questions.
This unexpected view of the question took Koznyshev by surprise; but he immediately formed a new plan of attack.
He remained silent awhile, lifted his rod and threw the line again, and then turned to his brother with a smile.
'But I think her hand will remain crooked all the same.'
'However, all that is not to the point,' said Koznyshev, frowning; he did not like to be contradicted, especially when he was met with arguments that incessantly shifted their ground, introducing new considerations without sequence so that it was difficult to know which of them to answer first.
'I do,' replied Levin unguardedly, and at once realized that he had not said what he really thought.
He felt that, since he admitted this much, it would be proved to him that he was talking meaningless twaddle.
How it would be proved to him he did not know; but he knew that it certainly would be proved logically, and waited for that proof.
'If you admit it to be good,' said Koznyshev, 'then, as an honest man, you cannot help loving and sympathizing with such movements and wishing to work for them.'
'Well, let's grant it is so,' said Levin, though he did not grant it at all. 'Still, I don't see why I should he bothered with it.'
'I don't see what philosophy has to do with it,' replied Koznyshev in a tone that made it seem  at least Levin thought so  that he did not consider his brother had a right to argue on philosophical questions.
'This is what it has to do with it,' he said, getting heated. 'I believe that in any case the motive power of all our actions is our personal happiness.
But Koznyshev shrugged his shoulders.
Constantine Levin spoke as if the dam of his flood of words had been broken.
All those Zemstvo institutions of ours,' he said, again jumping off to a subject that had no bearing on the case in point, 'are like those little birches that are cut down for decorations at Whitsuntide, and we Russians stick them up to imitate the woods that have grown up naturally in Western Europe. I cannot water these birches or believe in them from my soul.'
Koznyshev only shrugged his shoulders to express his wonder at this sudden introduction of little birches into their discussion, though he had at once grasped his brother's meaning.
'Wait a moment! One can't reason that way, you know,' he remarked; but Constantine, wishing to justify the failing of which he was aware in himself (his indifference to the general welfare), continued:
That is the common and philosophical truth,' said he, emphasizing the word philosophical, as if he wanted to show that he might talk about philosophy as much as anyone else.
Koznyshev smiled again. 'He too has some philosophy or other to serve his inclinations,' he thought
'You'd better leave philosophy alone,' said he. 'The principal task of philosophy has always, in all ages, been to find the necessary connection existing between personal and general interests.
He felt himself beaten at every point, yet was sure that his brother had not understood what he had been trying to say, only he did not know why this was so: whether it was because he could not express himself clearly, or because his brother either could not or did not wish to understand him.
But he did not go deeply into these questions, and without replying to his brother began reflecting on a totally different and personal matter.
Koznyshev wound up his last line, untied the horse, and they started on their homeward way.
THE PERSONAL MATTER THAT OCCUPIED LEVIN while he was talking with his brother was this. The year before, when visiting a field that was being mown, he had lost his temper with his steward, and to calm himself had used a remedy of his own  he took a scythe from one of the peasants and himself began mowing.
He liked this work so much that he went mowing several times: he mowed all the meadow in front of his house, and when spring came he planned to devote several whole days to mowing with the peasants.
Since his brother's arrival, however, he was in doubt whether to go mowing or not.
He did not feel comfortable at the thought of leaving his brother alone all day long, and he also feared that Koznyshev might laugh at him.
But while walking over the meadow he recalled the impression mowing had made on him, and almost made up his mind to do it.
After his irritating conversation with his brother he again remembered his intention.
'I need physical exercise; without it my character gets quite spoilt,' thought he, and determined to go and mow, however uncomfortable his brother and the peasants might make him feel.
In the evening Constantine went to the office and gave orders about the work, sending round to the villages to tell the mowers to come next day to the Kalina meadow, the largest and finest he had.
'And please send my scythe to Titus to be sharpened, and have it taken to the meadow to-morrow: I may go mowing myself,' he said, trying to overcome his confusion.
That evening, at tea, Levin said to his brother:
Koznyshev looked up at his brother in surprise. 'How do you mean?
Next morning Constantine got up earlier than usual, but giving instructions about the farming delayed him and when he came to the meadow each man was already mowing his second swath.
From the hill, as he came to his first swath, he could see in the shade at his feet, a part of the meadow that was already mown, with the green heaps of grass and dark piles of coats thrown down by the mowers.
As he drew nearer, the peasants  following each other in a long straggling line, some with coats on, some in their shirts, each swinging his scythe in his own manner  gradually came into sight.
Levin recognized some of his own men.
Old Ermil, wearing a very long white shirt [Russian peasants wear their shirts outside their trousers, like smocks.] was swinging his scythe, with his back bent; young Vaska, who had been in Levin's service as coachman, and who at each swing of his scythe cut the grass the whole width of his swath; and Titus, Levin's mowing master, a thin little peasant, who went along without stopping, mowing his wide swath as if in play.
Levin dismounted and, tethering his horse by the roadside, went up to Titus, who fetched another scythe from behind a bush and gave it to Levin.
'It's ready, master! Like a razor, it will mow of itself,' said Titus, taking off his cap and smiling as he handed the scythe.
They all looked at him, but no one made any remark until a tall old man with a shrivelled, beardless face, wearing a sheepskin jacket, stepped out on to the road and addressed him:
'I will try not to lag behind,' he said, taking his place behind Titus and waiting his turn to fall in.
'Mind!' repeated the old man.
By the roadside the grass was short and tough, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long time and was confused by so many eyes upon him, mowed badly for the first ten minutes, though he swung his scythe with much vigour.
'It's not properly adjusted, the grip is not right. See how he has to stoop!' said one.
It's all right: he'll get into it,' said the old man. 'There he goes...'
'He's the master, he must work; he's working for himself'...
When they had gone some hundred steps Titus was still going on without pausing, showing no signs of fatigue, while Levin was already beginning to fear he would not be able to keep up, he felt so tired.
He swung his scythe, feeling almost at the last gasp, and made up his mind to ask Titus to stop.
But just at that moment Titus stopped of his own accord, stooped, took up some grass and wiped his scythe with it.
The peasant behind him was still mowing but was obviously tired too, for he stopped without coming even with Levin and began whetting his scythe.
Titus whetted his own and Levin's, and they began mowing again.
Titus swung his scythe, swing after swing, without stopping and without getting tired.
Levin followed, trying not to lag behind, but it became harder and harder until at last the moment came when he felt he had no strength left, and then Titus again stopped and began whetting his scythe.
They were long, and to Levin seemed particularly difficult; but when it was done and Titus with his scythe over his shoulder turned about and slowly retraced his steps, placing his feet on the marks left on the mown surface by the heels of his boots, and Levin went down his own swath in the same way, then  in spite of the perspiration that ran down his face in streams and dripped from his nose, and though his back was as wet as if the shirt had been soaked in water  he felt very light-hearted.
What gave him most pleasure was the knowledge that he would be able to keep up with the peasants.
The only thing marring his joy was the fact that his swath was not well mown. 'I must swing the scythe less with my arms and more with the whole of my body,' he thought, comparing Titus's swath, cut straight as if by measure, with his own, on which the grass lay scattered and uneven.
As Levin was aware, Titus had been mowing this swath with special rapidity, probably to put his master to the test, and it chanced to be a very long one.
The next swaths were easier, but still Levin had to work with all his might to keep even with the peasants.
He thought of nothing and desired nothing, except not to lag behind and to do his work as well as possible.
He heard only the swishing of the scythes and saw only the receding figure of Titus, the convex half-circle of the mown piece before him, and the grasses and heads of flowers falling in waves about the blade of his scythe, and in the background the end of the swath where he would rest.
Suddenly he was conscious of a pleasant coolness on his hot perspiring shoulders, without knowing what it was or whence it came.
He glanced up at the sky whilst whetting his scythe.
While working he sometimes forgot for some minutes what he was about, and felt quite at ease; then his mowing was nearly as even as that of Titus.
But as soon as he began thinking about it and trying to work better, he at once felt how hard the task was and mowed badly.
He finished a swath and was about to start another when Titus paused and went up to the old man, and both looked at the sun.
'Breakfast-time, master,' said the old man.
Levin handed his scythe to Titus and with the peasants, who were going to fetch the bread that lay with their coats, went across the swaths of the long mown portion of the meadow, slightly sprinkled with rain.
Only then he remembered that he had not been right about the weather and that the rain was wetting the hay.
'The hay will be spoilt,' said he.
Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee.
AFTER BREAKFAST LEVIN GOT PLACED between a humorous old man who invited him to be his neighbour and a young peasant who had only got married last autumn and was now out for his first summer's mowing.
The old man went along holding himself erect, moving with regular, long steps, turning out his toes, and with a precise and even motion that seemed to cost him no more effort than swinging his arms when walking, he laid the grass in a level high ridge, as if in play or as if the sharp scythe of its own accord whizzed through the juicy grass.
His pleasant young face, with a wisp of grass tied round the forehead over his hair, worked all over with the effort; but whenever anyone glanced at him he smiled.
Evidently he would have died rather than confess that the work was tiring.
The perspiration in which he was bathed was cooling and the sun which burnt his back, his head and his arm  bare to the elbow  added to his strength and perseverance in his task, and those unconscious intervals when it became possible not to think of what he was doing recurred more and more often.
Yet more joyous were the moments when, reaching the river at the lower end of the swaths, the old man would wipe his scythe with the wet grass, rinse its blade in the clear water, and dipping his whetstone-box in the stream, would offer it to Levin.
It's good!' said he, with a wink.
And really Levin thought he had never tasted any nicer drink than this lukewarm water with green stuff floating in it and a flavour of the rusty tin box.
The longer Levin went on mowing, the oftener he experienced those moments of oblivion when his arms no longer seemed to swing the scythe, but the scythe itself his whole body, so conscious and full of life; and as if by magic, regularly and definitely without a thought being given to it, the work accomplished itself of its own accord.
The old man accomplished this with ease.
When he came to a molehill he would change his action, and with a short jerk of the point and then of the heel of his scythe he would mow all round the molehill.
And while doing this he noted everything he came to: now he plucked a sorrel stalk and ate it, or offered it to Levin; now he threw aside a branch with the point of his scythe, or examined a quail's nest from which the hen bird had flown up, almost under the scythe; or he caught a beetle, lifting it with the scythe-point as with a fork, and after showing it to Levin, threw it away.
Had he been asked how long he had been mowing, he would have answered 'half an hour,' although it was nearly noon.
As they were about to begin another swath the old man drew Levin's attention to the little boys and girls approaching from all sides along the road and through the long grass, hardly visible above it, carrying jugs of kvas stoppered with rags, and bundles of bread which strained their little arms.
'Look at the midges crawling along!' he said, pointing to the children and glancing at the sun from under his lifted hand.
They completed two more swaths and then the old man stopped.
'Come, master! It's dinner-time,' said he with decision.
Levin sat down beside them; he did not want to go away.
The old man broke some rye bread into a bowl, mashed it with a spoon handle, poured over it some water from his tin, broke more bread into it and salted it, and then, turning to the East, said grace.
'Come, master, have some of my dinner,' said he, kneeling in front of his bowl.
He shared the old man's meal and got into conversation with him about his domestic affairs, taking a lively interest in them and telling him about his own, giving him all the particulars which would interest the old peasant.
When the old man got up and, having said grace, lay down beneath the willows with an armful of grass under his head, Levin did the same, regardless of the flies, importunate and persistent in the sunshine, and of the crawling insects that tickled his perspiring face and body. He at once fell asleep, waking only when the sun touched the opposite side of the willows and reached him.
The old man had already been long awake and sat setting the scythes for the young men.
When he was fully awake Levin began to calculate how much had been done and how much could still be done that day.
He was not feeling at all tired and was only longing to work again and to accomplish as much as he could.
'What do you think  could we manage to get Mashkin Heights mown to-day?' he asked the old man.
At half-time, when they sat down again and those who smoked were lighting their pipes, the old man informed the young fellows that if they mowed the Mashkin Heights there would be vodka.
'Go on, go on!' said the old man, hurrying after him and easily catching him up. 'Take care, I'll mow you down!'
After a short consultation as to whether they should mow the ravine across or lengthwise, Prokhor  a gigantic dark man and a famous mower  took the lead.
He went in front, mowed a swath, turned round and restarted; following him all the others took their places, going downhill along the creek and back up to the very skirts of the wood.
Levin was again mowing between the old man and the lad.
The old man, who had put on his sheepskin jacket, was still as jolly, witty, and easy in his movements as before.
The old man stooped each time he came upon one, picked it up, and put it inside his jacket, saying, 'Another treat for my old woman.'
This, however, did not trouble the old man.
Swinging his scythe just as usual, taking short steps with feet shod in large bark-plaited shoes, he slowly climbed the slopes; and though his whole body and his loosely-hanging trousers shook, he did not miss a single mushroom or a curious grass, and continued joking with the other peasants and with Levin.
Levin followed, and often thought he would certainly fall when climbing a mound with his scythe in his hand  a mound so steep that it would have been hard to climb even unencumbered. Still, he managed to climb it and to do all that had to be done; and he felt as if some external force were urging him on.
He looked back from the top of the hill. He could not see the men, for the mist rising from the hollow hid them; but he heard their merry rough voices, laughter, and the clanking of the scythes.
Koznyshev had long had his dinner, and was in his room drinking iced water with lemon, while looking over the papers and magazines just arrived by post, when Levin rushed in, his tangled hair clinging to his moist brow, his shirt saturated back and front and dark with perspiration, and cried out joyfully:
'Dear me, what a sight you are!' said Koznyshev, turning to his brother with a momentary look of vexation: 'The door  the door!
Shut it!' he exclaimed. 'You've certainly let in a whole dozen.'
Koznyshev could not bear flies, and opened the windows in his room only at night, keeping the door carefully closed.
Koznyshev shook his head as he looked at his brother. 'Go, go and be quick!' he added with a smile, as, gathering together his books, he prepared to go too.
He also felt suddenly quite cheerful and did not wish to part from his brother. 'And where were you when it rained?'
Though Levin had imagined that he was not hungry, and sat down to table only not to offend Kuzma, yet when he began eating he thought everything delicious.
Koznyshev smiled as he looked at him
'Oh, yes, there's a letter for you,' said he. 'Kuzma, please bring it.
Please go and see her and help her with your advice  you know all about everything.
She is quite alone, poor thing; my mother-in-law is still abroad.'
I will certainly go and see her,' said Levin. 'Or shall we both go?
She is such a good woman; don't you think so?'
The sight of his younger brother had a distinctly cheering influence on him.
'I must say you have an appetite!' he said, glancing at the sunburnt ruddy face bent over the plate.
I sat there a little, and then went through the forest to the village, where I met your old wet-nurse and sounded her as to what the peasants think of you.
From her I understood that they do not approve of your doing it.
And I chummed up with such a fine old man!
You can't imagine what a charming fellow he is.'
Our disagreement lies in the fact that you consider personal interests the motive power, while I think every man with a certain degree of education ought to be interested in the general welfare.
Levin listened to his brother but understood absolutely nothing and did not wish to understand.
He was only afraid his brother might put some question which would elicit the fact that he was not paying attention.
'What can I have been disputing about?' he thought. 'Of course I was right, and he was right too, so it's all right!...
Koznyshev smiled too. 'Shall we go for a stroll together?' he said, not wishing to part from his brother, who seemed to be exhaling freshness and vigour.
'Oh, dear me!' exclaimed Levin, so loudly that he scared Koznyshev.
'How's Agatha Mikhaylovna's arm?' asked Levin, slapping his head. 'I had forgotten all about it.'
'Well, I'll run and see her, all the same.
And his heels clattered swiftly down the stairs, making a noise like a rattle.
OBLONSKY HAD GONE TO PETERSBURG to fulfil a very necessary duty  which to officials seems most natural and familiar, though to laymen it is incomprehensible  that of reminding the Ministry of his existence, without the performance of which rite continuance in Government service is impossible. Having taken away with him all the money there was in the house, he contrived while attending to duty to pass his time very pleasantly, going to races and visiting at country houses.
Meanwhile, to curtail expenses, Dolly and her children moved to the country. She went to Ergushevo, the estate which had formed part of her dowry, about thirty-five miles distant from Levin's Pokrovsk, and the very place where in spring the forest had been sold.
Like all guilty husbands Oblonsky was very anxious about his wife's comfort, so he looked over the house himself and gave orders to have everything done that seemed to him necessary.
According to him it was necessary to reupholster the furniture with new cretonne, to put up curtains, make the garden tidy, plant flowers and build a bridge by the lake; but he forgot many other things which were essential, and thus caused Dolly a great deal of trouble.
Try as he would to be a considerate husband and father, Oblonsky never could remember that he had a wife and children.
When he returned to Moscow he informed his wife that all was being prepared, that the house would look like a new toy, and advised her to move thither.
Her departure for the country suited Oblonsky in every way: it was good for the children, expenses would be cut down, and he would be freer.
His wife, on the other hand, considered going to the country for the summer to be absolutely necessary for the children, especially for the little girl who had not recovered her health after the scarlet fever; and also in order to escape the humiliation of small debts for fuel, fish, boots, and so on, which tormented her.
Besides this she liked the idea of going to her house in the country because she intended to get her sister Kitty, who was to return from abroad at midsummer and who had been ordered bathing, to join her there.
Kitty wrote from her watering-place that nothing seemed so attractive as spending the summer with Dolly at Ergushevo, which was full of childhood's memories for both of them.
In her girlhood she had lived there and it had left an impression on her mind as a place of refuge from all the unpleasantness of town; life there, though very plain (Dolly was reconciled to that), was cheap and comfortable; everything was cheap there and easy to get, and it would do the children good.
But when she came there as mistress of the house she saw that things were quite different from what she had expected.
The day after her arrival it poured with rain and in the night the rain came through into the passage and nursery, so that the children's beds had to be carried into the drawing-room.
Dolly, meeting with these difficulties, so terrible from her point of view, instead of finding peace and rest, was at first driven to despair. She bustled about and did her utmost; but feeling the hopelessness of her position, had to fight with the tears that rose every moment to her eyes.
The steward, formerly a non-commissioned officer, to whom Oblonsky had taken a fancy and whom he had promoted from hall porter to steward because of the man's handsome and respectful appearance, took no interest in his mistress's troubles, only saying in a deferential tone, 'Quite impossible, the people are so abominable,' and did nothing to help her.
She consoled her mistress, assuring her that everything would 'shape itself (this phrase was her own, and Matthew had learnt it from her), and she went to work deliberately and without excitement.
She at once made friends with the steward's wife, and on the very day of the removal drank tea with her and with the steward beneath the laburnums, discussing arrangements.
Dolly could not be quiet with six children, of whom one would fall ill, another be in danger of falling ill, a third be in want of something, a fourth show symptoms of something bad in his disposition, etc., etc.
Had it not been for them she would have been left to her thoughts about the husband who did not love her.
Besides, painful as were for a mother the fear of illness, and sorrow at the appearance of evil tendencies in her children, those children were already beginning to repay her care by affording her small joys.
These joys were so trifling as to be as imperceptible as grains of gold among the sand, and in moments of depression she saw nothing but the sand; yet there were brighter moments when she felt nothing but joy, saw nothing but the gold.
Now in the country solitude she grew more often aware of these joys.
Often when watching her children she made great efforts to convince herself that she was mistaken, that being their mother she was not impartial; and yet she could not help telling herself that they were charming children, all the six, each in his or her own way, all of them such as are rarely to be met with; and she was happy in them and proud of them.
AT THE END OF MAY, when the house was more or less in order, Dolly received from her husband an answer to her letter of complaint.
He wrote asking her to forgive his not having seen to everything, and saying that he would come as soon as possible.
On the Sunday before St Peter's Day Dolly took all her children to Communion.
[In the Russo-Greek Church quite young children receive Communion.] When talking intimately with her mother and sister Dolly often astonished them by her freedom of thought on religious matters.
She had a strange religion of her own, firmly believing in the transmigration of souls, and not caring about Church dogmas.
But in her family she fulfilled (not merely to set an example, but with her whole heart) all that the Church demanded, and was very uneasy because for about a year the children had not received Communion. So now, with the entire approval of Matrena Filimonovna, she resolved that this ceremony should be performed.
Several days previously she decided how all the children should be dressed.
It fitted so tight round Tanya's shoulders that it was painful to see her; but Matrena Filimonovna was inspired to insert wedge-shaped pieces and to make a fichu to cover the defect.
However, in the morning everything was right; and toward nine o'clock  the hour till which the priest had been asked to defer mass  the children, beaming with joy, stood in all their finery by the carriage at the porch, waiting for their mother.
Instead of the restive Raven, the steward's Brownie had been harnessed to the carriage on Matrena Filimonovna's authority, and Dolly, who had been detained by the cares of her own toilet, came out in a white muslin dress and took her seat in the carriage.
Dolly, somewhat excited, had dressed and done her hair with care.
At one time she used to dress for her own sake, in order to look well and be attractive; later on as she grew older dressing became less and less agreeable to her, because it made the loss of her good looks more apparent; but now it again gave her pleasure and excited her.
She was not dressing for her own sake, not for her own beauty, but in order, as the mother of all those charming children, not to spoil the general effect.
She gave her mirror a last glance and was satisfied with herself.
She looked well: not in the way she had wished to look when going to a ball, but well for the object she had in view at present.
There was no one in church except peasants, innkeepers and their womenfolk; but Dolly saw, or thought she saw, the rapture produced in them by her children and herself.
It's true Alesha did not stand very well: he kept turning round to see the back of his jacket; but nevertheless he was wonderfully sweet.
Little Lily was charming in her naive wonder at everything around, and it was difficult to repress a smile when, having swallowed the bread and wine, she said in English, 'More, please!'
At home also all went well, only at lunch Grisha began whistling and  what was still worse  would not obey the governess and had to go without his pudding.
Dolly would not have sanctioned any punishment on such a day had she been present, but she was obliged to support the governess and so confirmed the sentence that Grisha was not to have pudding.
Grisha cried and said he was being punished although it was Nikolenka that had whistled, and that he was not crying about the pudding (he didn't mind that!) but because of the injustice.
This was too sad, and Dolly decided to speak to the governess and get her to forgive Grisha, and went off to find her.
But as she was passing through the dancing-room she saw a scene which filled her heart with such joy that tears came to her eyes and she pardoned the little culprit herself.
On the plea of giving her dolls some dinner she had obtained leave from the governess to take her plateful of pudding to the nursery, but had brought it to her brother instead.
Still crying over the injustice done him, he ate the pudding, muttering between sobs: 'Eat some yourself... let us both eat... together!'
Tanya, affected first by pity for Grisha and then by the consciousness of her own virtuous action, also had tears in her eyes, but did not decline to eat her share of the pudding.
When they saw their mother they were frightened, but glancing at her face they knew they were acting rightly and, with their mouths full of pudding, began to laugh and wipe their smiling lips with their hands, smearing their beaming faces with tears and jam.
Grisha!' cried their mother, trying to save the frock, but smiling a blissful, rapturous smile.
The new clothes were taken off, the little girls had their overalls and the boys their old jackets, and orders were given to harness (to the steward's chagrin) his Brownie again, to take the whole family mushroom-hunting, and later to the bathing-house.
Previously Miss Hull used to find one and point it out to her; but this time Lily herself found a fine big one and there was a general shout of delight: 'Lily has found a mushroom!'
Terenty the coachman tied to a tree the horses, that were swishing their tails to drive away the flies, stretched himself full length in the shade, pressing down the high grass, and smoked his pipe, while from the bathing-house came the sound of the incessant merry squealing of the children.
To hold in her hands all those plump little legs, to draw on their stockings, to take the naked little bodies in her arms and dip them in the water, to hear them shrieking now with fear and now with delight, and to see her cherubs gasping and splashing, with their frightened yet merry eyes, was a great joy.
Matrena Filimonovna called to one of these to ask her to dry a bath-sheet and a chemise that had fallen into the water, and Dolly entered into conversation with them.
The peasant women, who had begun by laughing behind their hands without comprehending her questions, soon became bolder and more talkative, and at once captivated Dolly by their frank admiration of her children.
'Just look at the little beauty, as white as sugar!' said one, gazing admiringly at Tanya and stroking her head. 'But she's thin.'
'Yes, she's been ill.'
'Why, you seem to have been bathing that one too!' said the other woman, looking at the baby.
'No, she is only three months old,' Dolly answered proudly.
'I had four; two are left, a boy and a girl.
I weaned her in the spring.'
'How old is she?'
'In her second year.'
'Why did you nurse her so long?'
Dolly did not want to part from the peasant women; their conversation pleased her so much because their interests were exactly similar to hers.
What pleased Dolly most was the women's evident admiration for the great number of children she had, and their loveliness.
The women amused her and offended the English governess, who noticed that she was the object of their laughter, which she did not understand.
One of the young women was watching the governess, who was dressing after all the others, and seeing her put on a third petticoat could not refrain from remarking: 'Look at her! She's wrapping herself up and wrapping herself up, and hasn't got enough round her yet!' and the women burst out laughing.
SURROUNDED BY HER CHILDREN, all freshly bathed and with heads still damp, Dolly with a kerchief tied round her own head was nearing home when the coachman said: 'There's a gentleman coming  I think it's the Pokrovsk squire.'
She was always glad to see him, but on this day was more pleased than ever because he would now see her in all her glory.
No one could understand the dignity of her position better than Levin.
On seeing her he found himself confronted by just such a picture of family life as his fancy painted.
'You are like a hen with her chickens, Darya Alexandrovna!'
'Oh, I'm so glad!' said she, holding out her hand.
'Yes, he wrote that you had moved here, and he thought I might be of some use to you,' replied Levin, and having said this grew confused. Without finishing what he was going to say he continued walking beside the trap, breaking off twigs from the lime trees and biting them.
He was confused because he imagined that Dolly might not like to accept the help of a stranger in matters that ought to be attended to by her husband.
She really did not like the way Oblonsky had of forcing his family affairs upon strangers, and knew at once that Levin understood this.
It was for his quick perception and delicacy of feeling that Dolly liked him.
'Oh no!' said Dolly. 'At first it was inconvenient, but now everything is quite comfortable, thanks to my old nurse,' she said, indicating the nurse, who, aware that she was being mentioned, looked at Levin with a bright and friendly smile.
She knew him, knew that he would be a good match for the young lady, and hoped the affair would come off.
'Won't you sit down, sir? We'll move closer together,' she said to Levin.
Pretence about anything sometimes deceives the wisest and shrewdest man, but, however cunningly it is hidden, a child of the meanest capacity feels it and is repelled by it.
Whatever Levin's defects may have been, there was not a trace of pretence about him; therefore the children evinced toward him the same friendliness that they saw in their mother's face.
The two eldest, responding to his invitation, at once jumped out to him and ran with him as they would have done with their nurse, Miss Hull, or their mother.
Lily wanted to go too, and her mother handed her to him; he put her on his shoulder and ran on.
Don't be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna! There's no fear of my hurting or dropping her,' said he, smiling brightly at the mother.
And as she looked at his easy, strong, considerate, careful and ultra-cautious movements, the mother lost her fears and looked at them with a smile of approval.
Here in the country among the children, and in the company of Dolly whom he found very congenial, Levin's spirits rose to that childlike merriment Dolly liked so much in him.
He ran about with the children, taught them gymnastics, amused Miss Hull by his broken English and talked to Dolly about his rural occupations.
'Really?' said he, flushing up; and to change the subject he at once added: 'Well, then, shall I send you two cows?
While saying all that, he was passionately longing and yet dreading to hear every particular concerning Kitty.
He feared that the peace of mind he had acquired with so much effort might be destroyed.
Having with Matrena Filimonovna's help got her household into working order, she did not care to make any change; besides, she had no confidence in Levin's knowledge of farming.
Arguments about cows being milk-producing machines did not commend themselves to her, for she imagined that such arguments were calculated only to interfere with farming.
All these matters appeared much simpler to her: all that was necessary, as Matrena Filimonovna said, was to give Spotty and Whiteflank more food and drink, and to see that the cook did not take the kitchen refuse to the laundress for her cow.
But arguments about cereal and grass feeding were questionable and vague and, above all, she was anxious to talk about Kitty.
'And her health!
Is she better?' asked Levin anxiously.
'Yes, thank God! she has quite recovered.
I never believed that she had lung trouble.'
'Oh, I am so glad!' said Levin, and Dolly thought she saw something pathetic and helpless in his face as he said it, and then silently looked at her.
'Tell me, Constantine Dmitrich,' said Dolly with her kind though slightly ironical smile, 'why are you angry with Kitty?'
'Darya Alexandrovna,' said he, blushing to the roots of his hair, 'I am surprised that one so kind as you are should not feel what the reason was.
'You know I proposed and was rejected,' muttered Levin, and the tenderness he had a moment ago felt for Kitty was changed into a feeling of anger at the insult.
'All I knew was that something had happened that tormented her dreadfully, and she asked me never to speak about it.
And since she has not told me, she won't have told anybody...
'Do you know,' said Dolly, 'I am terribly, terribly sorry for her!
'But for her, poor child, I am terribly, terribly sorry.
'Well, Darya Alexandrovna, please excuse me!' he said rising. 'Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna; au revoir.'
'No, wait a bit,' she answered, holding him by the sleeve. 'Wait a bit.
'Please, please don't let us talk about it!' said he, sitting down again, conscious as he did so that a hope which he had thought dead and buried was waking and stirring within him.
'If I did not care for you,' Dolly went on, the tears rising to her eyes, 'if I did not know you as well as I do...'
You always know for certain whom you love; but a young girl in a state of suspense, with her feminine, maidenly delicacy, a girl who only knows you men from a distance and is obliged to take everything on trust  such a girl may and does sometimes feel that she does not know what to say.'
'Yes, if her heart does not tell her...'
'Oh, no! The heart does tell her; but just imagine: you men, having views on a girl, come to the house, get to know her, observe her and bide your time, and when you are quite certain that you love her you propose...'
But a girl is not asked.
She is expected to choose for herself, yet she has no choice; she can only say "Yes" or "No."-'
'Yes, a choice between me and Vronsky,' thought Levin, and the dead hope that had begun to revive in his soul died again and only weighed painfully on his heart.
'Darya Alexandrovna,' said he, 'in that way one may choose a dress, or... purchases... anything... but not love.
'Oh, that pride, that pride!' said Dolly, speaking as if she despised him for the meanness of his feelings compared to those which only women know. 'When you proposed to Kitty she was just in that state when it was impossible for her to give an answer: she was undecided  undecided between you and Vronsky; she saw him every day, you she had not seen for a long time.
I admit that had she been older...
I, for instance, could not have been undecided in her place.
To me he was always repulsive, and so he has proved in the end.'
'Darya Alexandrovna,' he replied drily, 'I value your confidence in me, but think you are mistaken.
I do not say she loves you; I only wished to tell you that her refusal proves nothing.'
It is just as if you had lost a child, and they kept on telling you: "Now he would have been so and so, and might be living and you rejoicing in him, but he is dead, dead, dead...!"-'
'How funny you are!' said Dolly, regarding Levin's agitation with a sad yet mocking smile. 'Yes, I understand it more and more,' she added meditatively.
Of course I will not avoid her, but whenever I can I will try to save her the unpleasantness of meeting me.'
'You are very, very funny!' Dolly repeated, looking tenderly into his face.
Let it be as if nothing had been said about it.' 'What have you come for, Tanya?' said Dolly in French to her little girl, who had just come in.
The little girl had forgotten the French for spade, so her mother told her and went on to say, still in French, where she would find the spade.
Nothing in Dolly's house, or about her children seemed half as charming as before.
'Why does she talk French with the children?' he thought.
Teach them French and deprive them of sincerity,' thought he, not knowing that Dolly had considered the point over and over again and had decided that even to the detriment of their sincerity the children had to be taught French:
So Levin stayed to tea, though his bright spirits had quite vanished and he felt ill at ease.
After tea he went out to tell his coachman to harness and when he returned he found Dolly excited, a worried look on her face and tears in her eyes.
Dolly, hearing their screams, ran up to the nursery and found them in a dreadful state. Tanya was holding Grisha by the hair, and he, his face distorted with anger, was hitting her at random with his fists.
A shadow seemed to have fallen on her life; she recognized that these children, of whom she had been so proud, were not only quite ordinary but even bad and ill-bred children, with coarse animal inclinations  in fact, vicious children. She could think and speak of nothing else, and yet could not tell Levin her trouble.
Levin saw that she was unhappy, and tried to comfort her by saying that it did not prove that anything was wrong with them, that all children fought; but as he spoke he thought to himself: 'No, I'll not humbug my children and won't speak French with them. But I shan't have children like these.
He said good-bye and left, and she did not try to detain him any longer.
The chief income from his sister's estate was derived from the meadows, which were flooded every spring.
When Levin took over the management of the estate he looked into the matter, and, concluding that the grass was worth more, fixed the price at eight roubles.
Then he went there himself and arranged to have the harvest gathered in partly by hired labourers and partly by peasants paid in kind.
But this year the peasants had agreed to get the harvest in and take one-third of all the hay in payment. Now the Elder had come to inform Levin that the hay was all made and that for fear of rain he had asked the steward to come, and in his presence had apportioned the hay and had already stacked eleven stacks of the landlord's share.
From the Elder's vague replies to Levin's questions as to how much hay the largest meadow had yielded, from his haste to apportion the hay without waiting for permission, and from the general tone of the peasant, Levin knew that there was something not quite square about the apportionment, and decided to go and investigate the matter himself.
Levin arrived at his sister's village at noon and left his horse with a friendly old peasant, the husband of his brother's nurse. Wishing to hear particulars of the hay harvest from this old man, Levin went to speak to him in his apiary.
Parmenich, a loquacious, handsome old man, welcomed Levin joyfully, showed him over his homestead, and told him all about the swarming of his bees that year; but to Levin's questions about the hay-harvest he gave vague and reluctant answers.
In spite of the Elder's explanations that the hay had been loose, but had settled down in the stacks, and his swearing that all had been done in a 'godly way,' Levin insisted that the hay had been apportioned without his order and that he would not accept the stacks as containing fifty loads each.
See them picking it up, like ducklings picking up the food you've thrown to them!' he added, pointing to where the hay was being loaded on the carts. 'They've carted a good half since dinner time...
Is that the last?' he shouted to a lad who was driving past, standing on the front of a cart and flicking the ends of his hempen reins.
'The last one, father,' shouted the lad, reining in the horse and smilingly turning to a rosy young woman who, also smiling, sat inside the cart; then he drove on again.
Your son?' asked Levin.
'My youngest,' replied the old man with a smile of affection.
All the first year he didn't understand anything; and we chaffed him,' answered the old man. 'Well, this is hay!
Regular tea!' said he again, in order to change the subject.
Levin looked more attentively at Vanka Parmenich and his wife.
Vanka stood inside the cart patting and stamping down evenly in the cart the enormous bales of hay which his young wife first passed to him in armfuls and then pitched up on the fork.
The young woman was working with ease, cheerfulness and skill.
The fork could not at once penetrate the broad-bladed compressed hay, so she first loosened it with the prongs, then with a quick and springy movement, putting all the weight of her body on the fork, quickly straightened her red-girdled figure and stood erect, her full bosom thrown forward beneath the pinafore, and turning the fork dexterously, she pitched the hay high up into the cart.
Vanka, with evident desire to save her every moment of unnecessary exertion, hurriedly caught the hay in his outspread arms and smoothed it evenly in the cart.
When she had lifted the remaining hay to him with a rake, she shook the chaff from her neck, straightened the kerchief that had slipped from her forehead, which showed white where the sun had not reached it, and crawled under the cart to help rope up.
Vanka showed her how to do this, and burst out laughing at something she said.
His wife threw her rake on top of the load, and swinging her arms went with vigorous steps to join the other women who had gathered in a circle.
Having come out upon the road, Vanka took his place in the line of carts.
The singing women were drawing nearer to Levin and he felt as if a thundercloud of merriment were approaching.
The cloud moved past, enveloping him and the haycock upon which he sat, and the other haycocks, the carts, the whole of the meadow, and the distant fields.
Levin envied them their healthy gaiety and felt a wish to take part in that expression of the joy of living; but he could do nothing except lie and look and listen.
When the company and their songs vanished out of sight and hearing, an oppressive feeling of discontent with his own lonely lot, his physical idleness and his hostility to the world overcame Levin.
Some of those very peasants who had disputed with him about the hay  whom either he had wronged or who had tried to cheat him  those very peasants had bowed pleasantly to him, evidently not harbouring, and unable to harbour, any ill-will toward him, being not only unrepentant but even forgetful that they had been trying to cheat him.
Levin had often admired that kind of life, had often envied the folk who lived it; but that day, especially after what he had seen for the first time of the relations between Vanka Parmenich and his young wife, it struck him that it depended on himself to change his wearisome, idle, and artificial personal life for that pure, delightful life of common toil.
The old man who had been sitting beside him had long since gone home.
Awaking to reality Levin rose from his haycock, and glancing up at the stars realized that the night was nearly over.
How shall I do it?' he asked himself, trying to find expression for what he had been thinking and the feelings he had lived through in that short night.
All his ideas and feelings separated themselves into three different lines of thought.
The first was how to renounce his old life and discard his quite useless education.
The second was concerned with his notion of the life he now wished to lead.
He was distinctly conscious of the simplicity, purity, and rightness of that life, and was convinced that in it he would find satisfaction, peace, and dignity, the absence of which was so painful to him.
But the third thought was the question of how to make the change from his present life to that other one.
And here no clear idea presented itself to his mind.
Should he have a wife?
Should he have work and the necessity to work?
Should he leave Pokrovsk, buy land, join a peasant commune, marry a peasant girl?'
How am I to do it?' he again asked himself., and could find no reply. 'However, I have not slept all night and can't render a clear account of myself now,' he thought, 'but I'll clear it up later.
'How beautiful!' he thought, looking up at a strange mother-of-pearl coloured shell formed of fleecy clouds, in the centre of the sky just over his head. 'How lovely everything is, this lovely night!
Leaving the meadow, he went down the high road toward the village.
There is generally a period of gloom just before daybreak and the complete triumph of light over darkness. Shivering with cold Levin walked rapidly with his eyes fixed on the ground.
'What's that? Who can it be coming?' thought he, hearing the tinkling of bells and raising his head.
At a distance of forty paces along the road on which he was walking he saw a coach with four horses abreast and luggage on top approaching him.
That was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who might be inside he glanced in at the window absent-mindedly.
In one corner an elderly woman was dozing; and close to the window sat a young girl who had just wakened and was holding the ribbons of her white nightcap with both hands.
Bright and thoughtful, full of that complicated refinement of a life to which Levin was a stranger, she looked across him at the glow of dawn.
At the very moment when this vision was about to disappear, her candid eyes fell on him.
She recognized him and joyful surprise lit up her face.
He guessed that she was on her way from the station to her sister's house at Ergushevo.
All that had so disturbed Levin during the sleepless night and all his resolutions vanished suddenly.
He recalled with disgust his thoughts of marrying a peasant girl.
The barking of dogs proved that the coach was passing through the village, and only the empty fields, the village before him, and he himself walking solitary on the deserted road, were left.
He looked up at the sky, hoping to find there the shell he had been admiring, which had typified for him the reflections and feelings of the night.
There in the unfathomable height a mystic change was going on and he could see no sign of anything like a shell; but a large cover of gradually diminishing fleecy cloudlets was spreading over half the sky, which had turned blue and grown brighter.
It answered his questioning look with the same tenderness and the same remoteness.
'No,' said he to himself. 'Beautiful as is that life of simplicity and toil, I cannot turn to it.
I love her!'
NONE BUT THOSE WHO KNEW KARENIN most intimately knew that this apparently cold and sober-minded man had one weakness, quite inconsistent with the general trend of his character. Karenin could not with equanimity hear or see a child or a woman weeping.
The chief of his staff and his secretary knew this and warned women who came with petitions that they should on no account give way to tears if they did not want to spoil their case.
Kindly go away!' he would shout on these occasions.
When Anna on their way home from the races announced to him what her relations with Vronsky were and immediately hid her face in her hands and began crying, Karenin, despite his indignation with her, was as usual overcome by that mental perturbation.
Being aware of this and of the fact that any expression he could at that moment find for his feelings would be incompatible with the situation, he tried to conceal all signs of life within himself and neither moved nor looked at her.
That was the cause of the strange deathlike look on his face which had so struck Anna.
When they reached home he helped her out of the carriage and took leave of her with his usual courtesy, uttering noncommittal words; he said he would let her know his decision next day.
His wife's words, confirming as they did his worst suspicions, had given Karenin a cruel pain in his heart.
This pain was rendered more acute by physical pity for her, evoked by her tears.
But when alone in the carriage, to his surprise and joy he felt completely relieved of that pity and of the suspicions and jealousy that had lately so tormented him. He felt like a man who has just had a tooth drawn which has been hurting him a long time.
After terrible pain and a sensation as if something enormous, bigger than his whole head, were being pulled out of his jaw, he feels, scarcely believing in his happiness, that the thing which has so long been poisoning his life and engrossing his attention no longer exists, and that it is possible again to live, think, and be interested in other things.
What Karenin experienced was a feeling of this kind: it had been a strange and terrible pain, but it was past, and he felt he could again live, and think of other things beside his wife.
'Without honour, without heart, without religion; a depraved woman!
I knew it and could see it all along, though I tried out of pity for her to deceive myself,' thought he. And it really seemed to him that he had always seen it.
He recalled all the details of their past life, and details which he had not previously considered wrong now proved to him clearly that she had always been depraved. 'I made a mistake when I bound up my life with hers, but in my mistake there was nothing blameworthy, therefore I ought not to be unhappy.
It is not I who am guilty,' he said to himself, 'but it is she.
What would happen to her and to her son, toward whom his feelings had changed as they had toward her, no longer occupied his mind.
The one thing that preoccupied him was the question of how he could best divest himself of the mud with which she in her fall had bespattered him: of how to do it in the way which would be most decent, most convenient for him, and consequently fairest, and how he should continue his active, honest, and useful career.
'I ought not to be unhappy because a despicable woman has committed a crime, but I must find the best way out of this painful situation in which she has placed me. And find it I will,' said he to himself, frowning more and more.
Semenov, Chagin, Sigonin :..' he passed them in review. 'It's true a kind of unreasonable ridicule falls on these men, but I never could see it in any other light than as a misfortune, and felt nothing but sympathy,' Karenin reflected, though it was not true: he had never felt any sympathy of the kind, and the more cases he had come across of husbands being betrayed by their wives the better the opinion he had had of himself.
The only question is, how best to face the situation.' And he began mentally reviewing the courses pursued by other men in similar positions.
In his youth Karenin had been particularly attracted by the idea of duelling, just because he was physically a timid man and was quite aware of it.
This horror had in his youth often induced him to take mental measure of his strength, in case he should ever be confronted by a situation in which it would be necessary to face danger.
Since, however, he had achieved success and gained a firm position in the world he had long forgotten that feeling; but the old habit now revived and claimed its own, and the fear of being a coward was again so strong that he considered this point a long time and flattered his vanity with the idea of a duel, though he knew beforehand that he would on no account fight one.
Supposing I challenged him...' continued Karenin; and vividly picturing to himself the night he would spend after the challenge, and the sensation of having a pistol pointed at him, he shuddered and realized that he would never do it. 'Supposing,' he went on, 'they showed me how to do it, placed me, and I pulled the trigger...'
He closed his eyes... 'and it turned out that I had killed him...' and he shook his head to drive away the stupid thought. 'What sense is there in killing a man in order to define one's relations with a guilty wife and a son?
Nevertheless, I shall have to decide what to do with her.
Then I, an innocent man, should be the victim. That would be still more senseless.
This would happen: I, knowing beforehand that matters would never be allowed to reach a dangerous point, should have challenged a man in order to cover myself with false glamour.
Having considered and rejected the idea of a duel, Karenin turned his thoughts to divorce, the next expedient of which some of the wronged husbands he remembered had availed themselves.
Going over all the cases of divorce he knew  there were very many, and in the highest Society, with which he was well acquainted  Karenin could not recall one in which the purpose of the divorce was the one he had in view.
Karenin saw that in his own case it would be impossible to obtain a legal divorce  that is, a divorce in which the guilty wife would be simply cast off.
He knew that in their complex conditions of life it would not be possible to obtain those coarse proofs of a wife's infidelity which the law demanded; he knew that in that life there was a certain convention of refinement which would not allow him to bring forward such proofs, had they existed, because such an action would make him sink even lower than she in public opinion.
To attempt a divorce could only lead to a lawsuit and a scandal which would give his enemies great opportunity for calumny, and would lower his high position in Society.
The chief object of his life, the settling of conditions with the least possible amount of disturbance, could not be furthered by divorce.
Besides, it was evident that as a consequence of divorce the wife would break off relations with her husband and unite with her lover.
In Karenin's soul, however, despite the complete and contemptuous indifference he thought he felt for his wife, there was one feeling left with regard to her: an objection to her being in a position to unite unhindered with Vronsky, so making her crime advantageous to her.
The very thought of it irritated him to such an extent that he groaned with inner pain, rose, and changed his place in the carriage and for a long while after that he sat wrapping his fluffy rug round his bony, easily-chilled legs.
'Besides a formal divorce, it would be possible to act as Karibanov, Paskudin, and that good-natured Dram did, and just separate,' he resumed when he had grown calm again; but this measure would have all the inconvenience of a divorce-scandal, and would throw his wife into Vronsky's arms just in the same way. 'No, it is impossible, impossible!' he said aloud, again wrapping the rug round his legs, 'I cannot be unhappy, but she and he must not be happy.'
The jealousy that had tormented him during the period of uncertainty had left him when his wife's words had with great pain drawn that aching tooth. But another feeling had now taken the place of the jealousy: it was a wish that his wife's guilt should meet with retribution.
He did not acknowledge it to himself, but in the depths of his soul he wished her to suffer for impairing his peace of mind and his honour. And having reviewed the possibilities of a duel, of divorce, and of separation, and having again rejected them, Karenin came to the conclusion that there was only one course to be followed: to keep her with him, hiding from the world what had happened, and taking all necessary steps to put a stop to her love-affair, and above all (though he did not confess this to himself to punish her.
'I must inform her of my decision, that after considering the painful situation in which she has placed her family, I think that an external status quo would be better for both parties than any other expedient, and that I am prepared to keep to that on the strict understanding on her part that she will obey my will and break off relations with her lover.' In confirmation of this decision, after it had already been reached, another powerful argument occurred to Karenin.
'It is only by this course that I can conform with religion,' said he to himself. 'It is the only way that makes it possible for me not to disown my guilty wife and to give her a chance of repenting, and even, painful as it will be, to devote part of my powers to her redemption.'
It was pleasant to think that no one would have a right to say that in such an important crisis in his life he had not acted in accordance with that religion whose banner he had always held aloft amid general coldness and indifference. Proceeding to consider further details, Karenin could not even see why his relations with his wife should not remain almost the same as before.
He could of course never again revive his respect for her; but there was no occasion for him to spoil his own life and to suffer just because she had proved a bad and unfaithful wife. 'Yes, time goes on; and time, which cures everything, will restore the old conditions,' said Karenin to himself.
BY THE TIME HE REACHED PETERSBURG Karenin had not only resolved to keep to his decision, but had mentally composed a letter to his wife.
On entering the hall of his house he glanced at the letters and papers which had been sent from the Ministry and ordered them to be brought into his study.
'Tell him to unharness; and no one is to be admitted,' he said in answer to the hall-porter's inquiry, accentuating with a certain pleasure the word admitted. It was a sign that he was in good spirits.
He paced twice up and down his study and then halted at the gigantic writing-table, on which his valet had already lit six candles. Cracking his fingers, he sat down and arranged his writing materials.
With his elbow on the table and his head bent to one side he sat and thought for a minute, and then wrote without an instant's pause.
He did not begin by addressing her, and wrote in French, using the plural pronoun you, which in French does not sound as cold and distant as it does in Russian. 'During our last conversation I expressed my intention of communicating my decision with reference to the subject of that conversation.
This is unavoidable for my sake, for yours, and for that of our son.
If not, you can yourself foresee what awaits you and your son.
Above all it provided a golden bridge for her to return by.
Having folded the letter, smoothed it out with a massive ivory paper-knife, and put it and the money in an envelope  with the pleasure that the use of his well-arranged writing appliances always caused him  he rang.
'Give this to the messenger, and tell him to take it to the country, to Anna Arkadyevna, to-morrow,' he said, and got up.
Karenin assented, and, toying with his paper-knife, went to his arm-chair, beside which a lamp was burning and a French book about the Eugubine Tables was lying ready.
After looking at the portrait for about a minute he shuddered and his lips trembled and made a sound like 'brr' as he turned away. He sat down hurriedly and opened his book.
He tried to read but could not awaken in himself the lively interest he had felt for the Eugubine Tables.
His eyes were on the book but he was thinking about something else.
He was not thinking of his wife but of a complication that had recently arisen in his official activity and at present constituted the chief interest of his work.
He felt that he now saw more deeply than ever into that complication, and that a capital idea (he might say that without flattering himself) had occurred to him, which would disentangle the whole business, raise him in his official career, upset his enemies, and therefore be of the greatest value to the State.
As soon as the footman, who had brought in the tea, had left the room, Karenin rose and went to the writing-table. Drawing toward himself the portfolio of current affairs, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he took a pencil from the stand and became absorbed in reading some intricate papers he had sent for, relating to the impending complication.
The complication was this: Karenin's official peculiarity, his characteristic trait (every successful official has his special trait), which together with his determined ambition, self-restraint, honesty, and self-confidence, had made him successful, consisted in a contempt for red-tape, a curtailment of correspondence, economy, and (as far as possible) a direct relation with real facts.
When Karenin had first taken up his present post he had at once realized this and had wished to stop it; but, till he felt himself firmly seated, he knew that it would not be wise to do so as too many interests were involved. Afterwards, being occupied with other matters, he had simply forgotten the business.
Karenin was acquainted with that family and gave away one of the daughters at her marriage.)
But since the gauntlet had been thrown down, he would take it up boldly and would demand the appointment of a special Committee to investigate and report upon the work of the Committee of Irrigation in the Zaraysk Province, but at the same time he would not yield an inch to those gentlemen who had raised the question.
A flush of animation suffused Karenin's face as he rapidly wrote out a summary of these ideas.
Having covered a sheet of foolscap he rose, rang, and sent off a note to his Chief Secretary, asking for some necessary references that had to be looked up.
After walking up and down the room he again looked at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously.
He once more took up the book on the Eugubine Tables and, having reawakened an interest in them, at eleven o'clock went to bed, and when as he lay there he remembered what had occurred with his wife, it no longer appeared to him in such gloomy colours.
THOUGH ANNA HAD ANGRILY and obstinately contradicted Vronsky when he said that her position was an impossible one, in the depths of her soul she felt that the situation was a false one and wished with all her heart to put an end to it.
On her way back from the races, in a moment of excitement in spite of the pain it caused her  she had told her husband everything, and she was glad she had done so.
After he left her, she told herself that she was glad she had told him, that now everything would be definite  at any rate, the falsehood and deception would no longer exist.
She thought it quite certain that her position would be cleared up for good.
The pain she had inflicted on herself and her husband would now, she thought, be compensated for by the fact that the matter would be settled.
She saw Vronsky that same evening, but did not tell him what had passed between her and her husband, though he would have to be told before her position could be settled.
When she woke up in the morning the first thing that came into her mind was what she had said to her husband, and it now appeared so terrible that she could not understand how she had been able to utter such strange and coarse words and could not imagine what result they would have.
Just as he was going away I wished to call him back and tell him, but changed my mind, because my not having done so at first would have appeared strange.
Why did I not tell him?' And in answer to this question a hot blush of shame spread all over her face.
She knew what had stopped her, knew she had been ashamed.
She dreaded the disgrace, which she had not considered before.
When she thought of what her husband would do, the most terrible fancies came into her head.
She fancied that presently the steward would come and turn her out of the house and that her disgrace would be proclaimed to all the world.
She asked herself where she would go when turned out, and found no answer.
When she thought about Vronsky, she imagined that he did not love her, that he was beginning to find her a burden, and that she could not offer herself to him; and in consequence she felt hostile toward him.
She felt as if the words she had used to her husband, which she kept repeating in imagination, had been said by her to every one and that every one had heard them.
She had not the courage to look into the eyes of the people she lived with. She could not make up her mind to call her maid, and still less to go down and face her son and his governess.
The maid, who had long been listening at the door, at last came in of her own accord.
Anna looked inquiringly into her eyes and blushed with alarm.
The maid begged pardon and said she thought she had heard the bell.
The note was from Betsy, who reminded her that she (Betsy) was that day expecting Lisa Merkalova and the Baroness Stolz, with their admirers Kaluzhsky and old Stremov, to a game of croquet. 'Do come, if only to study manners and customs.
I expect you,' she wrote in conclusion.
Anna read the note and sighed deeply. 'I don't want anything, anything at all,' she said to Annushka, who was moving the bottles and brushes on the dressing table.
She remained in the same position with head and arms drooping. Every now and then her whole body shuddered as she tried to make some movement or to say something and then became rigid again.
My God!' she kept repeating, but neither the word God or my had any meaning for her.
The thought of seeking comfort in religion, though she had never doubted the truth of the religion in which she had been brought up, was as foreign to her as asking Karenin for help would have been.
She knew that she could find no help in religion unless she was prepared to give up that which alone gave a meaning to her life.
She was not only disturbed, but was beginning to be afraid of a new mental condition such as she had never before experienced.
She felt as if everything was being doubled in her soul, just as objects appear doubled to weary eyes.
Sometimes she could not tell what she feared and what she desired.
Whether she feared and desired what had been, or what would be, and what it was she desired she did not know.
'Oh, dear! What am I doing!' she said to herself suddenly, feeling pain in both sides of her head.
When she came to her senses she found that she was clutching her hair and pressing her temples with both hands.
Anna asked, reviving suddenly, as for the first time that morning she remembered the existence of her son.
'It seems he has got into trouble,' answered Annushka with a smile.
'You had some peaches in the corner room; it seems he has eaten one of them on the quiet.'
The thought of her son at once took Anna out of the hopeless condition she had been in.
She remembered that partly sincere but greatly exaggerated role of a mother living for her son which she had assumed during the last five years; and felt with joy that in the position in which she found herself she had still one stay, independent of her relations with her husband and Vronsky.
That stay was her son.
Whatever position she might accept she could not give up her son.
Let her husband disgrace her, let Vronsky grow cold toward her and continue to live his own independent life (again she thought of him with bitterness and reproach), she could not give up her son: She had an aim in life and must act so as to ensure her position toward her son, while they had not yet taken him from her.
The thought of decided action concerned with her son  of going away somewhere with him  made her feel calmer.
She dressed quickly and with determined steps entered the drawing-room, where Serezha and his governess were waiting breakfast for her as usual.
Serezha, dressed all in white, was standing by a table under a looking-glass, and arranging some flowers he had brought, with bent head and back, showing that strained attention familiar to her in which he resembled his father.
Serezha exclaimed in a piercing voice, as he often did, 'Ah! Mama!' and stopped, hesitating whether to go and bid her good-morning and leave the flowers, or to finish the crown he was making and take it to her.
The governess began to give a long and detailed account of his misconduct, but Anna did not listen to her. She was wondering whether to take her also or not.
'Yes, that was very wrong,' said Anna, and putting her hand on his shoulder she looked at him not with a severe but with a timid expression which confused and gladdened the boy. She kissed him.
I... I...' he said, trying to find out from her face what he was to expect for eating the peach.
'Serezha,' she said as soon as the governess had gone away, 'it was wrong, but you won't do it again?... You love me?'
She felt the tears coming into her eyes.
'As if I could help loving him,' she said to herself, looking into his frightened and yet happy face. 'And is it possible that he would take sides with his father to torment me?'
The tears were already streaming down her cheeks, and in order to hide them she jumped up abruptly and went out on to the verandah.
She shivered with cold, and with the terror that seized her with new power out in the open air.
'Go to Mariette,' she said to Serezha, who had come out after her, and she began pacing up and down the straw matting of the verandah. 'Is it possible that they could not forgive me or understand that it could not have been otherwise?' she asked herself.
She stopped and looked at the crown of an aspen trembling in the wind, with its clean-washed leaves glistening brilliantly in the cold sunshine, and she felt that they would not forgive, that everybody would now be as pitiless toward her as the sky and the trees, and again she felt that duality in her soul. 'No, no, I must not think,' she said to herself; 'I must get ready to go.
But first I must write to both of them.' She quickly went to her sitting-room and wrote to her husband.
I am going away and taking my son.
I do not know the law and therefore I do not know to which of his parents a son must be left, but I am taking him because I cannot live without him.
Up to that point she wrote quickly and naturally, but the appeal to his generosity, in which she did not believe, and the necessity of finishing the letter with something moving, stopped her...
'No, I will say nothing,' she thought, tore up the letter, re-wrote it, omitting the reference to his generosity, and sealed it. The other letter she meant to write was to Vronsky.
'I have informed my husband,' she began, and was unable to write any more. It seemed so coarse and unwomanly.
'Besides, what can I write to him?' she asked herself; and again she blushed with shame.
She thought of his calmness, and a feeling of vexation with him made her tear the paper to pieces, with the one sentence written on it. 'There is no need to write anything,' she thought, closed her blotting-book, went upstairs to tell the governess and the servants that she was going to Moscow that evening, and then began packing.
Anna, who had forgotten her agitation while she was working, stood at a table in the sitting-room packing her hand-bag when Annushka drew her attention to the noise of approaching carriage wheels.
'Go and see what it is,' she said, and, calmly prepared for anything, sat down in an easy-chair and folded her hands on her knees.
A footman brought her a thick envelope addressed in her husband's handwriting.
'The messenger has been told to wait for an answer,' he said.
'All right,' she replied, and as soon as he had gone she tore open the envelope with trembling fingers.
She unfolded the letter and read the end first: 'All necessary preparations shall be made for your return. I beg you will note that I attach importance to this request of mine,' she read.
Having glanced through it, she went back and read it again from the beginning. When she had finished she felt cold, and knew that a more dreadful misfortune had befallen her than she had ever expected.
She had that morning repented of having told her husband and wished it were possible to unsay her words; and here was a letter treating her words as unsaid and giving her what she had desired; but now the letter appeared more terrible than anything she could have imagined.
'He's in the right, he's in the right!' she muttered; 'of course he always is in the right, he is a Christian, he is magnanimous!
Yes, a mean, horrid man!
They say he's a religious, moral, honest, and wise man, but they do not see what I have seen.
They do not know how for eight years he has been smothering my life, smothering everything that was alive in me, that he never once thought I was a live woman, in need of love.
They do not know how at every step he hurt me and remained self-satisfied.
Have I not tried to love him, tried to love my son when I could no longer love my husband?
If he killed me  if he had killed him,  I would have borne anything, I would have forgiven anything! But no!
'How was it I did not guess what he would do?
He will do what is consistent with his low nature.
He will be in the right, but as for me who am already disgraced he will disgrace me more and more! '-"You can yourself foresee what awaits you and your son!"-'  she repeated the words of the letter. 'That is a threat that he will take my son from me, and probably their stupid laws will permit it.
But don't I know why he said it? He does not believe in my love for my son or he despises it.
He despises that feeling of mine, but he knows that I will not give up my son, that I cannot give him up, that without my son I cannot live even with the man I love,  that if I forsook my son I should act like a horrid disreputable woman. He knows that and knows that I have not the power to do it.'
'-"Our life must go on as heretofore"-'  she recalled another sentence of the letter. 'That life was painful before, lately it has been dreadful.
And he knows it all; knows that I cannot repent of breathing, of loving, knows that nothing but lies and deception can come of this arrangement, but he wants to continue to torture me.
I know him; I know that he swims and delights in falsehood as a fish does in water. But no!
I will not give him that pleasure, come what will. I will break this web of lies in which he wishes to entangle me.
Was a woman ever as unhappy as I am?...
No, I shall break it off, break it off!' she exclaimed, jumping up and forcing back her tears.
And she went to the table to write him another note, though she knew in the depths of her soul that she would not have the strength to break anything off, nor to escape from her former position, however false and dishonest it might be.
She sat down at her writing-table, but instead of writing she folded her arms on the table and put her head on them, and began to cry, sobbing with her whole bosom heaving, as a child cries.
She wept because the hopes of clearing up and defining her position were destroyed for ever.
She felt that, insignificant as it had appeared that morning, the position she held in Society was dear to her, and that she would not have the strength to change it for the degraded position of a woman who had forsaken husband and child and formed a union with her lover; that, however much she tried, she could not become stronger than herself.
She would never be able to feel the freedom of love, but would always be a guilty woman continually threatened with exposure, deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful union with a man who was a stranger and independent of her, and with whom she could not live a united life.
She knew that it would be so, and yet it was so terrible that she could not even imagine how it would end.
And she cried, without restraint, like a punished child.
The approaching step of the footman recalled her to herself, and hiding her face from him she pretended to be writing.
'The messenger is asking for the answer,' he said.
'What can I write?' she thought. 'What can I decide alone?
And she felt again a schism in her soul, and again was frightened by the feeling; so she seized the first pretext for action that occurred to her to divert her thoughts from herself. 'I must see Alexis,' as she called Vronsky in her thoughts.
'He alone can tell me what to do. I shall go to Betsy's and perhaps shall meet him there,' quite forgetting that the evening before when she had told him she was not going to the Princess Tverskaya's, he had replied that in that case he would not go either.
She wrote to her husband: 'I have received your letter.  A.,' rang, and gave the note to the footman.
'We are not going,' she said to Annushka, who had just come in.
These considerations had made Anna reluctant to come, and it was to her refusal that the hints in Princess Tverskaya's note had referred.
Just as she arrived Vronsky's footman, who with his well-brushed whiskers looked like a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, also came up.
He stopped at the door, took off his cap, and let her pass.
Anna saw him, and only then remembered that the evening before Vronsky had said that he was not coming.
Probably he had sent a note to say so.
As she was taking off her outdoor things in the hall she heard the footman  who even pronounced his r's like a Gentleman of the Bedchamber  say: 'From the Count to the Princess,' as he delivered the note.
She felt inclined to ask where his master was; she wanted to go home and write to him to come to her house, or to go to him herself. But none of these things could be done.
She heard in front of her the bell that announced her arrival, and the Princess Tverskaya's footman was already standing half-turned toward her at an open door, waiting for her to enter the inner rooms.
'The Princess is in the garden; she will be informed in a minute.
The feelings of irresolution and indefiniteness were just the same as at home, or even worse, because she could do nothing; she could not see Vronsky but had to stay there, in this company of strangers so out of sympathy with her present mood. But she wore a costume that she knew suited her, she was not alone but surrounded by a ceremonious setting of idleness, and she felt easier than at home; she had no need to think of what to do.
When she met Betsy coming toward her in a white costume that struck Anna by its elegance, Anna smiled at her as usual.
The Princess Tverskaya came accompanied by Tushkevich and a young girl, a relation, who to the great delight of her provincial parents was spending the summer with the grand Princess.
'I have slept badly,' answered Anna, gazing at the footman, who she guessed was bringing Vronsky's note.
Won't you and Masha go and look at the croquet lawn where the grass is cut?' she said to Tushkevich.
'We can have a heart-to-heart talk over our tea. We'll have a cosy chat, won't we?' she added in English, pressing the hand with which Anna held her sunshade.
'Yes, especially as I cannot stay long. I must go to the old Countess Vrede  I promised to, ages ago,' said Anna, to whom falsehood  so alien to her by nature  had now become so simple and natural in Society that it even gave her pleasure.
Why she had said something she had not even thought of a moment before she could not have explained.
Her only reason for saying it was that since Vronsky was not coming she must secure her freedom and try to see him in some other way.
But why she had mentioned the old Lady-in-Waiting Vrede, to whom, among many other people, she owed a visit, she could not have explained; and yet as it happened she could have thought of nothing better had she tried to invent the most cunning means of seeing Vronsky.
'No, I won't let you go on any account,' said Betsy, fixing her eyes intently on Anna. 'I should be really hurt, if I were not so fond of you.
It's just as if you thought my company might compromise you! Please bring us tea in the little drawing-room,' she said to the footman, screwing up her eyes as she always did when speaking to a footman.
She took the note from him and read it. 'Alexis has failed us,' she said in French.
'He writes that he cannot come.' She spoke in a natural and matter-of-fact tone, as if it never entered her head that Vronsky had any other interest for Anna than as a croquet player.
Anna was aware that Betsy knew everything, but when she heard her talk about Vronsky she always felt a momentary conviction that Betsy knew nothing about it.
'Ah!' said Anna, in an indifferent tone as if she cared very little about it, and went on with a smile: 'How could your company compromise anyone?' This play with words, this concealment of a secret, had a great charm for Anna, as it has for all women.
'Stremov and Lisa Merkalova are the cream of the cream of Society! They are received everywhere, and I'  she put special stress on that I  'never was severe or intolerant: I simply have not the time.'
In Society he is the most amiable man I know, and a passionate croquet player.
And in spite of his ridiculous position as Lisa's old admirer, you should see how he carries it off.
While Betsy was saying this Anna saw by her bright intelligent look that she partly understood Anna's position and was devising something.
I must leave you for a minute; please close the envelope and send it,' she said from the doorway; 'I have some orders to give.'
I shall be there at six.' She closed it, and Betsy returning sent it off in her presence.
'You must love her: she dotes on you.
Yesterday she came to me at the races and was quite in despair that she had missed you.
She said that you are a real heroine for a novel, and that were she a man she would have committed a thousand follies for your sake. Stremov tells her she is committing them as it is!'
'Yes, but do tell me! I never can understand,' said Anna after a pause, in a tone that clearly proved she was not putting an idle question and that what she was asking about was more important to her than it ought to be; 'do tell me what are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, whom they call Mishka?
Betsy looked at her with smiling eyes.
'It is a new fashion,' she replied.
'Yes, but what are her relations with Kaluzhsky?'
Betsy burst into an unexpected, merry and uncontrollable peal of laughter, a thing she rarely did.
That is a question an enfant terrible might put!' and Betsy evidently tried to, but could not, control herself, and again burst out into the infectious kind of laughter peculiar to those who laugh seldom. 'You must ask them!' she uttered, while tears of laughter choked her voice.
Lisa Merkalova's husband carries her rugs after her and is always at her service.
'I don't think so,' answered Betsy, and while looking at her friend she began filling the little translucent cup with aromatic tea.
'You see,' she said, 'I am in a lucky position! I understand you and I understand Lisa.
At least she did not understand it when she was very young.
And now she knows that that role of not understanding becomes her.
Now perhaps she is purposely ingenuous,' and Betsy smiled pointedly. 'But still it becomes her.
SOUNDS OF FOOTSTEPS and a man's voice, then that of a woman followed by laughter, reached them, and the expected visitors entered the room, Sappho Stolz and a young man, shining with a superabundance of health, known as Vaska.
It was evident that he flourished on underdone beef, truffles, and Burgundy.
He came into the drawing-room behind Sappho and followed her across the room as if he were tied to her, with his glittering eye fixed on her as if he were ready to eat her.
She entered with a short, brisk step, in shoes with high French heels and shook hands with the ladies with a firm grip like a man.
Anna had never met this celebrity before, and was struck by her beauty, by the extravagant fashion of her costume, and by the boldness of her manners.
On her head the delicate golden hair (her own and others') was built up into such an erection that her head was as large as her shapely, well-developed and much-exposed bust.
At each strenuous step as she advanced, the shape of her knees and thighs was distinctly visible under her dress, and one involuntarily wondered just where, behind, under her heaped and swaying bustle, the real, graceful little body ended which was so exposed at the top and so hidden at the back and below.
Betsy hastened to introduce her to Anna.
'Just fancy! We nearly ran over two soldiers,' she began at once, winking and smiling as she threw back her train which she had jerked too much to one side.
'I was with Vaska... Oh, but you are not acquainted!' and she introduced the young man by his surname and burst into ringing laughter at her mistake in speaking of him as Vaska to a stranger.
Pay up!' he said smiling.
'Surely not now!' she said.
All right! Oh yes!' she suddenly said, addressing her hostess.
Here he is.'
The unexpected young visitor Sappho had brought with her and forgotten was nevertheless so important a personage that, in spite of his youth, both ladies rose to greet him.
He was Sappho's new admirer, and followed at her heels just like Vaska.
The character of her dark costume, as Anna at once noticed and appreciated, was perfectly suited to her style of beauty. Just to the same extent as Sappho was compact and spruce Lisa was limp and pliant.
When Betsy had spoken to Anna about her, she had said that Lisa was playing the role of an ingenuous child; but when Anna saw her she knew that this was untrue.
She was really ingenuous, and a perverted but a sweet and irresponsible woman.
It is true she had adopted the same tone as Sappho, and, as in Sappho's case, two admirers followed her as if tied to her and devoured her with their eyes; one a young and the other an old man; but in her there was something superior to her surroundings,  she had the radiance of a real diamond among false stones.
This radiance shone out of her beautiful and really unfathomable eyes.
Looking into those eyes every one felt as if they knew her perfectly, and knowing her could not help loving her. At the sight of Anna her whole face lit up with a joyful smile.
I am pleased to see you!' she said, walking up to Anna. 'Yesterday at the races I was just trying to get near you when you went away.
I was so anxious to see you, yesterday especially. Was it not dreadful?' and she gave Anna a look that seemed to reveal her whole soul.
What was there jolly about it? Do tell me how you manage not to get bored?' said she again to Anna.
'One has only to look at you to see that you are a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but who is not dull. Teach me how you do it!'
'That is the best way,' Stremov joined in. Stremov was a man of about fifty, getting grey, but still fresh looking, with a very plain though intelligent face full of character.
Lisa Merkalova was his wife's niece and he spent all his spare time with her.
On meeting Anna Karenina he, like a clever man of the world, being Karenin's enemy in the service, tried to be specially amiable to her, the wife of his foe. 'Don't do anything!' he repeated with a smile.
'That is the best way. I have always told you,' he went on, turning to Lisa Merkalova, 'that if one wishes not to be bored one must not expect to be bored, just as one must not be afraid of not falling asleep if one wishes to avoid sleeplessness.
'You are incorrigible,' said Stremov without looking at her, and again turned to Anna.
As he rarely met Anna he could not say anything to her except trivialities, but he said these trivialities, about her return from the country to Petersburg and of how fond the Countess Lydia Ivanovna was of her, in a way that expressed his whole-hearted desire to be agreeable to her, and to show her his respect and even more.
'No, please don't go!' begged Lisa Merkalova when she heard that Anna was leaving.
Stremov joined her in the entreaty.
'The contrast will be too great,' he remarked, 'if you go to see the old Countess Vrede after leaving this company here.
Besides, your visit will give her an opportunity to backbite, while here, on the contrary, you arouse the best feelings, quite opposed to backbiting.'
The flattering words of this clever man, the naive, childish sympathy which Lisa Merkalova expressed to her, all these familiar Society surroundings made her feel so tranquil, while what was lying in wait for her was so hard, that for a moment she doubted whether to remain and put off the dread moment of explanation.
But recalling what awaited her when alone at home if she took no decision, and remembering her action (the recollection of which was terrible) when she took hold of her hair with both hands, she took her leave and went away.
IN SPITE OF HIS APPARENTLY RECKLESS EXISTENCE, VRONSKY WAS a man who hated disorder.
While quite young and still in the Cadet Corps he had experienced the humiliation of a refusal when, having got into debt, he had tried to borrow money, and since then he had never again allowed himself to get into such a position.
To keep things straight he was in the habit, some five or six times a year according to circumstances, of secluding himself and clearing up all his affairs.
The morning after the races he woke late, and without having a bath or shaving he put on a linen tunic and, spreading out before him his money, his accounts, and his bills and letters, he set to work.
When Petritsky  who knew that on such occasions Vronsky was often cross  on waking saw his friend at his writing-table, he dressed quietly and went out without disturbing him.
Every one, knowing intimately all the complexities of his own circumstances, involuntarily assumes that these complexities and the difficulty of clearing them up are peculiar to his own personal condition, and never thinks that others are surrounded by similar complexities.
And not without some inward pride, nor without some justification, he reflected that any other man would long ago have got embroiled and been obliged to act badly if placed in a situation as difficult as his.
But Vronsky felt that it was necessary for him to investigate his affairs just at that time in order to keep out of trouble.
He began by first attacking his money problems, as the easiest to deal with.
Having noted down in his small handwriting on a piece of notepaper all he owed, he made up the account and found that it came to seventeen thousand and a few hundred roubles.
Having struck out the odd hundreds in order to have a round sum, counted his money and looked over his bank-book, he found that he had 1800 roubles, and there was no prospect of receiving any more before the New Year.
After reading over the list of his debts, he divided them into three classes, each of which he noted down separately.
These debts came to about 4000 roubles: 1500 for a horse and 2500 he had incurred by standing security for his young comrade Venevsky, who in Vronsky's presence had lost that sum to a card-sharper.
Vronsky had wished to pay at the time  he had the money with him  but Venevsky and Yashvin insisted that they would pay, and would not permit Vronsky, who had not even been playing, to do so.
This was all very fine, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business, his share in which was simply a verbal guarantee for Venevsky, he must have the 2500 roubles ready to throw to the sharper, and then have no more to do with him.
So that for the first part of his debt he must have 4000 roubles ready.
The remaining debts were owing to shops, hotels, and to his tailor, and there was no need to trouble about them.
So he needed 6000 roubles for immediate use, and had only 1800 roubles ready money.
To a man with an income of 100,000 roubles a year, as everybody said Vronsky had, it would seem that such debts could not cause any difficulty, but the fact was that he was far from having the 100,000 roubles.
His father's immense fortune, which alone brought in 200,000 a year, had not been divided between the brothers.
When the elder brother, having a number of debts, married the Princess Varya Chirkova, the daughter of a penniless Decembrist, Alexis gave up to his brother the income from his father's fortune, stipulating for only 25,000 roubles a year for himself.
At that time Alexis told his brother that this would suffice for him till he married, which in all probability he never would do.
And his brother, commanding one of the most expensive regiments, and newly married, could not refuse this gift.
Their mother, who had her own private fortune, allowed Alexis about 20,000 roubles a year in addition to the 25,000 agreed upon, and Alexis spent it all.
Latterly his mother, having quarrelled with him about his connection with Anna and his departure from Moscow, had stopped his allowance.
He could not ask his mother to help him out of them.
Her last letter in particular had irritated him, for it contained hints that she was willing to help him to gain success in Society and in the service, but not to help him live in a manner that scandalized all good Society.
His mother's wish to bribe him offended him to the bottom of his soul and increased his coldness toward her.
Yet he could not go back on his generous promise, although, dimly foreseeing some eventualities of his connection with Anna, he felt that it had been too lightly given and that, even though unmarried, he might need the whole hundred thousand a year.
He had only to remember his brother's wife and how that dear, excellent Varya at every opportunity showed him that she remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to realize the impossibility of withdrawing what he had given.
It was as impossible as to beat a woman, to steal, or to tell a lie.
There was only one possible and necessary way out of it, on which Vronsky decided without a moment's hesitation: to borrow ten thousand roubles from a money-lender, which he could easily do, to cut down his expenses, and to sell his racehorses.
Having decided on this, he at once wrote a note to Rolandaki, who had more than once offered to buy his horses.
Then he sent for the money-lender and the Englishman, and allotted what money he had among the different bills.
Having finished this business he wrote a cold and abrupt reply to his mother.
Then taking from his pocket-book three notes from Anna he re-read them, burnt them, and recalling a conversation he had had with her the evening before, fell into a reverie.
VRONSKY WAS PARTICULARLY FORTUNATE in that he had a code of rules which clearly defined what should and should not be done.
The code categorically determined that though the card-sharper must be paid, the tailor need not be; that one may not lie to a man, but might to a woman; that one must not deceive anyone, except a husband; that one must not forgive an insult but may insult others, and so on.
These rules might be irrational and bad but they were absolute, and in complying with them Vronsky felt at ease and could carry his head high.
Only quite lately, in reference to his relations to Anna, had he begun to feel that his code did not quite meet all circumstances, and that the future presented doubts and difficulties for which he had no guiding principle.
His present relations to her and her husband were clear and simple to him.
They were very clearly and exactly defined in the code of rules by which he was guided.
She was a respectable woman who had given him her love, and he loved her; therefore she was for him a woman worthy of as much or even more respect than a legitimate wife.
He would have let his hand be cut off before he would have allowed himself by word or hint to insult her, or fail to show her all the respect that a woman can possibly desire.
Every one might know or suspect, but no one must dare to speak about the matter, or he was prepared to silence the speaker and make him respect the non-existent honour of the woman he loved.
His relations to her husband were simplest of all.
From the moment that Anna gave him her love he considered his own right to her indefeasible.
No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but what was to be done?
But latterly new inner relations had sprung up between himself and her, which frightened him by their indefiniteness.
Only yesterday she had told him that she was pregnant, and he felt that this news and what she expected of him called for something that was not fully defined by his code of rules.
He was taken by surprise, and at the moment when she told him of her condition his heart had suggested his proposal to her to leave her husband.
He had made this proposal, but now, thinking it over, he saw clearly that it would be better to avoid that plan, and yet, while he told himself so, he feared that this might be wrong.
'When I told her to leave her husband, that meant that she should unite herself with me.
How can I take her away now that I have no money?
No doubt I could arrange that... but how could I go away with her while I am in the army?
The question of whether to leave or not to leave the army led him to another private matter  almost the chief, though the secret, interest of his life.
Ambition was the old motive of his childhood and youth, one which he did not acknowledge even to himself, but which was so strong a passion that it now struggled against his love.
His first steps in Society and in the service had been successful, but two years ago he had made a bad blunder. Wishing to show his independence and to get promotion, he had refused a post that was offered him, hoping that this refusal would enhance his value, but it turned out that he had been too bold and he was passed over.
Having then perforce to assume the role of an independent character, he played it very adroitly and cleverly, as though he had no grudge against anyone, did not feel himself at all offended, and only wished to be left in peace to enjoy himself.
In reality he had begun to feel dissatisfied about the time that he went to Moscow the year before.
He felt that the role of the independent man, who could have anything but wanted nothing, was beginning to pall, and that many people were beginning to think he could never do anything more than be an honest, good-natured fellow.
A playmate of his childhood, and his fellow-pupil at the Cadet Corps; Serpukhovskoy, who belonged to the same social circle, and who had finished the same year as himself and had been his rival in the classroom, at gymnastics, in mischief, and in ambitious dreams, had just returned from Central Asia, where he had gained two steps in official rank and had won a distinction rarely awarded to so young a General.
As soon as he reached Petersburg people began to talk about him as a rising star of the first magnitude: Of the same age as Vronsky, and his messmate, Serpukhovskoy was already a General expecting an appointment that might have an influence on State affairs; while Vronsky, though independent and brilliant and beloved by an enchanting woman, remained only a Cavalry Captain and was allowed to be as independent as he pleased. 'Of course I am not jealous and could not be jealous of Serpukhovskoy, but his promotion shows me that if one bides one's time the career of such a man as myself may be very quickly made.
Three years ago he and I were in the same position.
She herself said that she did not want to change her position; and I, having her love, cannot envy Serpukhovskoy.'
And slowly twisting his moustache he rose from the table and walked across the room.
His eyes shone with peculiar brightness and he felt that firm, calm, and joyful mood which always came when he had cleared up the situation.
Everything was clear and distinct, as after his former periodical stocktakings.
'Yes, it's done,' said Vronsky, smiling with his eyes and twirling the ends of his moustache as carefully as if, after the order he had established in his affairs, any too vigorous or rapid movement might upset it.
Vronsky looked at his comrade without answering, thinking about something else.
'Is that where the music is?' he said, listening to the familiar strains, now audible, of brass instruments playing polkas and waltzes. 'What's up?'
Having made up his mind that he was happy in his love, and having sacrificed his ambitions to it, or at any rate assumed that role, Vronsky could no longer feel envious of Serpukhovskoy nor vexed with him for not coming straight to see him on reaching the regiment.
Serpukhovskoy was a good friend and he was glad that he would see him.
In the grounds, what first met Vronsky's eyes were the soldier-singers in their white linen uniforms, standing beside a cask of vodka, then the jolly, healthy figure of the C.O. surrounded by his officers.
Having come out on the top step of the verandah, he was gesticulating and above the noise of the band (which was playing a quadrille of Offenbach's) was loudly giving orders to some soldiers who were standing somewhat apart.
After returning to the table, the Commander again came forward with a glass of champagne in his hand and announced a toast: 'To the health of our late comrade, the gallant General, Prince Serpukhovskoy!
'You are growing younger every day, Bondarenko!' he remarked to the ruddy-faced, smart-looking sergeant-major, serving for a second term, who stood just in front of him.
He had matured and had grown whiskers, but still had just as good a figure, and was just as striking  not so much for his good looks as for the delicacy and nobility of his face and bearing.
As he was descending the steps Serpukhovskoy noticed Vronsky. A smile of joy lit up his face.
He jerked his head backwards and raised his glass, welcoming Vronsky and showing by this gesture that he must first go to the sergeant-major, who was already stretching himself and puckering his lips for a kiss.
'Ah, here he is!' exclaimed the Commander, 'and Yashvin told me that you were in one of your dismal moods.'
Serpukhovskoy kissed the smart-looking sergeant-major on his moist fresh lips and, wiping his mouth on his handkerchief, stepped up to Vronsky.
'Well, I am glad!' he said, taking him apart and pressing his hand.
Excuse me!' he added, and turned to his adjutant. 'Please give orders to distribute this money equally among the men.'
He hurriedly took three one-hundred-rouble notes out of his pocket-book and blushed.
After that, feeling rather weak, he sat down on a bench in the yard and began demonstrating to Yashvin Russia's superiority to Prussia, especially in cavalry charges, and the carousal quieted down for a moment.
Serpukhovskoy went to the dressing-room to wash his hands, and found Vronsky there.
Vronsky had taken off his coat and was washing his hairy red neck under the washstand tap, rubbing it and his head with his hands.
When he had finished his ablutions Vronsky sat down beside Serpukhovskoy on a little sofa in the dressing-room and began a conversation of great interest to both of them.
'I used to hear all about you from my wife,' said Serpukhovskoy. 'I am glad you saw a good deal of her.'
He smiled because he foresaw the turn their conversation would take and was pleased.
Vronsky's opinion of him evidently gave him pleasure and he saw no reason to hide it.
Of course I may be making a mistake, but I believe I have some capacity for the career I have adopted, and that in my hands power of any kind, if I ever possess it, will be used in a better way than in the hands of many whom I know,' said he with the radiant consciousness of success. 'Therefore the nearer I am to getting it the more pleased I am.'
He is a dear child, just like this host of ours: hear him!' he added, listening to the cries of 'Hurrah!'
'And he is happy, but that would not satisfy you.'
Vronsky listened attentively, but it was not so much the meaning of Serpukhovskoy's words that interested him as his outlook on these questions, for Serpukhovskoy was already dreaming of a struggle with the powers-that-be and already had sympathies and antipathies in that sphere, whereas Vronsky's interest in the service was limited to his own squadron.
Vronsky realized, too, how powerful Serpukhovskoy might become by his undoubted capacity for reflection and comprehension, and by his intellect and gift of speech, so seldom met with in the Society in which he lived.
And, ashamed as he was of the fact, he felt jealous.
'All the same I lack the most necessary thing,' he replied.
'You say "perhaps,"-' continued Serpukhovskoy as if he had guessed Vronsky's thoughts; 'but I say, certainly.
Yes,' he said with a smile tender as a woman's, 'Give me carte blanche, leave the regiment, and I will draw you on imperceptibly.'
Serpukhovskoy rose and said, as he stood before Vronsky,
We are both of the same age; it may be that in number you have known more women than I have,' the smile of Serpukhovskoy's face and his gesture showed that Vronsky need have no fear, and that he would touch the tender spot gently and carefully. 'But I am married, and believe me, that "knowing only your wife, whom you love"  as somebody once said  "you can understand all women better than if you knew thousands."-'
Women are the chief stumbling-block in a man's career.
It is difficult to love a woman and do anything else.
'So much the worse! The more assured the position of the woman in the world, the worse it is!
'You have never loved,' said Vronsky softly, with his eyes looking straight before him and with Anna in his thoughts.
'Coming, coming!' he said, turning to a footman who had entered.
'Your man brought this from the Princess Tverskaya.'
Vronsky opened the note and his face flushed.
'My head has begun aching,' he said. 'I shall go home.'
IT WAS ALREADY PAST FIVE, and in order not to be late and not to use his own horses, which were known to everybody, Vronsky took Yashvin's hired carriage and told the coachman to drive as fast as possible.
The old four-seated hired vehicle was very roomy; he sat down in a corner, put his legs on the opposite seat, and began to think.
A vague sense of the accomplished cleaning up of his affairs, a vague memory of Serpukhovskoy's friendship for him, and the flattering thought that the latter considered him a necessary man, and above all the anticipation of the coming meeting, merged into one general feeling of joyful vitality.
This feeling was so strong that he could not help smiling.
He put down his legs, threw one of them over the other, and placing his arm across it felt its firm calf, where he had hurt it in the fall the day before, and then, throwing himself back, sighed deeply several times.
'Delightful! O delightful!' he thought.
He had often before been joyfully conscious of his body, but had never loved himself, his own body, as he did now.
It gave him pleasure to feel the slight pain in his strong leg, to be conscious of the muscles of his chest moving as he breathed.
That clear, cool August day which made Anna feel so hopeless seemed exhilarating and invigorating to him and refreshed his face and neck, which were glowing after their washing and rubbing.
The scent of brilliantine given off by his moustache seemed peculiarly pleasant in the fresh air.
All that he saw from the carriage window through the cold pure air in the pale light of the evening sky seemed as fresh, bright and vigorous as he was himself. The roofs of the houses glittered in the evening sun; the sharp outlines of the fences and corners of buildings, the figures of people and vehicles they occasionally met, the motionless verdure of the grass and trees, the fields of potatoes with their clear-cut ridge, the slanting shadows of the houses and trees, the bushes and even the potato ridges  it was all pleasant and like a landscape newly painted and varnished.
'Get on, get on!' he shouted to the coachman, thrusting himself out of the window, and taking a three-rouble note from his pocket he put it into the man's hand as the latter turned round.
The coachman felt something in his hand, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled quickly along the smooth macadamized high road.
'I want nothing, nothing but that happiness,' he thought, staring at the ivory knob of the bell between the front windows of the carriage, his mind full of Anna as he had last seen her. 'And the longer it continues the more I love her!
Where is she?
Why? Why has she given me an appointment here, in a letter from Betsy?' he thought; but there was no longer any time for thinking.
Before reaching the avenue he ordered the coachman to stop, opened the carriage door, jumped out while the carriage was still moving, and went up the avenue leading to the house.
There was no one in the avenue, but turning to the right he saw her.
Her face was veiled, but his joyous glance took in that special manner of walking peculiar to her alone: the droop of her shoulders, the poise of her head; and immediately a thrill passed like an electric current through his body, and with renewed force he became conscious of himself from the elastic movement of his firm legs to the motion of his lungs as he breathed, and of something tickling his lips.
On reaching him she clasped his hand firmly.
It was absolutely necessary for me to see you,' she said; and at sight of the serious and severe expression of her mouth under her veil his mood changed at once.
'Never mind!' she said, putting her hand on his arm. 'Come, I must speak to you.'
In her presence he had no will of his own: without knowing the cause of her agitation he became infected by it.
What?' he asked, pressing her hand against his side with his elbow and trying to read her face.
'I did not tell you last night,' she began, breathing quickly and heavily, 'that on my way back with Alexis Alexandrovich I told him everything... said I could not be his wife, and...
He listened, involuntarily leaning forward with his whole body as if trying so to ease her burden.
But as soon as she had spoken he straightened himself and his face assumed a proud and stern expression.
I understand how hard it must have been for you,' he said, but she was not listening to his words  only trying to read his thoughts from his face.
She could not guess that it expressed the first idea that had entered Vronsky's mind: the thought of an inevitable duel; therefore she explained that momentary look of severity in another way.
After reading her husband's letter she knew in the depths of her heart that all would remain as it was, that she would not have the courage to disregard her position and give up her son in order to be united with her lover.
Yet this interview was still of extreme importance to her.
She hoped that the meeting might bring about a change in her position and save her.
If at this news he would firmly, passionately, and without a moment's hesitation say to her: 'Give up everything and fly with me!' she would abandon her son and go with him.
But the news had not the effect on him that she had desired: he only looked as if he had been offended by something.
'It was not at all hard for me  it all came about of itself,' she said, irritably. 'And here...' she pulled her husband's note from under her glove.
'I understand, I understand,' he interrupted, taking the note but not reading it, and trying to soothe her. 'I only want one thing, I only ask for one thing: to destroy this situation in order to devote my life to your happiness.'
'Why do you tell me this?' she said. 'Do you think I could doubt it?
'Who's that coming?' said Vronsky, pointing to two ladies who were coming toward them. 'They may know us!' and he moved quickly in the direction of a sidewalk, drawing her along with him.
'Oh, I don't care!' she said.
Her lips trembled and her eyes seemed to him to be looking at him with strange malevolence from under the veil. 'As I was saying, that's not the point!
I cannot doubt that, but see what he writes to me.
Read ' she stopped again.
Again, as at the first moment when he heard the news of her having spoken to her husband, Vronsky yielded to the natural feeling produced by the thoughts of his relation to the injured husband.
Now that he held his letter he could not help imagining to himself the challenge that he would no doubt find waiting for him that evening or next day, and the duel, when he would be standing with the same cold proud look as his face bore that moment, and having fired into the air would be awaiting the shot from the injured husband.
And at that instant the thought of what Serpukhovskoy had just been saying to him and of what had occurred to him that morning (that it was better not to bind himself) flashed through his mind, and he knew that he could not pass on the thought to her.
After he had read the letter he looked up at her, but his look was not firm.
She understood at once that he had already considered this by himself, knew that whatever he might say he would not tell her all that he was thinking, and knew that her last hopes had been deceived.
This was not what she had expected.
'You see what a man he is!' she said in a trembling voice. 'He...'
'For God's sake hear me out!' he added, with an air of entreaty that she would let him explain his words. 'I am glad because I know that it is impossible, quite impossible for things to remain as they are, as he imagines.'
'Why impossible?' said Anna, forcing back her tears and clearly no longer attaching any importance to what he would say.
She felt that her fate was decided.
Vronsky wanted to say that after what he considered to be the inevitable duel it could not continue; but he said something else.
I hope...' he became confused and blushed 'that you will allow me to arrange and to think out a life for ourselves.
he began, but she did not let him finish.
'And my son?' she exclaimed. 'You see what he writes?
'But for heaven's sake, which is better? To leave your son, or to continue in this degrading situation?'
'You call it degrading! do not call it that; such words have no meaning for me,' she replied tremulously.
She had only his love left, and she wanted to love him. 'Try to understand that since I loved you everything has changed for me.
I am proud of my position because... proud of... proud...' she could not say what she was proud of.
Tears of shame and despair choked her.
He also felt something rising in his throat, and for the first time in his life he felt ready to cry.
He could not explain what it was that had so moved him; he was sorry for her and felt that he could not help her, because he knew that he was the cause of her trouble, that he had done wrong.
'Would divorce be impossible?' he asked weakly.
She silently shook her head. 'Would it not be possible to take your son away with you and go away all the same?'
Now I go back to him,' she said dryly.
Her foreboding that everything would remain as it was had not deceived her.
'Yes,' she said, 'but don't let us talk about it.'
Anna's carriage, which she had sent away and ordered to return to the gate of the Vrede Garden, drove up.
Karenin entered the Council room, greeted the members and the president as usual, and took his seat, his hand lying ready on the paper before him.
Among these papers were the statistics that he needed and a draft of the statement he was going to make.
But he did not really require the figures.
He remembered them all and did not even consider it necessary to go over in his mind what he was going to say.
He knew that when the time came, and he saw his opponent before him vainly trying to look indifferent, his speech would naturally be far more fluent and better than if he prepared it beforehand.
He felt that the contents of his speech would be so important that every word would be significant.
Yet as he listened to the general reports his face wore a most innocent and artless look.
Looking at his white hands with the thick veins and the delicate long fingers toying with the two edges of a white sheet of paper before him, and at his head wearily bent to one side, no one would have expected that words would flow from his lips which would raise a terrible storm and make the members shout each other down, forcing the president to call them to order.
When the Reports had been heard, Karenin in his quiet thin voice informed the meeting that he wished to bring to their notice some considerations of his own on the question of the settlement of the native races, and the attention of the meeting turned to him.
Karenin cleared his throat, and, as was his wont when making a speech, without looking at his opponent he fixed his eyes on the first man opposite him  a quiet little old man who never had any views in connection with the Special Committee  and began to explain his considerations.
When he came to the Fundamental and Organic Law his opponent jumped up and began to raise objections.
Stremov (who was also on the Special Committee), stung to the quick, began justifying himself, and the meeting became quite a stormy one. But Karenin triumphed and his motion was carried; three new Special Committees were formed, and the next day nothing was talked about in a certain Petersburg set but that meeting.
Karenin's success was even greater than he had expected.
When he woke on the Tuesday morning he recalled with pleasure his victory of the previous day, and could not help smiling, even while wishing to appear indifferent, when the secretary, with a desire to flatter him, reported the rumours that had reached him concerning what had happened at the meeting.
Busy with the secretary, Karenin quite forgot that it was Tuesday, the day fixed for Anna's return, and was surprised and unpleasantly startled when the footman came in to inform him of her arrival.
Anna returned to Petersburg early in the morning, and as she had wired that the carriage should be sent for her he might have expected her.
But he did not come out to meet her when she arrived.
She was told that he had not yet come out of his study, where he was busy with his secretary.
She sent word to her husband that she had arrived and went to her boudoir, where she set to work sorting her things, expecting that he would come in to see her.
But an hour passed and he did not come.
She went down into the dining-room on a plea of giving orders and purposely spoke in a loud voice, thinking that he would come; but although she heard him go out of the study door to take leave of the secretary, he did not come to her.
She knew that according to his habits he would soon go away to his work and she wished to see him first.
She passed through the ballroom to his study and resolutely went in.
When she entered he was sitting in his official uniform evidently ready to start, with his elbows on a little table, looking wearily in front of him.
She saw him before he saw her and knew that he was thinking about her.
When he saw her he was about to rise, but changed his mind as his face flushed  a thing Anna had never seen it do before. However, he quickly rose and came toward her, looking not at her eyes but at her forehead and hair.
He came up, took her hand, and asked her to sit down.
'I am very glad you have come,' he said, sitting down beside her. He evidently wished to say something, but faltered.
Several times he tried to speak, but stopped.
Although while preparing for this interview she had been teaching herself to despise and blame him, she did not know what to say, and pitied him. There was silence for some time.
'Is Serezha well?' he asked; and without waiting for a reply he added, 'I am not dining at home to-day and must be going at once.'
'I meant to go away to Moscow,' she said.
'Oh no, you were quite right to come,' he replied, and again became silent.
Seeing that he had not the strength to begin, she began for him.
'Alexis Alexandrovich!' she said, studying his face and without dropping her eyes under his gaze fixed on her hair, 'I am a guilty woman and a bad one, but I am what I was before, as I then told you. I have come to tell you now I cannot make any change.'
'I am not questioning you about it,' he replied suddenly in a firm tone and looking with hatred straight into her eyes. 'I had expected it.'
Under the influence of anger he had evidently regained perfect self-possession. 'But I repeat again what I then told you and subsequently wrote,' he went on in a shrill thin voice, 'I again repeat that I will not know it, I ignore it as long as it is not known to the rest of the world, as long as my name is not dishonoured.
When she saw his quiet gestures, heard his shrill, childish, and sarcastic voice, her repulsion toward him destroyed the pity she had felt for him, and she now experienced nothing but fear and anxiety to clear up the situation at any cost.
'I cannot be your wife, since I...' she began.
Anna sighed and hung her head.
'I cannot understand, however, that with your independent mind,' he went on, getting heated, 'informing your husband of your infidelity and appearing to see nothing unseemly in it, you should consider it unseemly to continue to fulfil a wife's duties to your husband!'
'What I want, is not to meet that person here, and for you to behave in such a way that neither Society nor the servants shall be able to accuse you,  for you not to see that man.
And in return you will enjoy all the advantages of a wife without fulfilling her duties.
He stopped and let her pass first.
THE NIGHT LEVIN HAD SPENT ON THE HAYCOCK had not passed without leaving its mark: he became disgusted with the agricultural pursuits on which he was engaged and lost all interest in them.
In spite of the splendid harvest he had never, or thought he had never, encountered so many failures, or so much hostility from the peasants, as that year; and the cause of those failures and that hostility were now quite plain to him.
The delight he had felt in the labour itself, occasioned by his having drawn nearer to the peasants, his jealousy of them, his envy of their life, his desire to adopt that kind of life (which had not been a mere desire that night but a real intention, the details of which he had considered), all these things together had so changed his outlook on the working of his estate that he could no longer feel his former interest in the work, or help noticing the unpleasant relation to the labourer on which it was all based. Herds of cattle of an improved breed like Pava, the tilled land ploughed with good ploughs, the nine fields surrounded with willows, the hundreds of acres of deeply manured land, the seed drills and all such things, were splendid if they could be worked by himself alone or with the help of friends and people in sympathy with him.
But now he clearly saw (the book on agriculture which he was writing, in which the labourer was the chief factor in farming, helped much in this direction) that the agricultural work he was carrying on was founded on a bitter and obstinate struggle between himself and his labourers, in which on the one side  his  there was a continual and strenuous attempt to bring everything into accord with what were considered the best models, while on the other side there was the natural order of things.
And he saw that in his struggle, in spite of extreme efforts on his part, and without any effort or even intention on the part of others, the only results achieved were that neither side was the winner, and that fine tools and splendid cattle and soil were quite uselessly damaged.
But the chief point was that not only was the energy expended on the work wasted, but he could not help feeling now, when he saw the meaning of his pursuit laid bare before him, that the aim of his efforts was a most unworthy one.
He struggled to get every penny he could, and had to do so or he would not have been able to pay his labourers their wages, and they struggled to be allowed to work quietly, pleasantly, and just as they were used to work.
It was to his interest that every labourer should get through as much work as possible and at the same time give his mind to it, not injuring the winnowing machine, the horse-rake, or the threshing machine, but working intelligently.
The English ploughs turned out useless, because it never entered the peasant's head to lower the upturned ploughshare, and as he forced it through at the turning he spoiled the ground and strained the horses, and Levin was told not to worry! The horses were allowed to stray into the wheat-field because not one of the peasants wanted to be watchman, and in spite of its having been forbidden the labourers took turns to watch the horses at night; so Vanka; who had been at work all day, fell asleep, and confessed his guilt, saying, 'I am in your hands, sir!'
Three of the best calves had been overfed by being turned into the meadow where the clover had been cut, without any water to drink; and the peasants would on no account admit that the clover had injured them. To comfort Levin he was told that his neighbour had lost a hundred head of cattle in three days.
All this happened not because anyone wished to harm Levin or his farming; on the contrary he well knew that they liked him and considered him a homely gentleman  high praise from a peasant. It was done simply because the labourers wished to work merrily and without care, while his interests were not only foreign and incomprehensible to them but flatly opposed to their own just interests.
Levin had long felt dissatisfied with his relation to the work on his estate. He had seen that the boat was leaking but had not found or looked for the leak, and perhaps had purposely deceived himself, for had he been disillusioned in that work, he would have had nothing left.
His agricultural pursuits had not only ceased to interest him but had become repulsive, and he could no longer give his mind to them. Added to this there was Kitty Shcherbatskaya not more than twenty miles away, and he wanted to meet her, yet could not.
When he called on Dolly, she had asked him to come again and come with the object of once more proposing to her sister, letting him feel that her sister would now accept him. Levin himself having seen Kitty Shcherbatskaya knew that he had not ceased to love her, yet he could not go to the Oblonskys' house while she was there.
That he had proposed and she had refused him had put an impossible barrier between them. 'I cannot ask her to be my wife just because she cannot be the wife of the man she wanted,' he said to himself, and this thought rendered him cold and hostile toward her.
'I shall not have the strength to speak to her without reproach or to look at her without ill will, and she will only hate me all the more  as it is only right she should. Besides, how can I go there now after what Darya Alexandrovna told me?
And I should come magnanimously to forgive her, to show mercy to her! I  stand before her in the role of one who forgives her and honours her with his love!
Why did Darya Alexandrovna tell me this? I might have met her accidentally and then all would have come naturally, but now it is impossible!'
Dolly sent to him to ask for a side-saddle for Kitty. 'I have been told,' she wrote, 'that you have a side-saddle.
That was more than he could stand.
'How can an intelligent woman with any delicacy so humiliate a sister?'
To say that he would come was impossible, because he could not come; to say that something prevented him from coming, or that he was leaving home, was still worse.
He sent the saddle without an answer, conscious of doing something shameful; and next day, putting the disagreeable management of the estate into the hands of the steward, he went away to a distant district to visit his friend Sviyazhsky, who had splendid shooting and had long been asking him to come and stay with him.
The snipe marshes in the Surovsky district had for a long time appeared tempting to Levin, but he had put off his visit because of his farm-work.
But now he was glad to go away from the proximity of Kitty and from his farm, and especially to go shooting, an occupation which served him as the best solace in all his troubles.
THERE WAS NO RAILWAY or stage-coach to the Surovsky district, and Levin went in his own tarantas.
Half-way he stopped to feed his horses at a well-to-do peasant's house.
The bald-headed, fresh-faced old man, with a red beard which was growing grey round the cheeks, opened the gates and pressed close to the post to let the three-horsed vehicle enter.
After showing the coachman to a place in a lean-to, in a large, clean, tidy, newly-constructed yard where stood some charred wooden ploughs, the old man invited Levin to enter the house.
A cleanly-dressed young woman with goloshes on her stockingless feet was washing the floor in the passage.
The dog that followed Levin frightened her, but when she was told that it would not hurt her she at once began to laugh at her own alarm.
After pointing to the door with her bare arm she again stooped, hiding her handsome face, and went on scrubbing.
'Want a samovar?' she asked.
The shutters were closed and there were not many flies in the room, which was so clean that Levin took care to keep Laska (who had been bathing in the puddles on the way) from trampling on the floor, telling her to lie down in a corner by the door.
Having looked round the room, he went out into the back-yard.
The good-looking woman in goloshes, with two empty pails swinging from a wooden yoke, ran down before him to fetch water from the well.
'Look alive!' the old man called merrily after her, and approached Levin. 'Is it to Nicholas Ivanich Sviyazhsky you are going, sir?
He too stops at our place,' he began garrulously, leaning on the banisters of the porch.
In the midst of his conversation about his acquaintanceship with Sviyazhsky the gates creaked again, and the labourers returning from the fields came into the yard with their ploughs and harrows.
'I say, father! have those ploughshares I ordered been brought?' asked a tall, robust young fellow, evidently the old man's son.
'There in the passage,' answered the old man, winding the reins into a ring and throwing them on the ground. 'Fix them on before we finish dinner.'
The good-looking woman returned, her shoulders pressed down by the weight of the full pails, and went into the house.
Levin took his provisions out of the tarantas and invited the old man to have tea with him.
We have had tea once to-day,' said he, evidently pleased to accept the invitation. 'Well, just for company!'
Over their tea Levin heard the whole history of the old man's farm.
Ten years previously he had rented about four hundred acres from the landowner, and the year before he had bought them outright and rented another nine hundred from a neighbouring proprietor.
A small part of the land  the worst  he let, and with the aid of his family and two hired men cultivated about a hundred and twenty acres.
The old man complained that his affairs were in a bad way.
But Levin knew that he only did so for propriety's sake and that in reality his farm was flourishing.
Had his affairs been in a bad way he would not have bought land at thirty-five roubles an acre, would not have married three of his sons and a nephew, and would not have twice rebuilt his homestead after fires, nor rebuilt it better each time.
In spite of the old peasant's grumbling one could see that he was justly proud of his property, of his sons, his nephew, his daughters-in-law, his horses, his cows, and especially of the fact that his whole household and farm held together.
From their conversation Levin gathered that he was not against new methods either.
He ploughed the land for the potatoes with an English plough, which he had borrowed from a landowner.
Many a time when Levin had seen this valuable food wasted he had wanted to have it gathered up, but had found this impossible.
On this peasant's fields this was being done, and he could not find words enough to praise this fodder.
'Thank you,' said the old man as he took the tea, but he refused sugar, pointing to a bit he still had left. 'How can one rely on work with hired labourers?' he said, 'it is ruination!
We know what sort of soil his is, black as poppy-seed, but he cannot boast of his harvests either.
'Father, Finnigan wants some tar fetched,' said the woman with the goloshes, coming in.
'That's how it is, sir,' said the old man, rising; and after crossing himself several times he thanked Levin and went out.
When Levin went into the back room to call his coachman he found the whole peasant family at dinner.
The vigorous young son with his mouth full of buckwheat porridge was saying something funny, and everybody laughed heartily  the woman with the goloshes laughing more merrily than anyone as she refilled the bowl with cabbage soup.
The handsome face of this woman with the goloshes might very well have had something to do with the impression of welfare that this peasant household produced on Levin; that impression was anyhow so strong that he never lost it.
And all the rest of the way to Sviyazhsky's he every now and then recalled that household, as if the impression it had left on him demanded special attention.
SVIYAZHSKY WAS MARSHAL OF THE NOBILITY in his district.
He knew that both Sviyazhsky and his wife wanted to see her married to him, Levin.
He knew this as certainly as all so-called eligible young men know these things, though he could never have said so to anyone; and he also knew that although he wanted to marry, and although this girl, to all appearance very fascinating, ought to make a splendid wife, he could as soon fly as marry her, even had he not been in love with Kitty.
And this knowledge spoilt the pleasure which he hoped his visit to Sviyazhsky would give him.
Levin had thought of this when he received Sviyazhsky's invitation, but in spite of it he made up his mind that this idea of Sviyazhsky's intentions was only an unfounded conjecture of his and that he would go.
Besides, at the bottom of his heart he wanted to put himself to the test and again to estimate his feelings for the girl.
He considered Russia to be a doomed country like Turkey, and the Russian government so bad that he did not think it worth while seriously to criticize its actions; yet he had an official position, was a model Marshal of the Nobility, and when he travelled always wore a cockade and a red band to his cap.
He imagined that to live as a human being was possible only in foreign countries, where he went to stay at every opportunity; yet he carried on very complicated and perfected agricultural pursuits in Russia and carefully followed and knew what was being done there.
He considered the Russian peasant to be one degree higher than the ape in development, yet at district elections no one shook hands with the peasants and listened to their opinions more willingly than he.
He believed in neither God nor Devil, yet he was much concerned by the question of improving the condition of the clergy and limiting parishes, and was at the same time particularly active in seeing that the church should be retained in his village.
On the Woman's Question he sided with the extreme advocates of woman's freedom and especially the right to work; yet he lived with his wife in such a way that it gave everybody pleasure to see the friendly relationship in which they passed their childless life, and had so arranged that his wife did nothing and could do nothing except share her husband's efforts to spend their time as pleasantly and merrily as possible.
Had Levin not possessed the faculty of giving the best interpretation to people's characters, Sviyazhsky's character would have presented no difficulty or problem to him; he would only have called him a fool or a good-for-nothing, and everything would have been clear.
But he could not call him a fool because Sviyazhsky was not only very intelligent but also a very well-educated man, who carried his education with extreme modesty.
There was no subject with which he was not acquainted, but he only exhibited his knowledge when forced to do so.
Still less could Levin call him a good-for-nothing because Sviyazhsky was certainly an honest, kind-hearted, and clever man, always joyfully and actively engaged on work highly prized by all around, and certainly a man who could never consciously do anything bad.
Levin tried but could not understand him, and regarded him and his life as animated riddles.
The Sviyazhskys were friendly with Levin, and therefore he allowed himself to sound Sviyazhsky and try to get to the very foundation of his philosophy of life, but it was all in vain.
Each time that Levin tried to penetrate deeper than the reception rooms of the other's mind, which were always open to anybody, he noticed Sviyazhsky seemed a little confused. A just perceptible look of fear appeared on his face, as if he were afraid that he would be understood by Levin, whom he met with good-natured, jocose resistance.
Now, after his disillusion with the work on his estate, Levin was especially pleased to stay a while with Sviyazhsky.
Not to mention the fact that the sight of the happy doves in their well-ordered nest, so content with themselves and everybody else, had a cheering effect on him, he now wanted, dissatisfied with life as he was, to get at the secret which gave Sviyazhsky such clearness, definiteness, and cheerfulness.
Levin also knew that he would meet neighbouring landowners at the Sviyazhskys', and it would be very interesting to talk and hear about farming, the harvest, the hire of labour, and all those questions which, though considered very low, seemed to him most important. 'These matters might not have been so important in the time of serfdom and may be unimportant in England.
The shooting did not prove as good as he had expected.
He went about all day and only brought back three, but on the other hand he brought back, as he always did after a day's shooting, a splendid appetite, good spirits, and the stimulated mental condition which in his case always accompanied physical exertion.
And when out shooting, while he did not seem to be thinking at all, he again and again thought about the old peasant and his family, and felt as if the impression made on him called not only for his attention, but for the solution of some problem related thereto.
Levin sat beside the hostess at the tea table, and was obliged to converse with her and her sister, who was sitting opposite him.
The hostess was a short, fair, round-faced woman, beaming with smiles and dimples.
Levin tried to find out through her the answer to the riddle, so important to him, presented by her husband; but he had not full freedom of thought because he felt painfully uncomfortable.
This painful discomfort was due to the fact that her sister sat opposite to him in a dress that seemed to him to have been put on especially for his benefit, with a particularly low, square-cut dcolletage showing her white bosom. Though her bosom was so white, or perhaps because it was so white, this square-cut deprived Levin of his freedom of thought.
He imagined, probably quite mistakenly, that the bodice was cut like that on his account; he felt that he had no right to look at it and tried not to do so, but felt guilty because it was cut so.
Levin felt as if he were deceiving some one, as if he ought to offer some explanation which was impossible, and therefore he kept blushing and was restless and uncomfortable.
His discomfort communicated itself to the pretty sister, but the hostess did not seem to notice anything and purposely drew her sister into the conversation.
On the contrary, though he is happy abroad, he is never so happy there as here.
He feels in his own sphere.
He is so busy, and he has a gift for taking an interest in everything.
'Yes, that is Nastya's business,' she said, pointing to her sister.
'You yourself teach?' asked Levin, trying to look beyond the bodice, but conscious that if he looked in her direction he must see it.
No more tea,' said Levin, and unable to continue the conversation, though he knew he was behaving rudely, he got up blushing. 'I hear a very interesting conversation there,' he added, and went to the other end of the table where his host and the two landlords were sitting.
Sviyazhsky sat sideways, leaning his elbow on the table and turning his cup round with one hand, while with the other he gathered his beard together, lifted it to his nose as if smelling it, and let it go again.
He looked with his glittering black eyes straight at an excited landowner, with a grey moustache, whose words evidently amused him.
Levin saw clearly that Sviyazhsky could have answered the landowner's complaint so that the meaning of the latter's words would have been destroyed at once, but owing to his position he could not give that answer, and listened not without pleasure to the landowner's funny speech.
Levin saw signs of this in the way the man was dressed  he wore an old-fashioned shiny coat which he was evidently not used to  and in his intelligent, dismal eyes, his well-turned Russian, his authoritative tone, evidently acquired by long practice, and in the firm movement of his fine large sunburnt hands, the right one having an old wedding-ring on the third finger.
They are starving, yet if you hire one of them as a labourer, he'll spoil and break things, and will even lodge complaints with the magistrate.'
The landowner evidently meant to tease Sviyazhsky, but the latter did not take offence; on the contrary, he evidently enjoyed it.
'Well, you see, we carry on our work without such measures, I and Levin and he,' Sviyazhsky said smiling, and pointing to the other landowner.
Is his what you would call "rational" farming?' said the landowner, ostentatiously using the word 'rational.'
The peasants come along, and say, "Be a father to us! Help us!"
Sviyazhsky looked at Levin with smiling eyes, and even made a just perceptible sarcastic sign to him ridiculing the old man, but Levin did not consider the landowner's words ridiculous, he understood him better than he did Sviyazhsky.
The landowner was evidently expressing his own thoughts  which people rarely do  thoughts to which he had been led not by a desire to find some occupation for an idle mind, but by the conditions of his life: thoughts which he had hatched in his rural solitude and considered from every side.
'The fact of the matter is, you see, that progress can only be achieved by authority,' he said, evidently wishing to show that education was not foreign to him.
And he began to develop his plan of emancipation, which might have prevented this dislocation.
But it did not interest Levin, and, as soon as the landlord had finished, Levin returned to the first proposition, and, trying to get Sviyazhsky to express his views seriously, said to him:
Ask any farmer; he cannot tell you what is profitable for you and what is not.'
It is all very well for you, but I have a son at the university to keep, and to pay for the little ones' education at the secondary school, so that I cannot buy Flemish drays.'
'Yes, that is quite true,' said the landowner with the grey moustache, and he even laughed with pleasure.
You just tell us, is your farming profitable?' said Levin, and at once noticed a momentary expression of fright which he had observed before on Sviyazhsky's face, when he tried to penetrate beyond the reception rooms of his mind.
His hostess had told him at tea that they had engaged that summer a German from Moscow, an expert bookkeeper, and paid him five hundred roubles to audit their accounts; and he found that they lost three thousand roubles odd a year on their farming.
The landowner smiled when the profits of Sviyazhsky's farming were mentioned, evidently aware of the sort of profits that his neighbour the Marshal of the Nobility was able to make.
Mary, send us some curds and whey or some raspberries here,' said Sviyazhsky to his wife. 'This year the raspberries are lasting an extraordinarily long time,' and Sviyazhsky got up cheerfully and moved away, evidently regarding the conversation as finished at the very point where to Levin it seemed to be just beginning.
Having lost his interlocutor Levin continued the conversation with the landowner, trying to prove to him that all our difficulties arise from the fact that we do not wish to understand the characteristics and habits of our labourers; but the landowner, like everybody who thinks individually and in solitude, was obtuse to other thoughts and tenacious of his own.
'Every possible relation to the power of labour has been defined and investigated,' he said. 'The remnant of barbarism, the primitive commune with its reciprocal bonds, falls to pieces of itself when serfdom is abolished, and there is nothing left but free labour; its forms are defined and ready and we must accept them.
The labourer, the hired man, the farmer, you cannot get away from them.'
And again he noticed a look of fear in the eyes of Sviyazhsky.
The landowners had risen, and Sviyazhsky, having again checked Levin in his disagreeable habit of prying beyond the reception rooms of his mind, went to see his visitors off.
He was more than ever excited by the thought that the dissatisfaction with work on the land which he now experienced was not an exceptional state of mind but the result of the condition of agriculture in Russia generally, and that some arrangement that would make the labourers work as they did for the peasant at the halfway-house was not an idle dream but a problem it was necessary to solve.
And he felt that it could be solved, and that he must try to do it.
Having said good-night to the ladies and promised to stay a whole day longer in order to ride with them and see an interesting landslide in the State forest, Levin before going to bed went to his host's study to borrow the books on the labour question which Sviyazhsky had offered him.
'What is it you are looking at?' he asked Levin, who, having stopped at the round table, was looking at one of the journals.
'Oh, there is a very interesting article there,' he added, referring to the journal Levin held in his hand. 'It turns out that the chief agent in the Partition of Poland was not Frederick at all,' he added, with gleeful animation.
And with characteristic clearness he briefly recounted these new and very important and interesting discoveries.
Though at present Levin was more interested in agriculture than in anything else, he asked himself while listening to his host, 'What is there inside him?
And why, why does the Partition of Poland interest him?' And when Sviyazhsky had finished he could not help asking him, 'Well, and what of it?'
It was interesting that 'it turns out,' and he did not consider it necessary to explain why it interested him.
'What interests me very much is this,' said Levin: 'he is right when he says that our rational farming is not a success and that only money-lending methods, like that quiet fellow's, or very elementary methods, pay,...
'Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to a sick man: "You should try an aperient."  "I have, and it made me worse." "Try leeches."  "I have, and they made me worse."
And in what way knowing how to add and subtract and to say the catechism will help them to improve their material condition, I never could understand! The other evening I met a woman with an infant in her arms and asked her where she was going.
She replied that she had been to see the "wise woman" because her boy was fractious, and she took him to be cured.
I asked her what cure the wise woman had for fractiousness. "She puts the baby on the perch among the fowls and says something."-'
The people are poor and ignorant, this we know as surely as the woman knows that the child is fractious because it cries.
'Well, in this at least you agree with Spencer, whom you dislike so much; he too says that education may result from increased well-being and comfort from frequent ablutions, as he expresses it  but not from the ability to read and reckon...'
A frightened look flashed up in Sviyazhsky's eyes and he said with a smile:
Levin saw that he would not succeed in finding a connection between this man's life and his thoughts.
It was evidently all the same to him what conclusions his reasoning led to: he only needed the process itself, and he did not like it when the process of reasoning led him up a blind alley.
That he disliked and evaded by turning the conversation to something pleasantly jocular.
There was this amiable Sviyazhsky, who kept his opinions only for social use, and evidently had some other bases of life which Levin could not discern, while with that crowd, whose name is legion, he directed public opinion by means of thoughts foreign to himself; and that embittered landowner with perfectly sound views he had wrung painfully from life, but wrong in his bitterness toward a whole class, and that the best class in Russia, and Levin's own discontent with his own activity, and his vague hope of finding a remedy for all these things  all this merged into a feeling of restlessness and expectation of a speedy solution.
Left alone in the room assigned to him, and lying on a spring mattress which bounced unexpectedly whenever he moved a leg or an arm, it was long before Levin could sleep.
Not one of the talks he had had with Sviyazhsky, though much that was clever had been said by the latter, interested him, but the landowner's arguments required consideration.
Levin involuntarily remembered all that the man had said, and corrected in imagination the answers he himself had given.
Let us consider the labourer not as an abstract labour force but as a Russian peasant with his own instincts, and let us arrange our farming accordingly. "Imagine!"
I ought to have said to him, "that your farming is conducted like that old man's: that you have found means to interest the labourers in the results of their work, and have found improvements which they must recognize as such  then, without impoverishing the soil, you will get double and treble the crops you get now.
He lay awake half the night considering the details necessary for carrying his thought into effect.
Above all he had to get away immediately to propose his new plan to the peasants before the winter corn was sown, so that that work might be done on the new conditions.
He decided completely to reverse his former methods of farming.
THE CARRYING OUT OF LEVIN'S PLANS presented many difficulties, but he struggled with all his might to attain, if not all he desired, at any rate a possibility of believing without self-deception that the thing was worth doing.
When, on the evening of his return, he informed the steward of his intentions, the steward with evident pleasure agreed with that part of the plan which showed that all that had been done up to then was foolish and unprofitable.
He remarked that he had always said so but had not been listened to.
But to Levin's proposal that he, like the peasants, should participate as a shareholder would in the farming, the steward only put on a look of great depression and expressed no definite opinion, but at once began to speak of the necessity of carting the last sheaves of rye next day and of starting the second ploughing, so that Levin felt that it was not the time for his plans to be considered.
The naive peasant, the cowman Ivan, quite understood Levin's offer of letting him and his family have a share in the profits of the dairy farm, and quite sympathized with this undertaking: but when Levin impressed upon him the benefit that would accrue to him in the future, a look of anxiety and regret that he could not stop to listen to it all appeared on Ivan's face, and he hurriedly remembered some task that could not be put off, seized a hay-fork to remove the hay from the enclosure, fetched water, or cleared away the manure.
They were firmly convinced that his real aim (whatever he might say) would always be hidden in what he did not tell them.
They agreed that an English plough ploughed better, that a scarifier worked quicker, but they found a thousand reasons why they could not use either the one or the other; and, though he was convinced that it would be necessary to lower his standards of farming, he disliked having to give up improvements the benefit of which was so clear.
Yet in spite of all these difficulties he got his way, and by autumn the scheme began to work, or at any rate it seemed so to him.
At first Levin thought of letting the whole of his farm as it stood to the peasants, to the labourers, and to his steward, on the new co-partnership lines, but he very soon saw that this was impossible and decided to divide up the different parts.
The naive Ivan, who, it seemed to Levin, best understood the plan, formed an artel [An artel is a workman's profit-sharing association, with mutual responsibility, common in Russia.] consisting chiefly of his own family, and became partner in the dairy section.
It is true that the dairy farm did not as yet go on any better than before, and Ivan strongly opposed heating the cowsheds and making butter from fresh cream, maintaining that cows required less food when kept in the cold and that butter made from sour cream went further; and that he expected his wages to be paid as before, not being at all interested to know that they were not wages but an advance on account of profits.
It was true that Shuraev had taken steps to sublet the kitchen garden in small lots to the other peasants; he evidently quite misunderstood, and apparently intentionally misunderstood, the conditions on which the land was let to him.
It was true that often when talking to the peasants, and explaining to them the advantages of the plan, Levin felt that they were only listening to the sound of his voice and were quite determined, whatever he might say, not to let themselves be taken in.
He felt this especially when talking to the most intelligent of them, Rezunov, and noticing the play in his eyes, which clearly indicated his derision of Levin and a firm resolve that if anyone was taken in it should not be Rezunov.
But in spite of this, Levin thought matters were getting on, and that by keeping strict accounts and insisting on having his way he would eventually be able to prove to the peasants the advantage of these new arrangements, and that things would then go on of themselves.
These affairs added to the rest of the farming which remained on his hands, and the indoor work on his book, so filled Levin's whole summer that he hardly ever made time to go out shooting.
At the end of August he heard from a servant who brought back the side-saddle that the Oblonskys had gone back to Moscow.
He felt that by not having answered Dolly Oblonskaya's letter (a rudeness he could not remember without blushing) he had burned his boats and could never visit there again.
But neither would he ever visit them again.
The rearrangement of his farming interested him more than anything had ever done in his life.
He read through the books lent him by Sviyazhsky, and, having ordered various others that he required, he read books on political economy and socialistic books on the same subject, but, as he had expected, he found nothing in them related to his undertaking.
In the works on political economy  in Mill for instance, which he studied first and with great ardour, hoping every moment to find a solution of the questions that occupied him  he found various laws deduced as governing the state of agriculture in Europe, but he could not see why these laws, inapplicable to Russia, should be considered universal!
It was the same with the socialistic books: they were either beautiful but inapplicable fancies which had carried him away when he was still at the university or they were improvements and patchings-up of the order existing in Europe, with which agricultural affairs in Russia have nothing in common.
Having taken up this question he conscientiously read everything relating to it; and he purposed going abroad in the autumn to study the question further there, so that what had often happened to him with other questions should not be repeated.
Often, just as he was beginning to understand the idea in his interlocutor's mind and to explain his own, he would suddenly be asked: And what about Kauffmann and Jones, and Dubois and Michelli?'
He knew what he wanted.
This he wanted to prove theoretically in his book and practically by his farming.
To elucidate matters theoretically and to finish his book, which, according to his dreams, would not only revolutionize political economy but completely abolish that science and lay the foundation of a new science (that of the relation of the people to the land) it was only necessary to go abroad and there study what had been done on the subject and find convincing proofs that what had been done there was not what was needed.
On the thirtieth of September the sun showed itself in the morning, and, in hopes of fine weather, Levin began seriously preparing for his departure.
He gave orders that the grain was to be got ready for carting and sent the steward to the merchant to collect the money for the wheat, while he himself went round to give final instructions before leaving.
Having got through all his business, soaked by the streams of water that had run in at the neck of his leather coat and at the top of his high boots, but in the most buoyant and animated spirits, he returned home in the evening.
The weather grew still worse toward evening and the frozen sleet beat the whole body of his drenched horse so painfully that it shook its head and ears and went sideways.
But Levin under his hood felt comfortable; he looked cheerfully round, now at the turbid streams that ran down the ruts, now at the drops that hung from every bare twig, now at the white spots of unthawed sleet that lay on the planks of the bridge or on the heaps of still juicy willow leaves lying in a thick layer round a denuded tree.
Notwithstanding the gloomy aspect of nature around him he felt peculiarly elated.
An old inn-keeper, into whose house he had gone to dry himself, evidently approved of Levin's plan and had offered to join a group to buy cattle.
'I need only push on steadily toward my aim and I shall achieve it,' he thought, 'and it is worth working and striving for.
I feel sure that Franklin felt just as insignificant and distrusted himself just as I do when he remembered his past.
He too probably had an Agatha Mikhaylovna to whom he confided his secrets.'
Having dined, Levin as usual sat down in his easy-chair with a book, and while reading continued to think about his impending journey in connection with the book he was writing. To-day the importance of his work presented itself to him with especial clearness, and whole paragraphs of their own accord shaped themselves in his mind, expressing the gist of his thoughts.
'That must form a short preface, such as I formerly considered unnecessary.' He rose to go to his writing-table, and Laska, who was lying at his feet, stretched herself, also got up, and looked round at him as if asking where she was to go to.
But he had no time to write his thoughts down, for the labourers' foremen had come, and Levin went into the hall to speak to them.
After arranging about the next day's work by seeing the peasants who had come on business, Levin went to his study and sat down to his work.
Laska lay down under the table, and Agatha Mikhaylovna with her knitting sat down in her usual place.
Having written for some time, Levin suddenly with particular vividness remembered Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting.
Agatha Mikhaylovna knew all the details of Levin's farming plans. He often laid bare his thoughts before her in all their details, and frequently argued with her and disagreed with her explanations.
But this time she quite misunderstood what he said.
'Of course one must think of one's soul before everything else,' she remarked with a sigh. 'There was Parfen Denisich, who was no scholar at all, but may God grant everyone to die as he did!' she said, referring to a servant who had died recently: 'he received Holy Communion and Extreme Unction.'
'I am not speaking about that,' he said. 'I mean that I am doing it for my own profit.
If he has a conscience he will work, if not, you can do nothing with him.'
Her mention of the very thing he was just thinking about grieved and hurt him.
He frowned, and without replying again sat down to his work, repeating to himself all that he had been thinking about its importance.
Only occasionally, in the stillness, he listened to the clicking of her needles and, remembering what he did not wish to remember, made a wry face.
At nine o'clock he heard the sound of a bell and the heavy lurching of a carriage through the mud.
But Levin overtook her. His work was not getting on now and he was glad of a visitor, whoever it might be.
HALFWAY TO THE FRONT DOOR Levin heard a familiar sound of coughing in the hall, but the noise of his own footsteps prevented his hearing it clearly and he hoped he was mistaken. Then he saw the whole of his brother's long bony, familiar figure, and it seemed that there could be no mistake, but he still hoped he was mistaken and that this tall man, who was taking off his overcoat and coughing, was not his brother Nicholas.
Levin was fond of his brother, but to be with him was always a torment.
Under the sway of the thoughts that had come to him and of Agatha Mikhaylovna's reminders, he was in an unsettled and confused state of mind and the forthcoming meeting with his brother seemed particularly distressing.
Instead of a cheerful, healthy stranger who, he hoped, would have diverted him from his mental perplexity, he had to meet his brother, who knew him through and through and would disturb his innermost thoughts and force him to make a clean breast of everything.
And that was what he did not desire.
Angry with himself for this bad feeling Levin ran into the hall; and as soon as he had a near view of his brother this feeling of disappointment vanished and was replaced by pity.
Dreadful as his emaciation and illness had previously made Nicholas, he was now still thinner and weaker.
He stood in the hall jerking his long, thin neck, drawing a scarf from it, and smiling in a strangely piteous manner. When he saw this meek, submissive smile, Levin felt his throat contract convulsively.
'There! I have come to see you,' said Nicholas in a hollow voice, without taking his eyes for an instant from his brother's face.
'I have long wanted to, but did not feel well. Now I am much better,' and he wiped his beard with the thin palms of his hands.
'Yes, yes!' answered Levin. He was still more terrified when, kissing his brother's face, his lips felt the dryness of the skin and he saw his large strangely brilliant eyes close at hand.
Some weeks before this Constantine Levin had written to tell his brother that, after the sale of a few things which till then had remained undivided, Nicholas was entitled to his share, which came to about 2ooo roubles.
Nicholas said that he had now come to fetch that money, but chiefly to visit his own nest and touch his native soil, in order like the heroes of old to gather strength from it for the work that lay before him.
In spite of the fact that he was more round-shouldered than ever and that, being so tall, his leanness was startling, his movements were quick and sudden as formerly.
Levin took him to his room.
Nicholas dressed carefully, a thing he never used to do, brushed his thin, straight hair and went smiling upstairs.
He was in a most affectionate and cheerful mood, such as Levin remembered his often being in as a child: and he even mentioned Sergius Ivanich without irritation.
When he met Agatha Mikhaylovna he joked with her and questioned her about the other old servants: The news of Parfen Denisich's death affected him strangely. A look of fear appeared on his face but he immediately recovered himself.
'After all, he was old,' he remarked and changed the subject. 'Well, I will spend a month or two with you and then I will go to Moscow.
I will now arrange my life quite differently,' he continued. 'You know, I have got rid of that woman?'
'Oh, she was a horrid woman!
She has caused me a lot of unpleasantness,' but he did not say in what the unpleasantness consisted.
He could not explain that he had turned Mary Nikolavna away because she made his tea too weak, and chiefly because she waited on him as on an invalid. 'Besides, I want to alter my life completely.
Nicholas probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother about his affairs, and Levin was glad to talk about himself because he could do so without any pretence: He told Nicholas of his plans and activities.
Never had he been so unnatural and artificial, even with an outsider or when making a formal call, as he was that day.
And his consciousness of this artificiality and his repentance made him more unnatural.
He wished to weep over his dear, dying brother, but had to listen and keep up a conversation about how Nicholas was going to live.
The house being damp, and only his bedroom heated, Levin put his brother to sleep behind a partition in that room.
Nicholas went to bed but, whether he slept or not, kept tossing and coughing like a sick man and, when unable to clear his throat, muttering some complaint.
Sometimes he sighed deeply and said, 'Oh, my God!' Sometimes, when the phlegm choked him, he muttered angrily, 'Oh, the devil!'
It was within himself too he felt it.
But what that inevitable Death was, he not only did not know, not only had never considered, but could not and dared not consider.
He sat on his bed in the dark, doubled his arms round his knees and thought, scarcely breathing from the mental strain.
But the more mental effort he made the clearer he saw that it was undoubtedly so: that he had really forgotten and overlooked one little circumstance in life  that Death would come and end everything, so that it was useless to begin anything, and that there was no help for it. Yes it was terrible, but true.
What am I to do?' he said despairingly.
He lit a candle, got up carefully, went to the looking-glass, and began examining his face and hair.
Yes! There were grey hairs on his temples.
He opened his mouth: his double teeth were beginning to decay.
He bared his muscular arms.
Yes, he was very strong.
But Nicholas, who was breathing there with the remains of his lungs, had once had a healthy body too; and he suddenly remembered how as children they used to go to bed together and only waited till Theodore Bogdanich had left the room, to throw pillows at one another and to laugh and laugh so irrepressibly that even the fear of Theodore Bogdanich could not stop that overflowing bubbling consciousness of the joy of living. 'And now that sunk and hollow chest...
Why don't you sleep?' his brother's voice called to him.
'Well, he is dying, he will die before spring. How can he be helped?
He felt that this would happen with his brother.
The very next morning he grew irritable and cavilled at everything his brother said, touching his most sensitive spots.
That was all they would say if only they spoke straight from the heart. But that would make life impossible, therefore Constantine tried to do what all his life he had tried and never known how to do (although he had often observed that many people were able to do it well), something without which life was impossible: he tried to say something different from what he thought; and he felt all the time that it sounded false and that his brother detected him and grew irritable.
On the third day of his stay Nicholas challenged his brother to explain his plans to him once more, and not only found fault with them but purposely confused them with communism.
Communists deny the justice of property, capital, or inheritance, while I do not deny that main stimulus' (it was repulsive to Levin to find himself using such words, but since he had been engrossed in his work he had involuntarily begun using more and more foreign words), 'but want only to regulate labour.'
'That is it. You have taken other people's idea, dropped all that gave it force, and wish to make one believe that it is something new,' said Nicholas, angrily jerking his neck.
At these words Levin suddenly grew warm, for at the bottom of his heart he felt that it was true  true that he wished to balance between communism and the existing forms of life, and that this was hardly possible.
'I am seeking for a way of making labour profitable for me and for the labourers,' he answered hotly.
'You think so? Well, then, leave me alone!' said Levin, and he felt that a muscle was uncontrollably quivering in his left cheek.
However much Levin tried afterwards to pacify his brother, Nicholas would not listen to it, but said that it was much better for them to part. And Levin saw that life had become simply intolerable for his brother.
Nicholas had quite made up his mind to go. Constantine came to him again and in an unnatural manner asked his forgiveness if he had offended him in any way.
Only just before he left Nicholas kissed Constantine, and suddenly said with a strange and serious look at his brother,
'Do not think too badly of me, Kostya!' and his voice trembled.
Levin understood that they were meant to say, 'You see that I am in a bad way, and perhaps we shall not meet again.' He understood this, and tears trembled in his eyes.
He again kissed his brother, but he did not know what to answer.
Three days after his brother's departure Levin left for abroad.
He surprised young Shcherbatsky, Kitty's cousin, whom he happened to meet at a railway station, by his moroseness.
Levin was saying what of late he had really been thinking.
He saw death and the approach of death in everything; but the work he had begun interested him all the more.
After all, he had to live his life somehow, till death came.
Everything for him was wrapped in darkness; but just because of the darkness, feeling his work to be the only thread to guide him through that darkness, he seized upon it and clung to it with all his might.
Karenin made it a rule to see his wife every day, so as not to give the servants any grounds for making conjectures, but he avoided dining at home.
Vronsky never came to the Karenins' house, but Anna met him elsewhere and her husband knew it.
Karenin expected the passion to pass, as everything passes; all would be forgotten and his name not dishonoured.
Anna, who was responsible for the situation, and for whom among the three it was most painful, bore it because she not only expected, but felt sure, that very soon everything would be settled and cleared up.
Involuntarily submitting to her judgment, Vronsky too expected something, not dependent on him, to clear up all these difficulties.
In the middle of the winter he spent a very dull week.
That was why he was chosen to attend the Prince; but the task seemed a hard one to him.
The Prince did not want to miss seeing anything about which he might be questioned at home and he also wanted to enjoy as many Russian amusements as possible; and Vronsky was obliged to accompany him in both cases.
The Prince enjoyed unusually good health even for a Prince, and by means of gymnastics and care of his body had developed his strength to such a degree that, in spite of the excess he indulged in when amusing himself, he looked as fresh as a big green shining cucumber.
He had been to Spain, where he arranged serenades and became intimate with a Spanish woman who played the mandoline.
In Switzerland he had shot a chamois, in England he had jumped hedges in a pink coat and shot two hundred pheasants for a bet.
He had been in a harem in Turkey, ridden an elephant in India, and now in Russia he wanted a taste of distinctive Russian amusements.
And the Prince imbibed the Russian spirit with the greatest ease, smashed trays full of crockery, made gipsy girls sit on his lap, and yet seemed to be always asking: 'What next?
But, on the whole, of all the Russian amusements the Prince liked the French actresses, a ballet girl, and white-seal champagne best.
Vronsky was used to Princes, but whether it was that he himself had lately changed, or whether his intimacy with this Prince was too close, that week at any rate appeared very wearisome to him. All that week he felt like a man attending a lunatic and afraid for his own reason too.
He was obliged to be on his guard the whole time not to deviate from the path of severe official respect, for fear of being insulted.
His opinion of Russian women, whom he wanted to study, more than once made Vronsky flush with indignation.
But the chief reason why the Prince's presence oppressed Vronsky was that he saw himself reflected in the Prince, and what he saw in that mirror was not flattering to his vanity.
The Prince was a very stupid, very healthy and very cleanly man  and nothing more.
He was quiet and not cringing with those above him, free and simple with his equals, and contemptuously good-natured with his inferiors.
Vronsky was the same, and considered it very meritorious to be so, but in his relations with the Prince he was the inferior and felt indignant with that condescendingly good-natured treatment.
'Stupid ox! can I really be like that myself?' he thought.
However this may have been, he parted from the Prince (who went on to Moscow) and received his thanks. Vronsky was very pleased to be rid of the embarrassing situation and the unpleasant mirror.
Come this evening; Alexis Alexandrovich is going to the Council and will remain there till ten.' After wondering for a moment at the strangeness of her asking him straight out to come to her house in spite of her husband's injunctions, he decided to go.
Immediately after lunch he lay down on the sofa. Five minutes later the memory of the disreputable scenes at which he had been present during the last few days became jumbled and connected with pictures of Anna and a peasant who had played an important part as a beater at the bear-hunting; and Vronsky fell asleep.
Yes, yes, the peasant, the beater  I think he was small and dirty with a tangled beard  was stooping down and doing something or other, and suddenly began to say strange words in French. That is all there was in that dream,' he thought.
'But why did it seem so terrible?' He vividly recalled the peasant and the incomprehensible words that the man had uttered, and a shudder of terror ran down his back.
'What nonsense!' he thought, glancing at his watch.
He rang for his valet, dressed hurriedly, and went out into the porch, having quite forgotten his dream and feeling worried only by the fact that he was late.
As he drove up to the Karenins' porch he again glanced at his watch and saw that it was ten minutes to nine.
But no matter! I cannot hide,' he thought; and with the manner; habitual to him since childhood, of one who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky got out of his sledge and went to the door.
The door opened and the hall porter with a rug over his arm called to the coachman.
Vronsky, though not in the habit of noticing details, noticed the look of surprise on the man's face.
In the doorway he nearly knocked up against Karenin.
The gaslight lit up Karenin's worn, bloodless face beneath the black hat, and his white tie showing from beneath the beaver collar of his overcoat.
Vronsky bowed, and Karenin silently moved his lips, lifted his hand to his hat, and went out.
Vronsky saw him get into the carriage without looking round, take the rug and a pair of opera-glasses through the carriage window; then he disappeared in the darkness.
His brows were knit and his eyes shone with a proud, angry light.
'That is a nice position!' he thought. 'If he struggled, if he defended his honour, I could act and could express my feelings; but this weakness or meanness...
Involuntarily submitting to Anna's weakness, who, ready in advance to accept anything, gave herself up to him entirely and expected him to decide her fate, he had long ceased to imagine that their union could end in the way he had then expected.
His ambitious plans had receded to the background, and feeling that he had come out of the range of activity in which everything was definite, he completely gave himself up to his passion, and that passion bound him closer and closer to her.
While still in the hall he heard her retreating footsteps, and knew that she had been waiting and listening for him, but had now gone back to the drawing-room.
'No!' she cried when she saw him, and at the first sound of her voice tears filled her eyes. 'No!
She put both her hands on his shoulders and gazed at him long, with a deep look of ecstasy and yet searchingly.
She scrutinized his face to make up for the time she had not seen him.
She compared, as she did at every interview with him, the image her fancy painted of him (incomparably finer than, and impossible in, actual existence) with his real self.
'YOU MET HIM?' she asked when they sat down at a table under the lamp. 'That is your punishment for being late.'
She knew all the details of his life.
He wished to say that he had been up all night and had fallen asleep, but seeing her excited and happy face he felt ashamed.
So he said that he had to go and report the Prince's departure.
Is it not the kind of life all you young men lead?' she said, frowning; and taking up her crochet-work from the table began disentangling the hook without looking at Vronsky.
'I have long since abandoned that kind of life,' he said, wondering at the change in her face and trying to penetrate its meaning. 'And I must own,' he went on smiling and showing his compact row of teeth, 'that I seem to have been looking in a mirror the whole of this week while watching that kind of life, and it was very unpleasant.'
She held her work in her hands, without crocheting, gazing at him with a strange, glittering, unfriendly look.
'Lisa called on me this morning; they still visit me in spite of the Countess Lydia Ivanovna,' she said, 'and she told me about your Athenian party.
How is it that you can forget that a woman cannot forget these things?' she said, getting more and more heated and thereby betraying the cause of her irritation.
'Especially a woman who cannot know your life.
'Yes; yes!' she said, evidently trying to drive away her jealous thoughts. 'But if you only knew how hard it is for me!
But he could not at once remember what he had wished to say.
These fits of jealousy which had lately begun to repeat themselves more and more frequently, horrified him and, however much he tried to hide the fact, they made him feel colder toward her, although he knew that the jealousy was caused by love for him.
How often he had told himself that to be loved by her was happiness! and now that she loved him, as only a woman can for whom love outweighs all else that is good in life, he was much further from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow.
Then he thought himself unhappy, but happiness was all in the future; now he felt that the best happiness was already in the past.
She was not at all such as he had first seen her.
Both morally and physically she had changed for the worse.
She had broadened out, and as she spoke of the actress there was a malevolent look on her face which distorted its expression.
He looked at her as a man might look at a faded flower he had plucked, in which it was difficult for him to trace the beauty that had made him pick and so destroy it.
Yet in spite of this he felt that though at first while his love was strong he would have been able, had he earnestly desired it, to pull that love out of his heart  yet now when he imagined, as he did at that moment, that he felt no love for her, he knew that the bond between them could not be broken.
'Well, what were you going to tell me about the Prince? I have driven away the demon,' she added.
'Oh, it was intolerable!' he said, trying to pick up the lost thread of what he had in his mind. 'He does not improve on nearer acquaintance.
If I am to describe him, he is a finely-bred animal, like those that get prizes at cattle-shows, and nothing more,' he concluded in a tone of vexation which awoke her interest.
'Oh, but in what way?' she rejoined. 'Anyhow he must have seen much, and is well educated...'
One can see that he has been educated only to have the right to despise education, as they despise everything except animal pleasures.'
'But don't all of you like those animal pleasures?' she remarked, and he again noticed on her face that dismal look which evaded his.
'Why do you take his part so?' he said, smiling.
'I don't take his part, and it is a matter of complete indifference to me, but I should say that as you did not like these pleasures you might have declined to go.
'Again! Again the demon!' said Vronsky, taking the hand which she had put on the table, and kissing it.
She turned away from him and, managing at last to disentangle her hook, with the aid of her forefinger began to draw the stitches of white wool, shining in the lamplight, through each other, the delicate wrist moving rapidly and nervously within her embroidered cuff.
Where did you meet Alexis Alexandrovich?' she suddenly asked, her voice ringing unnaturally.
'And he bowed like this to you?'
She drew up her face, half closed her eyes and quickly changed the expression of her face, folding her hands; and Vronsky saw at once upon her beautiful face the very look with which Karenin had bowed to him.
He smiled, and she laughed merrily, with that delightful laughter from the chest which was one of her special charms.
'I can't at all understand him,' said Vronsky. 'Had he after your explanation in the country broken with you, had he challenged me, yes!
But this sort of thing I do not understand. How can he put up with such a position?
'He?' she said, sarcastically. 'He is perfectly contented.'
'But not he!
As if I did not know him, and the falsehood with which he is saturated!...
As if it were possible for anyone to live as he is living with me! He understands and feels nothing.
Could a man who has any feelings live in the same house with his guilty wife?
Could he talk to her and call her by her Christian name?' And without meaning to, she again mimicked him: 'Ma chre Anna; my dear!'
'He is not a man, not a human being. He is... a doll!
Oh, if I were he, I should long since have killed, have torn in pieces, a wife such as I, and not have called her "Ma chre Anna. " He is not a man but an official machine.
He does not understand that I am your wife, that he is a stranger, a superfluous.-.-. But don't let us talk about him.'
'You are unjust, unjust, my dear,' said Vronsky, trying to pacify her. 'But still, don't let us talk about him.
She had evidently remembered other comical and unpleasant sides of her husband's character and waited for an opportunity to mention them.
The mocking light in her eyes faded, but a smile of a different kind  the knowledge of something unknown to him, and gentle sadness  replaced the former expression of her face.
And at the thought of how it was going to happen she felt so sorry for herself that the tears came into her eyes and she could not continue.
She laid her hand, sparkling with rings and the whiteness of the skin, on his sleeve.
'I do not understand,' he said, though he did understand.
Don't interrupt,' she said hurriedly.
The tears ran down her cheeks, he stooped over her hand and began kissing it, trying to hide the emotion which he knew to be groundless but could not master.
'That is right, that is better,' she said, firmly pressing his hand. 'This is all, all that remains to us.'
He recovered and lifted his head.
'A dream?' Vronsky instantly remembered the peasant of his dream.
'Yes, a dream,' she said. 'I dreamed it a long time ago.
I thought I had run into my bedroom, that I had to fetch or find out something there: you know how it happens in dreams,' and her eyes dilated with horror. 'And in the bedroom there was something standing in the corner.'
But she would not allow him to stop her.
What she was saying was of too much importance to her.
I wanted to run away, but he stooped over a sack and was fumbling about in it...'
She showed how he fumbled in the sack: Her face was full of horror.
And Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same horror filling his soul.
'What nonsense, what nonsense!' said Vronsky, but he felt that there was no conviction in his voice.
But suddenly she stopped.
The expression of her face changed instantaneously.
She had felt a new life quickening within her.
KARENIN AFTER MEETING VRONSKY in his own porch went on as had been his intention to the Italian Opera.
On his return home he carefully looked at the coat-stand, and noticing that no military coat hung there he went to his study as usual; contrary to his habit, however, he did not go to bed but walked up and down the room till three in the morning.
The feeling of anger with his wife, who would not observe the rules of propriety and fulfil the only condition he had insisted on, that is, that she should not see her lover in his house, gave him no rest.
She had not fulfilled his condition and he was obliged to punish her and carry out his threat: to divorce her and take away her son.
He knew the difficulties connected with such a step: but he had said he would do it and was now obliged to do it.
The Countess Lydia Ivanovna had hinted to him that that was the best way to get out of the situation, and he knew that of late the practice of divorce had been brought to such a state of perfection that he saw a possibility of overcoming the formal difficulties.
Besides, misfortunes never come singly, and the affair of the subject races and the irrigation of the Zaraysk Province had caused Karenin so much unpleasantness in his official capacity that he had of late felt extremely irritable.
He did not sleep at all, and his wrath, increasing in a kind of gigantic progression, had reached its utmost limits by the morning.
He dressed in haste, and as if he were carrying a cup brimful of wrath and were afraid of spilling any and of losing with his anger the energy he needed for an explanation with his wife, he went to her room as soon as he knew that she was up.
Anna, who thought that she knew her husband so well, was struck by his appearance when he entered.
His brow was knit, and his eyes, gloomily fixed before him, avoided looking at her; his lips were firmly and contemptuously closed.
In his step, his movements, and the sound of his voice was such determination and firmness as his wife had never known in him.
He entered her boudoir and without saying 'Good morning!' went straight to her writing-table, took up her keys, and opened the drawer.
'What do you want?' she exclaimed.
'They are not there,' she said, closing the drawer; but this action proved to him that he had guessed rightly, and rudely pushing away her hand he quickly drew out a letter-case in which he knew that she kept her most important papers.
She wished to snatch away the letter-case, but he thrust her aside.
I must speak to you,' he said, taking the letter-case under his arm and pressing it so tight with his elbow that his shoulder went up.
Astonished and abashed, she silently looked at him.
'I do not go into particulars of why a woman wants to see her lover.'
'I wanted, I only wanted...' she said, flushing.
His coarseness irritated her and gave her boldness. 'Is it possible you do not feel how easy it is for you to insult me?' she said.
'It is possible to insult an honest man or an honest woman, but to tell a thief that he is a thief is only la constatation d'un fait.' [The statement of a fact.]
'You call it cruelty when a husband gives his wife complete freedom while he affords her honourable shelter, on the one condition that she should observe the laws of propriety.
'No!' he shouted in his squeaky voice, which now rose to a higher note than usual, and seizing her so tightly by the wrists with his large fingers that the bracelet he pressed left red marks, he forced her back into her seat. 'Baseness?
Since you wish to use that word  it is baseness to abandon a husband and a son for a lover and to go on eating the husband's bread!'
She did not say what she had said to her lover the day before, that Vronsky was her real husband and that he (Karenin) was superfluous, she did not even think it.
She felt all the justice of his words and only said softly:
Why!' he went on just as angrily, 'that you should know that as you have not fulfilled my wish that propriety should be observed, I shall take steps to put an end to this situation.'
'Soon, very soon, it will come to an end of itself!' she muttered, and at the thought of the nearness of death, which she now desired, tears again filled her eyes.
The sufferings of the man who was your husband do not interest you.
What do you care that his whole life is wrecked and how much he has suf suf suffled!'
Karenin was speaking so rapidly that he blundered and could not pronounce the word, and at last said suffled.
That struck her as funny; but immediately after she felt ashamed that anything could seem funny to her at such a moment.
And for the first time she felt for him and put herself for an instant in his place, and was sorry for him.
But what could she say or do?
She bowed her head in silence.
'I came to tell you...' said he.
She looked up at him. 'No, it was an illusion,' she thought, calling to mind the expression of his face when he blundered over the word suffled.
'I cannot change anything,' she whispered.
My son will stay with my sister,' said Karenin, making an effort to remember what he had wanted to say about his son.
'You want Serezha in order to hurt me,' she said, looking at him from under her brows. 'You do not care for him...
"Yes, I have even lost my affection for my son, because he is connected with my repulsion for you.
And he was about to go, but now she stopped him.
'Alexis Alexandrovich! Leave me Serezha!' she whispered again.
Karenin flushed, and pulling away his hand left the room.
Three women: an old lady a young lady, and a tradesman's wife; and three gentlemen: one a German banker with a ring on his finger, another a bearded merchant, and the third an irate official in uniform with an order hanging from his neck, had evidently long been waiting.
The writing-table accessories (of which Karenin was a connoisseur) were unusually good, as he could not help noticing.
One of the clerks, without rising from his chair, screwed up his eyes and addressed Karenin ill-humouredly.
'The lawyer is engaged,' replied the assistant sternly, and indicated with his pen the persons who were waiting.
'Can he not find time to see me?' said Karenin.
'He has no spare time, he is always busy.
'Then I will trouble you to give him my card,' said Karenin with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving his incognito.
The assistant took the card and, though he evidently did not approve of what he read on it, went out of the room.
Karenin approved in theory of public trial, but for certain high official reasons he did not quite sympathize with some aspects of its application in Russia, and he condemned these applications as far as he could condemn anything that had been confirmed by the Emperor.
His whole life had been spent in administrative activity, and therefore when he disapproved of anything his disapproval was mitigated by a recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and the possibility of improvement in everything.
In the new legal institutions he disapproved of the position occupied by lawyers.
But till now he had never had to deal with a lawyer and so had disapproved only in theory; now his disapproval was strengthened by the unpleasant impression he received in the lawyer's waiting-room.
The lawyer was a short, thick-set, bald-headed man, with a black beard tinged with red, long light-coloured eyebrows, and a bulging forehead: He was as spruce as a bridegroom, from his white necktie and double watch-chain to his patent leather boots.
His face was intelligent and peasant-like, but his dress was dandified and in bad taste.
'Come in, please!' said the lawyer to Karenin, and gloomily ushering his client in before him, he closed the door.
'Won't you take a seat?' He pointed to a chair beside a writing-table covered with papers, and himself took the principal seat, rubbing his little hands with their short fingers covered with white hair and bending his head to one side.
But hardly had he settled down when a moth flew across the table.
The lawyer, with a rapidity one could not have expected of him, separated his hands, caught the moth, and resumed his former position.
Karenin glanced at him and saw that his intelligent grey eyes were laughing, as if he knew everything in advance.
'I know you and, like every Russian, I know ' here he again caught a moth  'your useful activity,' said the lawyer bowing.
Karenin sighed, collecting his courage, but having once made up his mind he went on in his squeaky voice without timidity or hesitation, emphasizing a word here and there.
'I have the misfortune,' began Karenin, 'to be a deceived husband, and I wish legally to break off relations with my wife  that is, to be divorced, but in such a way that my son should not remain with his mother.'
The lawyer's grey eyes tried not to laugh but they danced with irrepressible glee, and Karenin saw that it was not only the glee of a man getting profitable business; there was triumph and delight, and a gleam resembling the evil-boding gleam he had seen in his wife's eyes.
The lawyer looked down at Karenin's feet, feeling that the sight of his irrepressible joy might offend his client.
He glanced at a moth that flew past his nose and his hand moved, but did not catch it, out of respect for Karenin's situation.
'You wish me to state,' the lawyer said, still not raising his eyes and adopting, with a certain pleasure his client's manner of speech,' the various methods by which your desire can be carried out?'
'Divorce, under our laws,' he said, with a slight shade of disapproval of the laws, 'as you are aware, may be granted in the following cases... You must wait!' he exclaimed, addressing his assistant who had looked in at the door; but he rose all the same, spoke a few words to his assistant, and sat down again.
'In the following cases: physical defect in husband or wife, five years' absence without news'  and he bent one of his short hairy fingers  'and in cases of adultery,' he uttered the word with evident pleasure. 'These are subdivided as follows,' and he went on bending down his thick fingers, though the cases and the subdivisions evidently could not be classed together, 'physical defects in husband or in wife, and adultery of husband or of wife.'
As all his fingers had been used he straightened them all out and continued: 'That is the theoretical view; but I suppose you have done me the honour of applying to me in order to learn the practical application of the law. Therefore, guided by the precedents, I have to inform you that cases of divorce all come to the following:  there is, I suppose, no physical defect or absence without news?...'
I must add that the latter case is seldom met with in practice,' and with a momentary glance at Karenin the lawyer became suddenly silent, like a man who when selling pistols has described the advantages of the different kinds, and waits for his customer's decision.
But Karenin remained silent, and so he began again: 'The most usual, simple, and reasonable way I consider to be adultery by mutual consent.
I should not venture so to express myself were I talking to a man of undeveloped mind,' said the lawyer, 'but I expect it is comprehensible to you.'
Karenin was, however, so much upset that he did not at once understand the reasonableness of adultery by mutual consent and his perplexity was expressed in his looks; but the lawyer immediately helped him.
But he had religious requirements which hindered his acceptance of this method.
'It is out of the question in the present case,' said he. 'Only one measure is possible: involuntary detection confirmed by letters which I have.'
At the mention of letters the lawyer pressed his lips together and gave vent to a high-pitched sound of pity and contempt.
'Please remember that cases of this kind, as you know, are decided by the Ecclesiastical Department, and the reverend Fathers in such cases are keenly interested in the minutest details,' he said, with a smile that showed his fellow-feeling with the reverend Fathers' taste. 'Letters may certainly serve as a partial confirmation, but direct evidence from witnesses must be produced.
'If it is so...' Karenin began, growing suddenly pale; but at that moment the other suddenly rose and went to the door to speak to his assistant, who had again come to interrupt him.
'Tell her we have not got a cheap sale on here!' he said and came back again.
As he was returning he furtively caught another moth. 'A fine state my furniture will be in when summer comes!' he thought, and frowned.
'Yes, you were saying...' he began
After a short pause he said, 'I may conclude from your words that a divorce could be obtained.
'It is quite possible; if you allow me full liberty of action,' said the lawyer, without taking any notice of the last question. 'When may I expect to hear from you?' he added, moving toward the door, his eyes and patent leather boots shining.
The lawyer bowed deferentially, let his client pass out, and being left alone abandoned himself to his happy mood.
He felt so cheerful that, contrary to his custom, he allowed a reduction to the bargaining lady and gave up catching moths, having made up his mind to have his furniture re-covered next winter with velvet, like Sigonin's.
KARENIN HAD GAINED a brilliant victory at the Committee Meeting of the seventeenth of August; but the consequence of that victory undermined his power.
Stremov suddenly changed over to Karenin's side, bringing several other members in his train, and not only warmly supported the measures advocated by Karenin, but proposed other more extreme measures of the same nature.
Karenin's position, partly in consequence of this and partly from the contempt that fell on him as a result of his wife's infidelity, became very shaky.
In these circumstances he took an important resolution.
He announced, to the surprise of the Committee, that he would ask to be allowed to go and investigate the matter himself, and having received permission he started for the distant Provinces.
Karenin's departure was much talked about, especially because just before starting he formally returned the post-fare sufficient to pay for twelve horses all the way to his destination, which had been advanced to him.
'It is all very well for you to talk who possess I don't know how many millions,' she said.
It is very good for his health, and pleasant for him; and we have an arrangement by which this allowance goes for the hire of a carriage and coachman for me.'
On his way to the distant Province Karenin stopped three days in Moscow.
On the day after his arrival he went to call on the Governor-General.
At the crossing of Gazetny Street, where there is always a crowd of carriages and izvoshchiks, he suddenly heard some one calling out his name in such a loud and cheerful voice that he could not help looking round.
On the pavement at the corner of the street, in a short fashionable overcoat and a small fashionable hat, his teeth gleaming between his smiling red lips, young, gay, and beaming, stood Oblonsky, determinedly and insistently shouting and demanding that Karenin should stop.
He was holding with one hand the window of a carriage (from which the head of a lady in a velvet bonnet and two little children's heads were leaning out) and was smilingly beckoning with his other hand to his brother-in-law.
The lady too with a kind smile waved her hand to Karenin.
Karenin did not wish to see anyone in Moscow, and certainly not his wife's brother.
He raised his hat and was going on, but Oblonsky told the coachman to stop and ran across the snow.
And I went into Dusseaux's hotel yesterday and saw "Karenin" on the board, and it never entered my head that it could be you!' said Oblonsky, thrusting his head in at the carriage window, 'else I should have looked you up.
I am so glad to see you!' and he kicked his feet together to knock off the snow. 'What a shame not to send word!'
'Come and speak to my wife; she is so anxious to see you.'
Karenin unfolded the rug he had wrapped round his legs, which were so sensitive to the cold, got out of the carriage, and making his way through the snow approached Dolly.
Very pleased to see you,' he said in a tone that expressed clearly that he was very sorry. 'How are you?'
'She is well,' replied Karenin, frowning. 'I shall be very pleased,' and he went back to his carriage.
Karenin got into his carriage and sat far back, so as neither to see nor to be seen.
'Queer chap!' said Oblonsky to his wife, and after glancing at his watch waved his hand in front of his face as a sign of endearment to his wife and children, and walked jauntily away along the pavement.
'Never mind! Tell them I will pay!' and nodding his head to an acquaintance who was driving past he disappeared round the corner.
Oblonsky went to the rehearsal of a ballet at the Imperial Theatre and gave to Masha Chibisova  a pretty dancer, who through his patronage had just obtained an engagement  a coral necklace he had promised her the evening before; and behind the scene, in the midday darkness of the theatre, contrived to kiss her pretty face, which was brightened by his present.
Besides giving her the necklace he wished to make an appointment to meet her after the ballet.
Having explained that he could not be there at the beginning of the performance, he promised to come for the last act, and take her to supper.
From the theatre Oblonsky went to the market, and himself selected the fish and asparagus for dinner; and at noon he was already at Dusseaux's Hotel, where he had to call on three people who, fortunately for him, had all put up at the same place. These were: Levin, who had only just returned from abroad; a newly-appointed superior official who was making a tour of inspection in Moscow; and Karenin, his brother-in-law, whom he wanted to secure for dinner.
With the programme for that day's dinner he was very satisfied; there would be perch (brought alive to the kitchen) and asparagus, the piece le resistance was to consist of a splendid but quite plain joint of roast beef, and the wines would be well chosen: so much for the food and drink.
As for the guests, there would be Kitty and Levin, and, in order that they should not be too conspicuous, a girl cousin and young Shcherbatsky  here the pice de rsistance was to consist of Sergius Ivanich Koznyshev and Alexis Alexandrovich Karenin: Sergius Ivanich, a Muscovite and a philosopher, and Alexis Alexandrovich, a Petersburger and a practical politician.
Besides these he meant to ask the well-known crank and enthusiast Pestsov, a Liberal and a great talker, a musician and historian, and the dearest of fifty-year-old boys, who would serve as sauce or condiment to Koznyshev and Karenin  while he himself, Oblonsky, would stir them all up and set them by the ears.
The second instalment of the forest money had been paid and was not yet all spent. Dolly had been very nice and kind of late, and the thought of his dinner-party pleased Oblonsky in every respect.
Just two circumstances were not quite satisfactory, but they were drowned in the ocean of kind-hearted joviality which overflowed his heart.
From the fact that when he had met Karenin in the street the previous day the latter had treated him with cold stiffness, and had not called or even informed them of his arrival  from this, added to the rumour about Anna and Vronsky that had reached him, Oblonsky concluded that all was not as it should be between the husband and wife.
This was one of the unpleasant things, while the other was the fact that his new superior, like all new superiors, had the reputation of being a dreadful man who got up at six in the morning, worked like a horse, and expected his subordinates to do the same.
This superior also had the reputation of having the manners of a bear, and he was reported to hold views diametrically opposed to those of his predecessor and, till now, of Oblonsky also.
On the previous day Oblonsky had appeared on Service business in uniform; the new superior was very pleasant and chatted with him as with an old acquaintance; therefore Oblonsky now considered it his duty to call on him in a morning coat. The thought that the new superior might not take this in good part was the second unpleasant circumstance, but Oblonsky felt instinctively that everything would 'turn out' splendidly.
'After all, they're all human beings, all men, just like us poor sinners,' he thought, as he entered the hotel. 'What is there to be angry and quarrel about?'
Walking down the corridor with his hat tilted on one side, he said, 'How do you do, Vassily?' to a servant he knew.
'Fine thing! A she-bear?
He shook hands with the peasant and sat down without taking off his overcoat or hat.
'No, I have no time. I've only come in for a moment,' replied Oblonsky, throwing open his coat.
Later on he took it off and stayed for an hour, talking to Levin about bear-hunting and also about personal matters.
'Yes, yes,' he said, 'very likely you are right.
But I am glad you are in good spirits and go bear-hunting and work, and are full of enthusiasms, because Shcherbatsky told me he met you and you were down in the mouth, and kept talking about death...'
'Is he here?' asked Levin, and was going to inquire about Kitty.
He had heard that she went to Petersburg at the beginning of the winter to visit her sister, who had married a diplomatist.
He did not know whether she had returned, but changed his mind and thought: 'Whether she comes or not will make no difference.'
His instinct had not deceived him; the dreadful new superior turned out to be a most affable man. Oblonsky had lunch with him and sat talking so long that it was going on for four when he arrived at Karenin's.
That day he had two matters to see to: to interview a deputation from a subject-race which was in Moscow at that time, and give them instructions, and to write to the lawyer as he had promised.
The interview, though the deputation had been summoned on his initiative, was an affair that presented many difficulties and even dangers, and Karenin was very glad that it chanced to be in Moscow when he was there.
Karenin had a prolonged tussle with them, and wrote out for them a programme which they were not to overstep, and having dismissed them he wrote two letters to Petersburg.
In this matter his chief helper was the Countess Lydia Ivanovna, who was a specialist in deputations.
When he had finished with the deputation Karenin wrote to the lawyer, without the least hesitation giving him permission to act at his own discretion, and enclosing three notes from Vronsky to Anna which he had found in the writing-case he had taken possession of.
Having left his home with the intention of never returning to his family, and having seen the lawyer and communicated  though only to that one person  this intention, and particularly after converting this matter of life into an affair of ink and paper, Karenin had grown more and more used to the notion; so that carrying it into effect now seemed to him possible.
He was just closing his letter to the lawyer when he heard Oblonsky's voice.
Oblonsky was disputing with Karenin's servant, and insisting that he should be announced.
'No matter!' thought Karenin, 'it is even better so. I will tell him about my position with regard to his sister at once, and will explain why I cannot dine at his house.'
'Ask the gentleman in!' he said in a loud voice, collecting his papers and placing them inside a blotter.
'There, you see, you were lying to me! He is at home!' came the voice of Oblonsky in answer to the man who had been trying to stop him, as he entered, the room, taking off his overcoat as he came.
'I can't come,' Karenin, who was standing, said coldly, without offering his visitor a seat.
Karenin had expected to enter at once upon the cool relation in which he would henceforth stand toward the brother of the wife against whom he was beginning divorce proceedings; but he had not counted upon the flood of kindliness which overflowed the banks of Oblonsky's soul.
Oblonsky opened his clear and shining eyes wide.
What do you mean?' he demanded in French, quite taken aback.
But before Karenin could finish what he was about to say, Oblonsky did something quite unexpected.
'Dear me, Alexis Alexandrovich! What are you talking about?' he cried, a look of pain appearing on his face.
Karenin sat down, conscious that his words had not the effect he had anticipated, that he would be obliged to give an explanation, and that whatever that explanation might be, it would not alter his relation to his brother-in-law.
'Yes, I am under the painful necessity of applying for a divorce,' he continued.
I know you to be a first-rate and a just man; I know Anna to be  excuse me! I cannot change my opinion of her  a fine, a splendid woman; and therefore forgive me, but I cannot believe this.
Well, before doing so, see my wife and talk it over with her!
She cares for Anna as for a sister, she is fond of you, and she is a wonderful woman.
For heaven's sake, talk it over with her!
'You will come and see her?'
Do come, and above all, do talk it over with her.
She is a wonderful woman.
'If you wish it so much, I will come,' said Karenin with a sigh, and anxious to change the subject he inquired about a matter interesting to them both  Oblonsky's new superior, a man who, though still young, had suddenly been given so important a post.
Karenin had never liked Count Anichkin, their opinions had always been at variance, and now he could not repress a feeling of spite, quite comprehensible to anyone in an official position, toward a more successful man.
'Oh yes, he came to the Council yesterday.
He seems to know his business perfectly and is very active.'
The curse of our State is its red-tape administration, of which he is a worthy representative.'
'I really don't know what his tendencies are, but I do know that he is a first-rate fellow,' replied Oblonsky. 'I have just been to see him, and he really is a first-rate chap.
It is very refreshing, and it is amazing that he did not know of it.
Yes, he certainly is a first-rate chap.'
Oblonsky looked at his watch.
Karenin parted from his brother-in-law in a very different manner to that in which he had met him.
'I have promised, and I will come,' he answered in a dejected tone.
As he put on his overcoat while walking away, his arm struck the servant's head. He laughed and went out.
'Five o'clock, and morning dress, if you please!' he sang out, returning to the door.
They respected one another, but in almost everything they were completely and hopelessly at variance, not because they belonged to different schools of thought but just because they belonged to one camp (their enemies confused them one with the other), and in that camp each of them had his own shade.
His wife in her gala dress, a grey silk, evidently worried both about the children who would have to dine alone in the nursery and about her husband who had not returned, had not managed in his absence to mix the guests properly.
The good-natured Turovtsyn clearly felt quite out of it, and the smile on his thick lips, with which he met Oblonsky said as clearly as words, 'Well, my friend, you have planted me among the clever ones!
To have a drink at the Chateau des Fleurs would be more in my line.' The old Prince sat silent, his shining eyes looking askance at Karenin, and Oblonsky saw that he had already prepared some remark wherewith to polish off that dignitary of State, whom people were invited to as to a dish of sturgeon.
Karenin himself, as the Petersburg way is when one dines with ladies, was in evening dress with a white tie, and Oblonsky saw by his face that he had come only to keep his promise, and by being in that company was fulfilling an unpleasant duty.
On entering the drawing-room Oblonsky made his excuses, explaining that he had been kept by the particular Prince who was his usual scapegoat whenever he was late or absent, and in a moment he had reintroduced everybody, and having brought Karenin and Koznyshev together, he started them off on the subject of the Russification of Poland, and they immediately caught on, Pestsov joining them.
Having patted Turovtsyn on the shoulder, he whispered something funny in his ear and got him to sit down next to Dolly and the old Prince.
Then he told Kitty that she was looking very nice, and introduced young Shcherbatsky to Karenin.
In a moment he had kneaded all that Society dough in such a way that the drawing-room was in first-rate form, and was filled with animated voices.
However, that was all for the best, for Oblonsky, on looking in at the dining-room, saw to his horror that the port-wine and sherry were from Depres and not from Lev and having given orders to send the coachman as quickly as possible to Lev he turned to go back to the drawing-room.
But he met Levin at the door.
'As if you ever could help being late!' said Oblonsky taking his hand.
Whom have you got?' asked Levin with a blush, knocking the snow off his cap with his glove.
Oblonsky, in spite of being Liberal, knew that to be acquainted with Karenin could not but be an honour, and therefore treated his best friends to that honour.
He had not seen Kitty since the memorable evening when he had met Vronsky, excepting for that one moment when he had caught sight of her on the high road.
In the depths of his soul he had felt sure that he should meet her that evening, but to maintain his freedom of thought he had tried to assure himself that he did not know it.
Now, when he heard that she was here, he was suddenly filled with such joy and at the same time with such fear, that it took away his breath and he could not utter what he wished to say.
'What was she like?
The same as before, or as she was that morning in the carriage?
Why should it not be true?' he thought.
'Oh, do introduce me to Karenin!' he brought out with difficulty, and with despairing determination he entered the drawing-room and saw her.
She was not as she had been before nor as he had seen her in the carriage. She was quite different.
She saw him as soon as he entered.
She was filled with joy, and that joy made her feel so confused that for a moment when, as he was approaching the hostess, he again glanced at her, Kitty herself, he, and Dolly all thought she would not be able to control herself but would burst into tears.
She blushed, grew pale, then blushed again, and quite rigid, with only her lips quivering slightly, sat waiting for him.
He came up, bowed, and silently held out his hand.
Had it not been for the light quivering of her lips and the moisture that made her eyes brighter, her smile would have appeared almost calm when she said:
'What a long time it is since we saw one another!' while with a desperate resolve her cold hand pressed his.
'When?' she asked him with surprise.
'You were driving to Ergushevo,' said Levin, feeling that the happiness with which his heart was overflowing was taking his breath away. 'How did I dare to connect anything that was not innocent with this pathetic being!
Yes, what Darya Alexandrovna told me seems to be true,' he thought.
Oblonsky took his arm and led him up to Karenin.
'Let me introduce you,' and he gave their names.
'Very pleased to meet you again,' said Karenin coldly, as he shook hands with Levin.
Koznyshev, who knew better than anyone how at the end of a most abstract and serious dispute unexpectedly to administer a grain of Attic salt and thereby to change his interlocutor's frame of mind, did so now.
How many have you got?' he asked, turning to the host with a kindly smile and holding out a tiny wine-glass to be filled.
'Yes, that is the very best way,' he said, chewing some cheese and filling the glass with a special kind of vodka. And the conversation was really ended by the joke.
'Have you really been doing gymnastics again?' he went on turning to Levin, and with his left hand he felt Levin's muscles.
Levin smiled, tightening his arm, and under Oblonsky's fingers a lump like a Dutch cheese and hard as steel bulged out beneath the fine cloth of Levin's coat.
'I expect great strength is needed for bear-hunting,' said Karenin, who had the vaguest notions about sport, as he helped himself to cheese and broke his slice of bread, cut as fine as a cobweb.
On the contrary a child can kill a bear,' he said, making room, with a slight bow, for the ladies who were coming up to the side-table with the hostess.
'You have killed a bear, I hear?' said Kitty, vainly trying to catch a wayward, slippery pickled mushroom with her fork, and so shaking the lace of her sleeve through which her arm gleamed white. 'Have you any bears near your estate?' she added, turning her lovely little head toward him and smiling.
There was, it would seem, nothing unusual in what she had said, but for him what a meaning there was, inexpressible in words, in every sound and every movement of her lips, her eyes, and her hands as she said it!
There was a prayer for forgiveness, and trust in him, and a caress  a tender, timid caress, and a promise, and hope, and love for him in which he could not but believe and which suffocated him with joy.
On my return journey I met your brother-in-law, or rather your brother-in-law's brother-in-law, on the train,' he said smiling. 'It was a funny meeting.'
And gaily and amusingly he told how after not sleeping all night he, in his sheep-skin coat, had rushed into Karenin's compartment.
'The rights of passengers to a choice of seats are very ill-defined,' said Karenin, wiping the tips of his fingers on his handkerchief.
'I noticed that you were not quite sure what to make of me,' said Levin with a good-natured smile, 'so I hastened to start an intellectual conversation, to expiate my sheep-skin.' Koznyshev, while continuing his conversation with the hostess, listened with one ear to his brother, turning his eyes toward him, and thought, 'What has happened to him to-day?
He did not know that Levin felt as if he had grown a pair of wings.
Levin knew that she was listening to his words and liked hearing him, and that was the only thing he cared about.
Not only in that room but in the whole world there existed for him nothing but Kitty and himself, and he had now acquired a great significance and importance.
'Well, you might sit here,' he said to Levin.
PESTSOV LIKED TO BRING HIS DISCUSSIONS TO A FINISH, and had not been satisfied with Koznyshev's remark, especially as he felt the fallacy of his own opinion.
'I did not mean,' he began over his soup, addressing Karenin, 'the density of population alone, but that combined with firm foundations. It is not principles that count.'
'But the question is,' interrupted Pestsov in his deep voice  he was always in a hurry to speak and always seemed to stake his whole soul on what he was talking about  'what does "higher development" consist of?
We see that the Rhine has become Frenchified, yet the Germans do not stand on a lower level!' he shouted. 'There is some other law!'
'I think that the influence will always be on the side of the truly educated,' said Karenin slightly raising his eyebrows.
'I am not expressing my opinion of either kind of education,' replied Koznyshev, smiling at him condescendingly as at a child and holding out his glass. 'All I say is that both sides have weighty arguments in their favour,' he continued addressing himself to Karenin.
Koznyshev quietly waited to put in his word, evidently ready with triumphant retort.
'But one cannot help admitting,' he said with his subtle smile, turning to Karenin, 'one cannot help admitting that it is difficult to weigh exactly all the pros and cons of the different studies, and that the question, which kind of education should be preferred, would not have been so easily decided had there not been on the side of classical education that advantage which you have just mentioned: the moral advantage, disons le mot  the anti-nihilistic influence.'
But supposing it has not that salutary virtue after all?' he concluded, adding the grain of Attic salt.
Everybody laughed at Koznyshev's 'pills,' and Turovtsyn, who had at last heard the something funny for which he had been waiting as he listened to the conversation, laughed particularly loudly and merrily.
Hardly had Koznyshev with his joke put an end to the discussion of one question before Pestsov immediately raised another.
'One cannot even admit that the Government had that aim in view,' he said.
And we must sympathize with this desire of others to help in man's work for the community.'
'And how about the old proverb?' remarked the old Prince, who had long been listening to the conversation with a humorous twinkle in his small glittering eyes. 'My daughters won't mind my mentioning it.
Turovtsyn burst into loud laughter, and Koznyshev felt sorry he had not made that remark himself.
'Yes, but a man can't be a wet nurse,' said Pestsov, 'while a woman...'
'Oh yes, an Englishman on board ship did once nurse his baby,' said the old Prince, allowing himself this indelicacy in his daughters' presence.
'Yes, but what is a girl to do if she has no home?' said Oblonsky, agreeing with Pestsov and supporting him, and thinking of the dancer Chibisova, whom he had in his mind all the time.
'If you looked carefully into that girl's story, you would find that she had left her family or a sister's family, where she might have done woman's work,' said Dolly, irritably and unexpectedly intervening in the conversation. She probably guessed what girl her husband had in his mind.
'But we are defending a principle, an ideal!' said Pestsov in his sonorous bass. 'Women wish to have the right to be independent and educated.
'And I am hampered and oppressed by the knowledge that they won't take me as a wet-nurse in the Foundlings' Hospital,' repeated the old Prince, to the great joy of Turovtsyn, who laughed till he dropped the thick end of a piece of asparagus into the sauce.
At first when the influence of one nation on another was being talked about, thoughts of what he had to say on the subject involuntarily came into Levin's mind; but these thoughts, formerly so important to him, now only flickered through his mind as in a dream and were not of the slightest interest.
How often she had thought about that question when she remembered her friend abroad and the irksome state of dependence in which Varenka lived, how often she had wondered what would be her own fate if she did not get married, and how many times she had argued about it with her sister.
But now it did not interest her at all.
They began by Levin's telling Kitty in answer to her question of how he could have seen her in the carriage in the summer, how he was going back from the hay fields along the high road and met her.
Your mother was asleep in her corner.
I was going along and wondering who that could be in a four-horsed coach, a splendid team with bells, and for an instant you appeared and I saw you at the window sitting like this, holding the strings of your cap with both hands and thinking very deeply about something,' he said and smiled. 'How I wish I knew what you were thinking about!
'Was I not very untidy?' she thought, but seeing the rapturous smile which the recollection of these details evoked she felt that the impression she had produced was a very pleasing one.
'I really don't remember.' 'How pleasantly Turovtsyn laughs!' said Levin, looking with pleasure at his moist eyes and shaking body.
'I see you think he is a bad man.'
Change your opinion quickly,' said Kitty. 'I too did not think much of him, but he is... he is a dear fellow and wonderfully kind-hearted.
'How did you manage to find out his heart?'
I know him very well. Last winter soon after... soon after you came to us,' she said with a penitent and at the same time a trustful smile, 'Dolly's children all had scarlet fever and he happened to call.
And fancy!' she went on in a whisper, 'he was so sorry for her that he stopped and helped her to nurse the children.
Really, he stayed three weeks in the house and looked after the children like a nurse.'
'I am telling Constantine Dmitrich about Turovtsyn and the scarlet fever,' she said, leaning over toward her sister.
'Yes? it was wonderful! he is splendid!' said Dolly, looking toward Turovtsyn who felt that he was being talked about, and giving him a gentle smile.
Levin looked at Turovtsyn again and wondered how it was he had failed to realize what a charming man he was.
'I am sorry, very sorry. I shall never again think ill of anyone!' he said merrily; expressing what he sincerely felt at the moment.
The inequality between husband and wife, in his opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of a wife and that of a husband were unequally punished both by law and by public opinion.
'No, I don't smoke,' quietly replied Karenin, and, as if wishing to show that he was not afraid of the conversation, he turned with a cold smile to Pestsov.
'I imagine that the cause of the prevailing opinion lies in the very nature of things,' he said, and was about to go to the drawing-room, but Turovtsyn quite unexpectedly addressed him.
'Have you heard about Pryachnikov?' said Turovtsyn, animated by the champagne he had drunk, and impatient to break his silence, which had long oppressed him.
And with a kindly smile on his moist and rosy lips, he went on addressing himself chiefly to Karenin, the principal guest. 'Vasya Pryachnikov, as I was told to-day, has fought a duel with Kvitsky and killed him.'
He again made an attempt to draw his brother-in-law away, but Karenin himself asked with interest:
'Oh!' said Karenin indifferently, and raising his eyebrows he went to the drawing-room.
'I am so glad you came,' said Dolly with a frightened smile, as she met him in the sitting-room through which he had to pass: 'I must speak with you.
Karenin, with the same look of indifference, produced by his raised eyebrows, sat down beside her and feigned a smile.
'Yes,' he said, 'especially as I wished to ask you to excuse me for having to go away at once.
Dolly was firmly convinced of Anna's innocence, and felt herself growing pale and her lips trembling from anger with this cold, unfeeling man who so calmly intended to ruin her innocent friend.
'Alexis Alexandrovich,' she said, looking into his eyes with desperate determination. 'I asked you about Anna and you did not give me an answer.
How is she?'
'I think she is well, Darya Alexandrovna,' replied Karenin without looking at her.
'Alexis Alexandrovich, forgive me, I have no right to... but I love Anna like a sister, and respect her and I beg, I implore you to tell me what has happened between you, what do you accuse her of?'
Alexis Alexandrovich winced, and almost closing his eyes bowed his head.
'I expect your husband has told you the reasons which make me consider it necessary to change my former relations with Anna Arkadyevna,' he said without looking in her eyes, discontentedly eyeing Shcherbatsky who was passing through the sitting-room.
'I don't, I don't believe it, I cannot believe it!' Dolly said, clasping her bony hands with an energetic movement.
She rose quickly, put her hand on Karenin's sleeve and said, 'We shall be disturbed here, come this way, please.'
He rose and obediently followed her into the schoolroom.
'I don't believe it, I don't!' she uttered, trying to catch his eyes, which avoided hers.
'One can't disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna,' said he, emphasizing the word fact.
'But what has she done?' asked Darya Alexandrovna. 'What is it she has done?'
'She has despised her duties and betrayed her husband.
That is what she has done,' he said.
No, for God's sake!... you are mistaken,' said Dolly, raising her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.
Karenin smiled coldly with his lips only, wishing to prove to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but this passionate defence, though it did not shake him, lacerated his wound.
'It is difficult to make a mistake when a wife herself announces to her husband that eight years of married life and a son have all been an error, and that she wants to begin life from the beginning again,' he said crossly, sniffing.
'Darya Alexandrovna,' he said, now looking straight at Dolly's kind, excited face and feeling his tongue involuntarily loosened. 'I would give much for the possibility of doubting.
I doubt everything so much that I hate my son, and sometimes believe he is not my son.
Dolly had understood it as soon as he looked her in the face. She felt sorry for him, and her faith in her friend's innocence was shaken.
'Nothing to do, nothing to do!' she muttered with tears in her eyes. 'No, there is something else to do,' she said.
'That is just what is so terrible in this kind of grief, that you can't do as in all other troubles  losses or deaths  just bear your cross, but here you must act,' he said, as if guessing her thoughts. 'You must come out of the degrading position in which you are placed; it is impossible to live three together.'
'I understand, I understand very well,' said Dolly and her head dropped.
She was silent, thinking of herself and her own sorrow, and then suddenly and energetically she raised her head and folded her hands as in prayer.
You are a Christian. Think of her!
What will become of her if you throw her off?'
'I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, and have thought deeply,' said Karenin. His face flushed in blotches and his dim eyes looked straight at her.
Dolly now pitied him with all her heart. 'I did that very thing when she herself informed me of my shame; I let everything go on as before.
I gave her a chance to turn over a new leaf, and I tried to save her.
She disregarded my very easy demand  that she should observe the proprieties,' he went on, getting heated. 'One may save a person who does not wish to perish; but if a nature is so spoilt and depraved that it regards ruin as salvation, what can one do?'
She will be nobody's wife, she will be ruined.'
'What can I do?' said Karenin, shrugging his shoulders and raising his eyebrows.
The recollection of his wife's last delinquency irritated him so much that he again became as cold as he had been at the beginning of the conversation. 'I am very grateful for your sympathy, but it is time for me to go,' he said rising.
You should not ruin her.
And here I am living; my children growing, my husband returns to the family and feels his error, grows purer and better, and I live...
Karenin listened, but her words no longer affected him.
All the bitterness of the day when he decided on a divorce rose again in his soul.
I have done everything for that woman and she has trampled everything in the mud which is natural to her.
I am not a cruel man, I have never hated anyone, but I hate her with the whole strength of my soul and I cannot even forgive her, because I hate her so much for all the wrong she has done me!' he said with tears of anger choking him.
He had long known all that, but it could not apply to his case.
Every one has trouble enough of his own!' And having got himself under control, Karenin quietly rose, said good-bye, and went away.
WHEN EVERYBODY WAS LEAVING THE TABLE Levin wanted to follow Kitty into the drawing-room but was afraid she would not like it because it would make his attentions to her too obvious.
So he stopped with the group of men, taking part in their conversation. But without looking through the open door at Kitty he was conscious of her movements, her looks, and the place in the drawing-room where she sat.
He began at once, and without the slightest effort, to fulfil the promise he had made her, of thinking well of and always liking everybody.
The conversation had turned to the question of village communes, in which Pestsov saw some special principle which he called the 'chorus principle.'
Levin did not agree either with Pestsov or with his brother Sergius, who, in a way of his own, both admitted and did not admit the importance of the Russian Communal System.
But he talked to them only with the idea of getting them to agree and softening their controversy.
He was not at all interested in what he himself said, still less in what they were saying, and only desired one thing  that everybody should feel contented and pleased.
Without looking round he felt a pair of eyes and a smile directed toward him, and he could not help turning.
'I thought you were going to the piano,' he said, moving toward her. 'That is what I miss in the country  music.'
'No, we were only coming to call you away. Thank you for coming,' she said, rewarding him with a smile as with a gift.
This was what he wanted to express.
She wrinkled her forehead, trying to understand.
But as soon as he began to explain she understood.
'I see: one must find out what one's opponent is contending for, what he likes, and then one can...'
She had completely grasped and found the right expression for his badly-expressed thought.
Levin smiled joyfully: he was so struck by the change from the confused wordy dispute with his brother and Pestsov to this laconic, clear, and almost wordless communication of a very complex idea.
Levin agreed with Dolly, that a girl who does not get married can find woman's work in the family.
'No,' said Kitty, blushing, but looking all the more boldly at him with her truthful eyes: 'A girl may be so placed that she cannot enter into a family without humiliation, while she herself...'
'Oh yes!' he said, 'yes, yes, yes, you are right, you are right!'
And he understood all that Pestsov at dinner had been trying to prove about the freedom of women, simply because he saw in Kitty's heart fear of the humiliation of being an old maid, and, loving her, he too felt that fear and humiliation, and at once gave up his contention.
Submitting to her mood, he felt in his whole being an ever-increasing stress of joy.
'Oh, I have scribbled over the whole table!' she said, and putting down the chalk moved as if to get up.
'How can I remain here alone, without her?' he thought horror-struck, and took up the chalk. 'Don't go,' he said and sat down at the table.
He looked straight into her kind though frightened eyes.
'There,' he said, and wrote the following letters,  W, y, a: i, c, n, b; d, y, m, t, o, n?
These letters stood for: When you answered: it can not be; did you mean then or never? It was quite unlikely that she would be able to make out this complicated sentence; but he looked at her with an expression as if his life depended on her understanding what those letters meant.
She glanced seriously at him and then, leaning her frowning forehead on her hand, began reading.
Occasionally she looked up at him, her look asking him: 'Is it what I think?'
'I have understood,' she said with a blush.
'What word is this?' he asked pointing to the 'n' which stood for never.
'That word is never,' she said, 'but it is not true.'
He quickly rubbed out what he had written, handed her the chalk, and rose.
Dolly's sorrow, caused by her talk with Karenin, was quite dispelled when she saw those two figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, looking up at Levin with a timid, happy smile, and his fine figure bending over the table, with his burning eyes fixed now on the table, now on her.
Suddenly his face beamed  he had understood.
He looked at her questioningly, and timidly.
'Yes,' answered her smile.
'And n... And now?' he said.
I will tell you what I wish, what I very much wish!' and she wrote these initial letters: T, y, m, f, a, f, w, h. This meant, 'that you might forgive and forget what happened.'
She looked at him with a smile that remained fixed on her lips.
'I understand,' she whispered.
She understood it all, and without asking if she was right, took the chalk, and wrote the answer at once.
For a long time he could not make out what she meant and he often looked up in her eyes.
He was dazed with happiness. He could not find the words she meant at all; but in her beautiful eyes, radiant with joy, he saw all that he wanted to know.
And he wrote down three letters.
But before he had finished writing she read it under his hand, finished the sentence herself, and wrote the answer: 'Yes.'
Everything had been said in that conversation. She had said that she loved him, and would tell her father and mother, and he had said that he would call in the morning.
WHEN KITTY HAD LEFT and Levin remained alone he felt so restless without her and so impatient to live more and more quickly through the hours till morning when he would see her again and be united to her for good, that he dreaded like death the fourteen hours he would have to spend without her.
In order not to be alone and to deceive time, he needed to be with and to talk to somebody.
Oblonsky would have been the pleasantest companion for him now, but he was going to an evening party as he said (really to the ballet).
Levin only had time to tell him he was happy and fond of him and would never, never forget what he had done for him.
Oblonsky's look and smile showed Levin that he understood him rightly.
Levin did not like her remark. She did not understand how high and unattainable for her all this was, and she should not have dared to refer to it.
Levin took leave of them but, not to remain alone, he fastened on to his brother.
'I am very glad, she seems a fine gi...' he began.
'Don't, don't, don't speak!' exclaimed Levin, seizing the collar of his brother's fur-coat and lapping it over his face. 'She is a fine girl' were words so ordinary, so insignificant, so inappropriate to his feelings.
Koznyshev laughed merrily, a thing he rarely did. 'Anyhow I may say I am very glad.'
Nothing, nothing, silence...' said Levin, and again wrapping the collar round his brother's face he added: 'I am very fond of you!
They arrived at the Council, and Levin listened to the secretary haltingly reading an official report which he evidently did not understand himself, but from his face Levin saw what a nice, kind, and splendid fellow he was.
That was plain from the confused and embarrassed manner in which he read the report.
Levin listened to them and clearly saw that neither the sums of money nor the pipes had any real existence, there was nothing of the kind and he saw also that they were not at all angry but were all very kind and estimable fellows, and that it was all very good and pleasant.
What seemed remarkable to Levin was that they were all perfectly transparent to him that day, and that by means of little signs which he had never noticed before he recognized the soul of each and clearly saw that they were all kind and, in particular, were all extremely fond of him.
Levin could not at all think or remember why he had ever felt dissatisfied with Sviyazhsky or what he had thought lacking in him.
And by a strange connection of ideas, as that sister-in-law was connected in his fancy with the idea of marriage, it appeared to him that he could not tell anybody of his happiness so appropriately as Sviyazhsky's wife and sister-in-law, and he was very glad to go and see them.
Sviyazhsky questioned him about his affairs in the country, as usual disbelieving in the possibility of devising anything that had not already been discovered in Western Europe; but now Levin did not consider this at all unpleasant.
On the contrary he felt that Sviyazhsky was right, and that the whole business was insignificant, and he noticed the wonderful gentleness and delicacy with which Sviyazhsky avoided saying that he was right.
He remained at the house two or three hours, talking about different matters but thinking only of the one thing that filled his soul and not noticing that they were dreadfully weary of him and ought long ago to have been in bed.
Sviyazhsky, yawning, showed him to the hall and wondered at the strange state his friend was in.
Levin returned to the hotel and the thought of how with his impatience he would spend the remaining ten hours frightened him.
The attendant on duty lighted his candle and was going away, but Levin stopped him.
Egor, the attendant, of whom Levin had taken no notice heretofore, turned out to be a very intelligent, good, and above all very kind man.
It turned out that Egor had a family, three boys and a girl who was a seamstress and whom he wanted to marry to an assistant in a harness business.
Levin took this opportunity to express to Egor his opinion that in marriage the chief thing is  love, and that when there is love there will always be happiness because happiness lies always within oneself.
Egor listened very attentively and evidently quite understood Levin, but in confirmation of it remarked, quite unexpectedly to Levin, that when he was in the service of nice people he was always satisfied with his masters and that he was satisfied with his present master although he was a Frenchman.
'A wonderfully kind man!' thought Levin.
And Levin saw that Egor too was in an exultant state and wished to tell him all his most intimate feelings.
From a child I...' he began with shining eyes, evidently infected by Levin's exultation as men get infected by others' yawning.
The room was cool, but he felt suffocated with heat.
Beyond a snow-covered roof he could see a gilt fretwork cross adorned with chains on the dome of a church and above it the three-cornered constellation of the Charioteer with the bright yellow star Capella.
He looked now at the cross, now at the star, and inhaled the fresh frosty air which flowed with a regular current into the room, following, as in a dream, the images and memories that arose in his fancy.
Towards four o'clock he heard steps in the corridor and looked out.
It was the gambler Myaskin whom he knew, returning from the club.
He passed dejectedly, frowning and coughing. 'Poor, unfortunate fellow!' thought Levin, and tears of affection and pity for the man filled his eyes.
He wished to speak to him and comfort him, but recollecting that he had nothing over his shirt he changed his mind and again sat down in front of the little window to bathe in the cold air and to gaze at that beautifully-shaped silent cross, full of meaning for him, and at the ascending bright yellow star.
When it was past six o'clock he began to hear the floor-polishers, and the church bell ringing for service, and felt he was beginning to grow cold.
He went back to his room in the hotel and ordered coffee.
Levin tried to drink a little coffee, and put a piece of roll into his mouth, but his mouth could do nothing with it.
He took the piece out of his mouth, put on his overcoat and went out to walk about again.
It was past nine when he reached the Shcherbatskys' porch a second time.
He had not eaten for a whole day, had not slept for two nights, had spent several hours half-dressed and exposed to the frost, yet he felt not only fresher and better than ever before, but quite independent of his body: he moved without his muscles making any effort, and felt capable of anything.
He was sure that he could fly upwards or knock down the corner of a house, were it necessary.
He spent the rest of the time walking about the streets, looking at his watch, and gazing around.
And what he then saw he never saw again.
After a long round, through the Gazetny Street and the Kislovka, he returned to the hotel, put his watch in front of him, and sat down waiting till it should be twelve.
Trying not to offend the others, and promising to let them too drive him later on he hired one and told him to drive to the Shcherbatskys'.
The izvoshchik was charming with the white band of his shirt showing from under his coat and clinging closely to his full, red, sturdy neck.
The izvoshchik knew the Shcherbatskys' house, and rounding his elbows in a manner specially respectful to his fare called 'Whoa!' and stopped at the porch.
That was evident from the smile in his eyes and the tone in which he said:
Not only did he know everything, but he evidently rejoiced and made efforts to hide his joy.
Glancing into his kind old eyes, Levin felt something new even in his happiness.
Won't you leave it here?' he said when Levin turned back for his cap.
The first person he met was Mlle Linon.
She was passing through the dancing-hall and her curls and her face shone.
He had scarcely begun to speak to her when he heard the rustle of a dress outside the door, his eyes no longer saw Mlle Linon, and the joyful terror of the nearness of his happiness seized him.
As soon as she had gone out he heard the sound of very, very rapid light steps on the parquet floor, and his joy, his life, his own self, the best in himself, that which he had sought and yearned for so long, advanced very, very rapidly towards him.
He saw nothing but her clear, true eyes, frightened by the same joy of love which filled his own heart.
She stopped so close that she touched him.
Her arms rose and her hands dropped on his shoulders.
She had done everything she could  she had run up to him and given herself entirely, shyly, and joyfully.
He put his arms round her and pressed his lips to her mouth that was waiting for his kiss.
Her mother and father had definitely given their consent and were happy in her happiness.
She had wished to be the first to announce to him his and her joy.
She had prepared herself to meet him alone, and had rejoiced at the idea, yet had felt timid and bashful and had not known what she would do.
She had heard his step and his voice and had waited behind the door for Mlle Linon to go.
Without thinking or asking herself what next, she had come to him and acted as she had.
'Come to Mama!' she said, taking him by the hand.
For some time he could not say anything, not so much because he feared that words might spoil the loftiness of his feelings, as because every time he wished to speak he felt that, instead of words, tears of joy would come.
He took her hand and kissed it.
'Can it be true' he said at last in a smothered voice. 'Dear, I cannot believe that you love me.'
She smiled at the word 'dear,' and at the timid look he gave her. 'Yes!' she said significantly and slowly.
The Princess, on seeing them, breathed quickly and immediately burst into tears, then she at once laughed and ran up to them with energy such as Levin never expected from her, and putting her arms round his head kissed him and wetted his cheeks with her tears.
Love her.
'Well, you've settled it quickly!' said the old Prince, trying to be indifferent, but Levin noticed that his eyes were moist when he addressed him. 'I have long, I have always wished it!' said the old Prince, taking Levin's hand and drawing him nearer.
'Papa!' exclaimed Kitty and closed his mouth with her hands.
'Well, well, I won't!' he said. 'I am very, very... plea...
He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, then her face again, and made the sign of the cross over her.
And Levin was seized with a new feeling of affection for this man who had been strange to him before, when he saw how Kitty long and tenderly kissed his fleshy hand.
THE PRINCESS SAT IN HER ARMCHAIR silently smiling, and the Prince seated himself beside her.
Kitty stood close to her father's chair, still holding his hand.
'Here he is,' said the old Prince, pointing to Levin. 'He is the principal person concerned.'
'What an idea!' said the mother with a pleased smile at his haste. 'And the trousseau?'
Nothing can spoil it!' He looked up at Kitty and noticed that the thought of a trousseau did not in the least upset her; so he thought, 'It is necessary, evidently.'
'Well, you see, I don't know at all; I only expressed my wish,' he said, to excuse himself.
The Princess went up to her husband, kissed him and was about to go away, but he stopped her, embraced her, and tenderly, like a young lover, kissed her several times, with a smile.
The old couple seemed to have become confused for the moment, and not to know whether it was they who were again in love or only their daughter.
When they had gone Levin came up to his betrothed and took her hand.
He had now mastered himself and was able to speak, and there was much he had to say to her; but what he said was not at all what he had intended.
I never dared hope, yet in my soul I was always certain,' said he. 'I believe it was predestined.'
'And I,' she said. 'Even when...' she stopped, and again went on, her truthful eyes looking into his face resolutely, 'even when I drove my happiness from me I always loved you only, but I was carried away.
He referred to one of the things he had decided to tell her.
He meant to confess, from the first, about two matters: that he was not as pure as she, and that he was an agnostic.
It was painful but he thought he ought to tell her both these things.
'No, not now, later!' he said.
Their conversation was interrupted by Mlle Linon, who with a feigned yet affectionate smile came to congratulate her favourite pupil.
Before she had gone out, the servants entered with their congratulations.
All that time Levin felt uncomfortable and bored, but the stress of his joy went on increasing.
All that time he felt that many things he did not know were expected of him, but he did all he was told, and it all gave him joy.
He had thought that his courtship would be quite unlike any other, that the ordinary conditions of courtship would spoil his peculiar happiness; but he ended by doing what others do, and his happiness was thereby only increased, becoming more and more peculiar to him, unlike anyone else's was or is.
'Are they necessary?' and off he went to
Fomin's. His brother told him he ought to borrow some money because he would have a lot of expense: there would be presents...
'Are presents required?' and off he rushed to Fulda, the jeweller's.
At the confectioner's, florist's, and jeweller's, he noticed that they were expecting him, that they were pleased to see him, and triumphed in his happiness just like everyone else with whom he had anything to do at that time.
It was extraordinary that not only was everybody fond of him, but all the hitherto unsympathetic, cold, or indifferent persons were delighted with him, gave way to him in everything, treated his feelings with delicate consideration, and shared his own opinion that he was the happiest man on earth because his betrothed was the height of perfection.
When the Countess Nordston took the liberty of hinting that she had hoped for something better, Kitty got so heated and proved so convincingly that no one on earth could be better than Levin, that the Countess had to admit it, and thereafter never encountered Levin in Kitty's presence without a smile of delight.
The confession he had promised her was the one painful episode of that time.
He consulted the old Prince, and with his permission gave Kitty his diary, which contained the facts that were tormenting him.
He had written the diary with the intention of showing it to his future bride-elect.
The confession of his agnosticism passed without a remark.
She was religious and had never doubted the truth of her religion, but the lack of external religion in him did not affect her at all.
She knew, through her love, his whole soul, and saw in it what she desired, and the fact that that spiritual condition is called agnosticism was quite indifferent to her.
The other confession made her weep bitterly.
Levin had not handed her the diary without an inward struggle.
He knew that between him and her there could and should be nothing secret, and therefore he decided that it was his duty, but he had not considered how the confession might affect her: he had not put himself in her place.
Only when he came that evening, before going to the theatre, and entered her room to see in her tear-stained face the misery caused by the irremediable sorrow he had brought about, did he realize from that sweet, pathetic face what an abysm separated his tainted past from her dove-like purity, and he was horror-struck at what he had done.
'Take, take those dreadful books back!' she cried, pushing away the note-books that lay on the table before her. 'Why did you give me them?...
But no  it was best after all,' she added, pitying the despair on his face. 'But it is dreadful, dreadful!'
His head drooped and he remained silent, unable to speak.
'You will not forgive me?' he whispered.
However, his happiness was so great that this confession did not impair it, but only gave it a new tinge.
She forgave him, but after that he felt yet more unworthy of her, morally bowed still lower before her, and valued still more highly his undeserved happiness.
INVOLUNTARILY REVIEWING THE IMPRESSIONS left on his mind by the conversations at dinner and after, Karenin returned to his solitary room. What Dolly had said about forgiveness had merely vexed him.
Whether or not to apply the Christian principle to his own case was too difficult a question to be lightly discussed, and Karenin had long since answered it in the negative. Of all that had been said the words of the silly good-natured Turovtsyn had sunk deepest into his mind  'He acted like a brick, challenged the other man, and killed him.'
Evidently everybody had agreed with that, though they were too polite to say so. 'However, that point is settled and not worth thinking about,' said Karenin to himself; and with nothing in his mind but his impending journey and his work of inspection, he went to his room and asked the doorkeeper, who followed him, where his valet was.
The man replied that the valet had just gone out.
Karenin ordered tea, sat down at a table, took up a time-table, and began planning his journey.
Rising, he began to pace the room. 'Quos vult perdere dementat,' he thought, quos being those who had had a hand in making the appointment.
'Something else of the same kind,' he thought bitterly, as he opened the second telegram.
It was from his wife, and Anna, written in blue pencil, was the first word he saw. 'I am dying.
I shall die easier for your forgiveness,' he read.
Smiling contemptuously, he threw down the telegram. His first thought was that beyond doubt it was only falsehood and cunning.
To legitimize the child, compromise me, and prevent a divorce?' he reflected. 'But there is something about dying...'
'Supposing it is true?' he said to himself. 'If it is true, and at the moment of suffering and approach to death she is sincerely repentant, and I, believing it to be false, refuse to come?
I am returning to Petersburg,' he told the valet.
He decided to go back to Petersburg and see his wife.
If the news of her illness were false, he would go away again saying nothing; but if she were really ill and dying, and wished to see him before her death, he would, should he find her still living, forgive her; and should he arrive too late he would perform his last duty to her.
While on his way he did not again think about what he should do.
He dared not think of it, because when he imagined what would happen he could not drive from his mind the thought that her death would at once dissolve all the difficulties of the situation.
Bakers, the closed shops, night izvoshchiks and men sweeping the pavements passed before his eyes, and watching all this he tried to stifle the thought of what lay before him and of what he dared not desire and yet could not help desiring.
As he entered the hall Karenin dragged forth his resolve as it were from a remote corner of his brain, and conned it over. It said:
Now he clearly realized how much he had desired her death.
'And her health?'
Korney, wearing his morning apron, came running downstairs.
'Very bad,' he said. 'There was a consultation yesterday and the doctor is here now.'
'Take my things,' said Karenin; and somewhat relieved by the news that there was still some hope of her dying, he entered the ante-room.
On the hall-stand was hanging a military coat, and he noticed it.
There was no one in the drawing-room, but the midwife, with lilac ribbons in her cap, came out of Anna's boudoir.
She talks only about you and nothing but you,' said she.
Beside the table, sitting with his side toward the back of a low chair, was Vronsky, his hands covering his face, weeping.
At the sound of the doctor's voice he jumped up, uncovered his face, and saw Karenin.
But at sight of her husband he was filled with such confusion that he again sat down, drawing his head down between his shoulders as if trying to become invisible. Then, making an effort, he rose and said:
The sight of Vronsky's tears made Karenin aware of the approach of that mental perturbation which other people's visible sufferings always aroused in him, and turning away his head he went toward the door without heeding what Vronsky was saying.
She lay with her face toward him.
Her cheeks were rosy red, her eyes glittered, and her little white hands, from which the cuffs of her dressing-jacket had been pushed back, toyed with the corner of the blanket, twisting it.
I should have forgotten and he would have forgiven...
But why does he not come?
He is kind, he himself does not know how kind he is.
Oh, but it will be bad for her, for my little girl!
Well, all right  well, let her have a nurse.
He will come back and it will pain him to see her.
Take her away!'
'Anna Arkadyevna, he has come! Here he is,' said the midwife, trying to draw Anna's attention to Alexis Alexandrovich.
'Oh, what nonsense!' Anna went on, taking no notice of her husband.
'But let me have her, let me have my little girl!
He has not come yet. You say he won't forgive me, because you don't know him.
One must know his eyes. Serezha's are just the same  that's why I can't bear to see them.
Have they given Serezha his dinner?
Suddenly she recoiled, became silent and frightened, and put her arms before her face as if in expectation of a blow; she had seen her husband.
'No, no!' she began again. 'I am not afraid of him.
Over Karenin's drawn face came a look of suffering; he took her hand and was about to say something, but could not speak.
His lower jaw trembled; he struggled with his agitation, every now and then glancing at her.
And every time he did so he saw her eyes looking at him with such tender and ecstatic emotion as he had never before seen in them.
Wait, wait!...' she paused as if to collect her thoughts.
'Yes,' she continued, 'yes, yes, yes!
But there is another in me as well, and I am afraid of her. She fell in love with that other one, and I wished to hate you but could not forget her who was before.
I am dreadfully bad, but the nurse told about the holy martyr  what was her name?  she was worse.
And I shall go to Rome, there is a wilderness there and then I shall be in nobody's way. I shall only take Serezha and the little girl...
You are too good!' With one hot hand she held his, while with the other she pushed him away.
The perturbation in Karenin's soul went on increasing and reached a point where he gave up struggling against it. Suddenly he felt that what he had taken for perturbation was on the contrary a blissful state of his soul, bringing him joy such as he had never before known.
He was not thinking that the law of Christ, which all his life he had tried to fulfil, told him to forgive and love his enemies but a joyous feeling of forgiveness and love for his enemies, filled his soul.
He knelt with his head resting on her lent arm, which burnt through its sleeve like fire, and sobbed like a child.
She put her arm round his bald head, moved closer to him, and looked up with an expression of proud defiance.
'Here he is; I knew!
The doctor moved her arms and carefully drew the bedclothes over her shoulders.
She meekly lay down on her back and gazed with radiant eyes straight before her.
Why does he not come in?' she cried, calling to Vronsky on the other side of the door. 'Come, come!
Vronsky came to her bedside and, on seeing Anna, again hid his face in his hands.
He is a saint,' said she.
'Uncover, yes, uncover your face!' she went on angrily. 'Alexis Alexandrovich, uncover his face!
Karenin took Vronsky's hands and moved them away from his face, terrible with its look of suffering and shame.
Karenin held out his hand, without restraining the tears that were falling.
'Thank God, thank God!' she cried. 'Now everything is ready.
How badly those flowers are drawn, not a bit like violets,' and she pointed to the wallpaper.
And she began to toss in her bed.
The doctor and his colleagues said it was puerperal fever, which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred ended fatally.
All day she was feverish, delirious, and unconscious.
At midnight she lay insensible, with hardly any pulse.
Vronsky went away, but came again in the morning to inquire. Karenin met him in the ante-room and said: 'Remain here: she may ask for you,' and himself showed him into Anna's boudoir.
Toward morning she had become excited and animated, and her thoughts and words flowed rapidly; but again this state lapsed into unconsciousness.
On the third day she was just the same and the doctors gave some hope.
On receiving the telegram I came here with the same feelings  more than that, I wished for her death. But...'
He stopped and reflected whether he should reveal his feelings or not. 'But I saw her and forgave her.
I only pray God that the joy of forgiving may not be taken from me.' Tears filled his eyes, and their clear calm expression struck Vronsky.
'That is my position. You may trample me in the mud, make me the laughing-stock of the world,  I will not forsake her and will never utter a word of reproach to you,' continued Karenin.
'My duty is clearly defined: I must and will remain with her.
If she wishes to see you I will let you know; but now I think it will be best for you to leave.'
He rose, and sobs broke his voice. Vronsky got up at once, and stooping before him looked up into his face without unbending his back.
He could not understand Karenin, but felt that here was something high, and inaccessible to one with his outlook on life.
AFTER HIS CONVERSATION with Karenin Vronsky went out on to the Karenins' porch and then stopped, recalling with difficulty where he was and where he ought to go.
He felt ashamed, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of the possibility of cleansing himself from his degradation.
He felt himself knocked quite out of the rut along which he had hitherto trodden so proudly and so lightly.
All the apparently solid habits and rules of his life suddenly seemed false and inapplicable.
The deceived husband  who up till now had appeared a pitiful creature, an accidental and rather ridiculous obstacle to his happiness  suddenly recalled by her and raised to a pedestal that inspired the utmost respect, that husband in his lofty elevation turned out to be, not only not cruel, false, or absurd, but kind, simple, and dignified.
Vronsky felt Karenin's greatness and his own humiliation,. Karenin's rightness and his own wrongdoing.
He felt that the husband in his sorrow was magnanimous, while he himself was mean and trivial in his deceptions.
But the consciousness of his degradation toward the man whom he had unjustly despised accounted for but a small portion of his grief.
He was unspeakably miserable because his passion for Anna, which he imagined had of late begun to cool, had become even stronger now that he knew her to be lost to him for ever.
During her illness he had learnt to know her thoroughly, had seen into her very soul; and it seemed to him that he had never loved her before.
And just now, when he knew her and loved her in the right way, he had been humiliated before her and had lost her for ever, leaving her nothing but a shameful memory of himself.
But most terrible of all was the ridiculous, shameful figure he had cut when Karenin was pulling his hands from before his shame-suffused face.
Returning home after the three sleepless nights, Vronsky did not undress but lay down prone on a sofa, with his head on his folded arms.
Fancies, memories, and most strange thoughts followed one another with extreme rapidity and clearness: now he saw himself pouring out medicine for the patient and overfilling the spoon, then he saw the midwife's white hands, or Karenin's curious pose as he knelt on the floor by her bedside.
'To sleep, to forget!' he said to himself with the calm certainty of a healthy man that being tired and in want of sleep he would at once fall asleep.
And in fact in a moment his thoughts grew confused and he began to fall into the abyss of forgetfulness.
The waves of the sea of unconscious life were beginning to close over his head when all at once he felt as if he had received a violent electric shock.
He started so violently that his whole body was thrown upwards on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on his hands he rose to his knees in fear.
His eyes were wide open as if he had not slept at all.
The heaviness of his head and the languor of his limbs, of which he had been aware a moment previously, had suddenly vanished.
'You may trample me in the mud,' he seemed to hear Karenin saying; and he saw Anna's feverishly flushed face and brilliant eyes gazing, not at him but at Karenin; he saw his own, as it seemed to him, stupid and ridiculous figure when Karenin was drawing his hands away from his face.
He stretched out his legs and again threw himself upon the sofa, in the same position as before, and shut his eyes.
'Sleep, sleep,' he kept repeating to himself.
But with his eyes closed he could see yet more distinctly Anna's face, as he had seen it on that memorable evening before the race.
'All that is ended and never will be again, and she wishes to efface it from her memory.
Then how can we be reconciled  how can we be reconciled?' said he aloud, and went on unconsciously repeating those words.
This reiteration prevented other images and memories which were thronging his brain from arising.
But the repetition of those words did not long hinder his imagination from working.
Again, following each other with great rapidity, his happiest moments rose in his fancy; and with them his recent humiliation. 'Take away his hands,' Anna's voice is saying.
Karenin pulls away his hands and he is conscious of the shame-suffused and stupid expression of his own face.
He still lay trying to fall asleep, though he had lost all hope of succeeding, and kept repeating in a whisper random words connected with disjointed thoughts, in order to prevent other images from rising.
'What is this? Am I going mad?' he asked himself.
What else makes people go mad? What makes them shoot themselves?' he replied to his own thought; and opening his eyes he was surprised to see, close to his head, an embroidered cushion worked by Varya, his brother's wife.
Fingering a tassel of the cushion, he tried to think of Varya as he had last seen her. But to think of anything extraneous was painful.
'No, I must sleep!' He moved the cushion and pressed his head against it, but his eyes would not remain closed without effort.
He jumped up and sat down. 'That's at an end for me,' he thought, 'I must think over what I must do, what is left me.'
His thoughts glided quickly over his life unconnected with his passion for Anna.
The Court?' he could not dwell on any of these things.
He rose from the sofa, took off his coat, loosened the strap, and, baring his shaggy chest to breathe more freely, walked across the room. 'That's how one goes mad,' he said again, 'and how one shoots oneself so as not to be ashamed,' he concluded slowly.
Going up to a door he closed it, then with fixed gaze and tightly clenched teeth, approached the table, took up his revolver, examined it, turned it to a loaded chamber, and pondered.
For a minute or two he stood motionless with bowed head, a strained expression of effort on his face, holding the revolver in his hand. 'Of course!' he said to himself, as if led to a definite conclusion by a logical, continued, and clear line of reasoning.
In reality that convinced 'Of course!' was merely the outcome of the repetition of a round of fancies and recollections similar to those he had already gone over dozens of times in the last hour.
They were the same memories of happiness lost for ever, the same thoughts of the senselessness of all that life had in store for him, and the same consciousness of his humiliation.
'Of course!' he said again when thought returned a third time to that point in the enchanted circle of memories and ideas; and placing the revolver against the left side of his chest, with a strong movement of his whole hand as if to clench the fist, he pulled the trigger.
He did not hear the sound of a shot, but a powerful blow on the chest knocked him off his feet.
He did not recognize his room as he looked up at the curved legs of the table, and at the waste-paper basket and the tiger-skin rug.
The quick step of his servant, coming through the drawing-room, brought him to his senses.
He made an effort and understood that he was on the floor, and, seeing blood on the tiger-skin and on his hand, realized that he had tried to shoot himself.
Missed,' he muttered, feeling with his hand for the revolver.
It was close to him but he sought it further away.
Continuing his search he leaned over to the other side, and unable to keep his balance, fell down bleeding.
The elegant servant with the whiskers, who often complained to his friends about the weakness of his nerves, was so upset when he saw his master lying on the floor, that he left him to bleed to death and ran away to get help.
In an hour's time Varya arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors whom she had summoned from every quarter, and who all arrived at the same time, she got the wounded man to bed, and then stayed in the house to nurse him.
THE MISTAKE KARENIN HAD MADE when, preparing to see his wife, he had not considered the possibility either of her repentance being real or of her recovery, faced him in all its significance two months after his return from Moscow.
But this mistake was not entirely caused by his omitting to consider that contingency, but also by the fact that, up to the day when he was face to face with his dying wife, he had not known his own heart.
By his sick wife's bedside he had for the first time in his life given rein to that feeling of tender sympathy which the suffering of others evoked in him; and which he had till then been ashamed of, as of a weakness; and his pity for her, remorse at having wished for her death, and above all the joy of forgiving, in itself gave him not only relief from suffering but inward peace such as he had never before experienced.
Suddenly he felt that the very thing that had been a source of suffering to him had become a spiritual joy, and that what had seemed insoluble as long as he indulged in censure, recriminations, and hatred, had become simple and clear when he forgave and loved.
He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and remorse.
He pitied his son too, more than he had done before, and reproached himself for not having paid more attention to him.
But for the new-born little girl he had a peculiar sentiment, not of pity alone but even of tenderness.
At first commiseration alone drew his attention to the delicate infant, not his daughter, who had been neglected during her mother's illness and would certainly have died then had it not been for his solicitude; and he himself hardly knew how he grew fond of her.
Several times a day he went to the nursery, and remained there so long that the nurses, who had been shy in his presence, became quite used to him.
Sometimes he would sit for half an hour gazing at the saffron and red downy, wrinkled little face of the sleeping infant, watching the movements of the frowning little forehead and the plump little hands with the bent fingers and palms that rubbed the tiny eyes and nose.
At such moments especially Karenin felt quite calm and at peace with himself, seeing nothing exceptional in his position and nothing that ought to be altered.
But as time went on he saw more and more clearly that, however natural his position might appear to him at the time, he would not be allowed to remain in it.
He was conscious that, beside the good spiritual force which governed his soul, there existed a coarse power, as potent if not more so; and that this power would not grant him the humble peace he desired.
He felt that everybody looked at him with questioning surprise without understanding him, expecting something from him; and especially he was aware of the insecurity and artificiality of his relation to his wife.
When the softened mood caused by the nearness of death had passed, Karenin began to notice that Anna feared him, was oppressed by his presence, and avoided looking him straight in the eyes.
It was as if she wished, yet could not make up her mind, to say something, and foreseeing that their present relation could not continue, expected something from him too.
At the end of February Anna's newborn daughter, also named Anna, happened to fall ill.
Toward four o'clock, having finished his work, he returned home.
On entering the ante-room he saw there a handsome footman in gold-braided livery with a bearskin cape, holding a cloak lined with white fur.
All through that difficult time Karenin noticed that all his worldly acquaintances, especially the women, displayed a particularly lively interest in him and his wife.
He noticed in all these acquaintances a kind of joy, which they suppressed with difficulty, like the joy he had noticed in the lawyer's eyes and again just now in the footman's.
The presence of Princess Tverskaya and the memories associated with her, coupled with the fact that he had never liked her, was unpleasant to Karenin, and he went straight to the nursery.
In the front nursery Serezha, lying with his chest on the table and his legs on a chair, was drawing something and chattering merrily.
An English nursery governess, who since Anna's illness had replaced the French governess with the boy, sat doing some crochet-work. She hurriedly rose, curtseyed, and nudged Serezha.
Karenin passed his hand over his son's hair, answered the governess's inquiry about Anna's health, and asked what the doctor had said about baby.
'But she is still suffering,' remarked Karenin, listening to the crying child in the next room.
'Why do you think so?' he asked, stopping short.
The little girl lay with her head thrown back, wriggling in the wet-nurse's arms, and would neither take the breast nor cease screaming, despite the hushing of two nurses who were bending over her.
'Miss Edwards says that perhaps the nurse has no milk,' he said.
The nurse was an old family servant, and in her simple words Karenin thought he noticed a hint at his position.
The baby screamed louder, catching her breath and growing hoarse.
The old nurse with a gesture of vexation came up and took her from the wet-nurse, and began pacing up and down, rocking the baby in her arms.
The healthy-looking wet-nurse in her finery, evidently afraid of being dismissed, muttered something to herself as she covered her well-developed breast, and smiled contemptuously at the idea of her not having sufficient milk.
In that smile also Karenin thought he saw himself and his position ridiculed.
Karenin sat down on a chair and with a look full of suffering and weariness watched the nurse as she paced the room.
When the child was pacified and laid in her deep cot, and the nurse after smoothing the little pillow went away, Karenin rose, and stepping with difficulty on tiptoe approached the infant.
For a moment he stood silent, regarding the child with the same weary expression; but suddenly a smile, wrinkling the skin on his forehead and making his hair move, lit up his face, and he quietly left the room.
He was vexed with his wife for not troubling about the charming baby, felt disinclined to go in and see her while in that frame of mind, and also disinclined to meet the Princess Betsy; but his wife might think it strange if he did not come in as usual, and so he mastered himself and went to her bedroom.
Stepping on the soft carpet, as he approached the door he involuntarily overheard a conversation which he had no wish to hear.
'If he had not been going away I should understand your refusal and his too.
'Yes, but you can't but wish to say good-bye to a man who tried to shoot himself for your sake...'
Karenin, with a frightened and guilty face, stopped short and thought of returning unnoticed; but coming to the conclusion that this would be undignified he turned, coughed, and went toward the bedroom door.
The voices were silent and he entered.
Anna, in a grey dressing-gown, with her black hair cropped short but already growing again like a thick brush over her round head, sat on a couch.
A usual when she saw her husband all her animation vanished from her face; she bowed her head and glanced uneasily at Betsy.
Betsy, dressed in the very latest fashion, her hat soaring high above her head like a little chimney coronet over a lamp, in a dove-coloured dress with very pronounced diagonal stripes going one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt, was sitting beside Anna, her flat tall figure very erect and her head bent.
'Ah!' she exclaimed, as if in surprise, 'I am so glad you are at home.
Yes, you are a wonderful husband!' she said with a significant and affable expression, as if she were conferring on him an Order of Highmindedness for his conduct toward his wife.
Karenin bowed coldly, and kissing his wife's hand asked about her health.
'I think I am better,' she said, avoiding his eyes.
'But your face looks feverish,' said he, emphasizing the word feverish.
She rose, but Anna, suddenly blushing, quickly seized her hand.
I must tell you... you, I mean,' and she turned toward her husband, the colour spreading over her neck and forehead. 'I don't wish to hide anything from you.'
Karenin cracked his fingers and bowed his head.
'Betsy says Count Vronsky wanted to come and say good-bye before leaving for Tashkend.' She was not looking at her husband, and evidently was in a hurry to get through what she meant to say at any cost.
'You said, my love, that it would depend on Alexis Alexandrovich.' Betsy corrected her.
I can't receive him, and it would lead...' She stopped suddenly and glanced inquiringly at her husband, who was not looking at her.
Karenin drew nearer and was going to take her hand.
Her first impulse was to draw away her hand from his moist one with the thick swelling veins, that was seeking hers; but with evident effort she pressed it.
'I am very grateful for your confidence, but...' he began in confusion, feeling with vexation that what he could so clearly decide within himself he was unable to discuss in the presence of the Princess Tverskaya, who appeared to him the personification of that coarse power which would rule his life in the eye of the world, and which prevented him from yielding to his feelings of love and forgiveness.
Karenin followed her.
I know you to be a really high-minded man,' said Betsy, stopping short in the little sitting-room and once again pressing his hand with peculiar warmth. 'I am only an outsider, but am so fond of her and respect you so much that I will take the liberty of advising you.
Alexis Vronsky is honour personified, and besides he is leaving for Tashkend.'
But the question whom my wife will and whom she will not receive she will decide for herself.'
He said this from force of habit, with a dignified raising of his eyebrows, but immediately remembered that whatever he might say there could be no question of dignity in his position, and saw the confirmation of this in the suppressed cruel and ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him when he had spoken.
KARENIN TOOK LEAVE OF BETSY when they reached the dining-room and returned to his wife.
She was lying down, but on hearing his step she quickly sat up in her former place and glanced at him with apprehension.
He saw that she had been crying.
'I am very grateful to you for your confidence,' he repeated in Russian what he had said in French in Betsy's presence. When speaking Russian to her he called her 'thou,' and that always irritated her.
I too think that, as he is going away, there is no need whatever for Count Vronsky to come here.
Anna suddenly interrupted him, with an irritation she could not repress. 'No need whatever,' she thought, 'for a man to come and take leave of a woman he loves, for whose sake he wanted to die and has ruined himself, a woman who cannot live without him!
No need whatever!' And she pressed her lips together and lowered her glistening eyes, looking at his hands with their swollen veins, which he was slowly rubbing together.
'Let us say no more about it,' she added more calmly.
'That my wish coincides with yours,' she rapidly completed his sentence, exasperated by the slowness with which he spoke, and knowing beforehand what he would say.
Especially as she...'
'I don't believe anything they say about her,' Anna put in quickly. 'I know that she is sincerely fond of me.'
She was agitatedly toying with the tassels of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that tormenting feeling of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself, but which she could not overcome.
The one thing she was longing for was to get rid of his obnoxious presence.
'I have just sent for the doctor,' said he.
'Then why would you not let me nurse her, when I entreated you to? She is a child anyhow' (he understood what she meant by that anyhow) 'and they will kill her.'
She rang, and ordered the baby to be brought. 'I asked to be allowed to nurse her, and I wasn't; and now I am blamed.'
'Yes, you are blaming me! Oh God, why did I not die?' and she began to sob.
'Forgive me, I am upset! I am unjust,' she went on, controlling herself.
'No, it can't go on like that,' he told himself with conviction after leaving his wife.
Never before had his impossible situation (as the world thought it)  his wife's hatred, and the strength of that coarse power which, in direct opposition to his inward mood, dominated his life and demanded fulfilment of its decrees and a change in his relation to his wife  never before had the impossibility of his position appeared so evident.
He saw clearly that the world and also his wife were demanding something from him, but exactly what this something was he did not comprehend.
All this was arousing a feeling of animosity in his soul, spoiling his peace of mind and depriving his achievement of all value.
He considered it better for Anna to break off her relations with Vronsky, but if everyone thought this impossible, he was even ready to allow those relations to be renewed, so long as no slur was thereby cast on the children, he was not deprived of them, and his position was not altered.
Bad as this would be, it would be preferable to a complete rupture, which would place her in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of all he loved.
But he felt powerless; he was aware in advance that everybody would be against him and that he would not be allowed to do what now seemed so natural and good, that he would be obliged to do what was wrong but what seemed to them necessary.
BEFORE BETSY HAD PASSED OUT of the dining-room Oblonsky, who had just come from Eliseyev's, where newly-arrived oysters were to be had, met her in the doorway.
What a pleasure to meet you,' he began. 'And I have been at your house.'
'We meet only for a moment, as I am just going,' said Betsy, smiling and putting on her glove.
There is nothing for which I am more thankful than for the revival of the old custom of hand-kissing,' and he kissed Betsy's hand: 'When shall I see you again?'
I not only settle my own, but other people's family affairs,' said he with a significant glance.
'Oh, I am very glad!' said Betsy, at once understanding that he referred to Anna. She returned to the dining-room with him and they stood together in a corner.
'He will kill her,' said Betsy in a significant whisper. 'This is impossible, impossible...'
'I am very glad you think so,' returned Oblonsky, shaking his head with an expression of grave, woebegone commiseration. 'That is why I have come to Petersburg.'
'The whole town is talking of it,' she said. 'It is an impossible situation.
He does not understand that she is one of those women who cannot play with their feelings.
One of two things must happen: either he must take her away, acting energetically  or he must divorce her.
But all this is stifling her.'
Having seen her down to the hall and again kissed her hand, a little above the glove just where the pulse beat, and having told her some rubbish so daring that she did not know whether to be angry or to laugh, Oblonsky went to his sister's room.
He found her in tears.
Though he was overflowing with high spirits Oblonsky immediately fell into a sympathetic and romantic mood suited to hers, inquired after her health and asked how she had spent the morning.
This afternoon and morning and all other days, past and future,' she replied.
'I have heard it said that women love men for their very faults,' Anna began suddenly, 'but I hate him for his virtues.
Try and realize it: even his looks have a physical effect on me and drive me beside myself.
Will you believe it? Knowing that he is a kind and generous man  that I am not worth his little finger  nevertheless I hate him!
I hate him for his generosity.
She was going to say 'death,' but he did not let her finish.
'You are ill and excited,' said he. 'Believe me, you are greatly exaggerating the case.
No one else in his place, having to deal with such despair, would have permitted himself to smile, for a smile would have appeared callous. But in his smile there was so much kindness and almost feminine tenderness that it was not offensive, but soothing and pacifying.
'No, Steve,' said she. 'I am lost, quite lost!
Again he understood from her frightened face that she considered death to be the only escape, and did not let her finish.
'Not at all!' he replied. 'Listen.
Again he smiled his almond-oil smile. 'I will begin at the beginning: you married a man twenty years older than yourself.
Your husband has accepted that and forgiven you.' He paused between each sentence, expecting her to make objections; but she made no answer.
Does he wish it?'
'And he sees that and knows it.
You suffer and he suffers; what can come of that?
While a divorce would solve the whole problem,' said Oblonsky not without difficulty expressing his main idea, and looking at her significantly.
She replied only by shaking her cropped head; but by the expression of her face, suddenly illuminated with its old beauty, he saw that the only reason she did not wish for this solution was because it seemed to her an impossible happiness.
OBLONSKY, WITH THE SAME RATHER SOLEMN EXPRESSION with which he was wont to take the chair at Council meetings, entered Karenin's study.
Karenin, with his arms crossed behind him, was pacing up and down meditating on the very subject that his wife and Oblonsky had been discussing.
'I am not disturbing you?' asked Oblonsky, experiencing at the sight of his brother-in-law a feeling of embarrassment quite unusual with him.
To hide that embarrassment he took out a cigarette-case with a new kind of fastening which he had only just bought, smelt the leather of which it was made, and took out a cigarette.
I must have... I must have a talk with you,' said Oblonsky, surprised at his own unaccustomed timidity.
That timidity was so unexpected and strange that Oblonsky could not believe it was his conscience telling him that what he was about to do was wrong.
'I hope you believe in my affection for my sister and my sincere attachment and respect for yourself,' said he, blushing.
Karenin stopped. He made no reply, but the expression of submissive self-sacrifice on his face struck Oblonsky.
'I intended to talk to you about my sister and your mutual position,' said Oblonsky, still struggling with his unwonted timidity.
Karenin smiled sadly, looked at his brother-in-law, and without replying went to the table and took from it an unfinished letter which he handed to him.
'I think about that subject incessantly, and this is what I have begun to write, as I think I can put it better in writing, and my presence is distasteful to her,' he said, holding out the letter.
Oblonsky returned the letter and went on looking at his brother-in-law with the same amazement, not knowing what to say.
That silence was so disconcerting to both that Oblonsky's lips twitched painfully as he silently and fixedly gazed at Karenin's face.
'That is what I wanted to tell her,' said Karenin as he turned away.
'Yes, yes!' said Oblonsky, tears choking him and preventing his reply.
'Yes, yes, I understand you,' he brought out at last.
'I must know what she wants,' said Karenin.
'I am afraid she does not understand her position herself. She is no judge of it,' replied Oblonsky, growing more composed.
'She is crushed, literally crushed by your generosity. If she reads this letter she will not have the strength to say anything  she will only hang her head lower than ever.'
How am I to find out what she wishes?'
'But how?' he added, moving his hands before his eyes in a manner unusual with him. 'I don't see any possible way out.'
'There is a way out of every situation,' said Oblonsky, rising and growing excited. 'There was a time when you wished to break with her...
'If you wish to know my opinion,' said Oblonsky with the same soothing, almondy-tender smile with which he had addressed Anna  a kindly smile so convincing that Karenin, conscious of his own weakness and yielding to it, was involuntarily ready to believe anything Oblonsky should say,  'she would never say so, but there is one way out, one thing she might wish! It would be, to terminate your relations and everything that reminds her of them.
Karenin sighed heavily and closed his eyes. 'There is only one thing to consider: does either party wish to remarry?
If not, it is very simple,' went on Oblonsky, gradually overcoming his embarrassment.
Karenin, his face drawn with distress, muttered something to himself and made no reply.
An action for divorce, with the details of which he was now acquainted, seemed impossible, because a feeling of self-respect and his regard for religion would not allow him to plead guilty to a fictitious act of adultery, and still less to allow the wife he had forgiven and whom he loved to be indicted and disgraced.
In case of a divorce, what would become of his son?
To leave him with his mother was not possible; the divorced mother would have another, an illegitimate family, in which the position and education of a stepson would in all probability be a bad one.
Should he keep him himself?
He knew that would be revengeful and he did not wish for revenge.
But besides all this, what made divorce seem to Karenin more impossible than any other course was that by consenting to it he would by that very act ruin Anna.
What Dolly had said in Moscow, to the effect that in considering a divorce he was thinking of himself and not of Anna, who would then be irretrievably lost, had sunk into his heart. And having connected these words with his forgiveness and with his attachment to the children, he now understood them in his own way.
To agree to a divorce  to give her her freedom  would mean, as he looked at it, to deprive himself of the only thing that bound him to life, the children he loved, and to deprive her of the last support on the path of virtue and cast her to perdition.
As a divorced wife she would form a union with Vronsky which would be both illegal and criminal, because according to the law of the Church a wife may not remarry as long as her husband is living.
'She will form a union with him and within a year or two he will either abandon her or she will unite with someone else;' thought Karenin; 'and I, by consenting to an illegal divorce, shall be the cause of her ruin.' Hundreds of times he had thought it over and had come to the conclusion that a divorce was not merely less simple than his brother-in-law considered it, but quite out of the question.
He did not believe a word of what Oblonsky was saying, and for all his arguments had scores of refutations ready; yet he listened, feeling that those words expressed that coarse and mighty power which overruled his life and to which he would have to submit.
How have I deserved this?' thought Karenin, recalling the particulars of a divorce-suit in which the husband took all the blame on himself; and with the same ashamed gesture with which Vronsky had covered his face, he hid his own in his hands.
'Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also... and if any man will take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also,' thought Karenin.
'Yes, yes!' he cried in a shrill voice. 'I will take the disgrace, and even give up my son... but... but had we not better let it alone?
However, do as you like!' and turning away so that his brother-in-law should not see his face, he sat down on a chair by the window.
It was very bitter, and he felt ashamed; yet mixed with the bitterness and the shame he felt a sense of joy and emotion at the greatness of his own humility.
'Alexis Alexandrovich! Believe me, she will esteem your generosity,' said he.
'But evidently it was God's will,' he added, and having said it felt how silly it was and could hardly help smiling at his own stupidity.
Karenin would have answered, but could not for his tears.
I regard this disaster as an accomplished fact and am trying to help both you and her,' Oblonsky went on.
When he left his brother-in-law's room Oblonsky was touched, but this feeling did not spoil his contentment at having successfully arranged the matter, for he was certain that Alexis Alexandrovich would not go back on his word.
To his contentment was added an idea that had just occurred to him.
When the affair was all settled he would ask his wife and intimate friends a riddle: 'What is the difference between me and a chemist?'
However, I will improve on it later,' he said to himself with a smile.
ALTHOUGH VRONSKY'S wound had missed the heart it was dangerous, and for several days he lay between life and death.
When he was first able to talk again his brother's wife Varya was alone with him.
'Varya!' he said looking sternly at her, 'it went off accidentally!
Without saying a word Varya bent over him and looked in his face with a joyful smile.
'Well, thank God!' she exclaimed. 'You are not in pain?'
'A little, here,' and he pointed to his chest.
He looked at her silently, his broad jaws set, while she bandaged him.
When she had finished he said.
Only I hope you will not go letting it off accidentally any more,' said she with an inquiring smile.
'I expect I shan't, but it would have been better...' and he smiled gloomily.
Despite these words and that smile, which greatly perturbed Varya, when the inflammation left him and he became convalescent he felt that he had rid himself entirely of one part of his grief.
By his action he seemed to have washed off the shame and degradation he had previously felt.
Now he could think quietly about Karenin, fully realizing his generosity without being humiliated thereby.
Besides that, he got into his old rut again.
He found he could look people in the face once more, and he was able to live in accord with his former habits.
The one thing he could not tear out of his heart, although he continually struggled against it, was a regret bordering on despair at having lost Anna for ever.
That now, having atoned for his guilt toward her husband, he would be obliged to give her up and never place himself between her with her remorse and her husband, was clear to his mind; but he could not eradicate from his heart a regret for the loss of her love  could not efface from his memory the moments of happiness he had known with her, moments he had valued so lightly, but the image of which with all their charm pursued him still.
But the nearer the hour for his departure approached the harder seemed the sacrifice he was making to what he considered his duty.
His wound was quite healed and he went about making preparations for his journey to Tashkend. 'Only to see her once more, and then to bury myself, to die!' he thought, as he was making a round of farewell calls, and he expressed this thought to Betsy.
It was with this message that Betsy went to Anna, and she brought him an answer in the negative.
'So much the better,' thought Vronsky when he heard it. 'It would have been a weakness  would have taken away all the strength I have left.'
Next day Betsy herself came and announced that she had received, through Oblonsky, the definite news that Karenin consented to a divorce and that therefore Vronsky might see Anna.
Without so much as taking the trouble of seeing Betsy to the door, or of asking when he could see Anna and where her husband was, Vronsky, in spite of all his resolutions, at once went to the Karenins'.
Without seeing anyone or anything he ran up the stairs and entered her room with hurried steps  almost at a run.
Without thinking, or considering whether they were alone or not, he embraced her and covered her face, hands, and neck with kisses.
Anna had prepared herself for this meeting and had thought about what she would say to him; but she had no time to say any of it, seized by his passion.
His passion communicated itself to her.
Her lip trembled so that for a long time she could not speak.
'Yes, you have taken possession of me and I am yours,' she brought out at last, pressing his hands to her bosom.
'It had to be!' said he. 'As long as we live it will have to be.
'It is true,' she said, growing paler and paler, putting her arms about his head. 'Still, there is something terrible in this, after what has been.'
If our love could be stronger, there being something terrible in it would make it so,' he said, raising his head with a smile that showed his fine teeth.
She could not help smiling in answer, not to his words but to his enamoured eyes.
She took his hand and stroked with it her cold cheek and cropped hair.
You have improved so, you little boy!  But how pale you are!'
'Yes, I feel very weak,' she said with a smile, and her lip trembled again.
'We will go to Italy and you will soon get well,' said he.
'Is it possible that we shall be like husband and wife, alone, a family, you and I?' she said, looking closely into his eyes.
'Steve says he will agree to anything, but I cannot accept his generosity,' she said dreamily, gazing past Vronsky's face. 'I don't want a divorce.
He was quite unable to understand how she could, at the moment of their first reunion, think about her son and divorce.
'Don't talk and don't think about it' he said, playing with her hand and trying to draw her attention to himself; but she continued to gaze past him.
'Oh, why did I not die? It would have been best!' she said, the tears streaming noiselessly down her cheeks; but unwilling to pain him, she tried to smile.
But now without a moment's hesitation he did refuse it and, observing that his superiors frowned upon his action, at once resigned his commission.
A month later Karenin and his son were left alone in the house, and Anna went abroad with Vronsky  not only without getting a divorce but having resolutely refused it.
Consequently, having decided to divide her daughter's trousseau into two parts, a lesser and a larger, the Princess eventually consented to have the wedding before Advent.
She decided that she would have the smaller part of the trousseau got ready at once, and would send on the larger part later; and she was very cross with Levin because he could not give her a serious answer to her question whether he agreed with this arrangement or not.
Levin continued in the same condition of delirium as before; imagining that he and his joy were the chief or only purpose of all existence, and that he need not now think or bother about anything, as other people would see to everything for him.
His brother Sergius Ivanich, Oblonsky, and the Princess directed his actions. He quite agreed to every proposal.
I am happy, and my happiness cannot be made or marred by anything you do,' he thought.
When he told Kitty of Oblonsky's advice that they should go abroad, he was quite surprised at her opposition to it and to find that she had definite ideas of her own about their future life.
She knew that in the country Levin had work of which he was fond.
As he saw, she not only did not understand that work but did not wish to understand it. This, however, did not prevent her considering it very important, and besides, she knew their home would be in the country, and she wanted to go  not abroad, where they were not going to live  but to where her home would be.
This decided expression of her wish surprised Levin, but, as it was quite immaterial to him, he at once begged Oblonsky to go to the house in the country, just as if it were Oblonsky's duty to go, and arrange everything there according to his own good taste.
'I say,' Oblonsky asked Levin one day after his return from the country, where he had made all preparations for the young couple, 'have you got a certificate to show that you have received communion?'
In his present state of mind, softened and sensitive to everything, to be obliged to pretend was not only trying but appeared impossible.
Now, in his state of triumph at the flowering time of his life, he was to be obliged to lie or blaspheme!
But question Oblonsky as he would, as to whether he could not obtain a certificate without going to communion, Oblonsky declared that he must go through with it.
And the priest is such a nice old man.
Standing in church during the first service he attended, Levin tried to revive the memories of his youth and the strong religious feeling with which at the age of sixteen or seventeen he had been imbued. But he immediately became convinced that it was out of his power to do so.
In matters of religion Levin, like most of his contemporaries, had very indefinite views.
Therefore, unable either to believe in the importance of what he was doing or to look upon it with indifference as an empty form, he, while preparing for confession, felt awkward and ashamed at doing something incomprehensible and therefore  as an inner voice told him  necessarily false and wrong.
During the service he would sometimes listen to the prayers, trying to see in them a meaning which would not clash with his opinions, or, finding that he could not understand and had to disapprove of them, he would try not to listen but to occupy his mind with observation of what was going on or with recollections which passed with extraordinary clearness through his brain as he stood idly in the church.
He stood through the mass and vespers and evensong, and the next day, having got up earlier than usual, he went to church before breakfast to hear morning prayers and to confess.
The young deacon, the two halves of his long back clearly distinguishable through his thin under-cassock, met him, and going at once to a small table beside the wall, began reading the prayers.
While he was reading, and especially during the frequent and rapid repetitions of 'Lord, have mercy upon us!'  which sounded like 'Lordvmercypons!'  Levin felt as if his mind were closed and sealed up, and that, if he did make it stir now, nothing but confusion would result; therefore as he stood behind the deacon he continued his own train of thought, without listening or trying to comprehend what was being read. 'How wonderfully expressive her hand is!' he thought, recalling how they had sat at the corner table the day before.
As was nearly always the case just then, they had nothing to say to each other, and she had put her hand on the table and kept opening and closing it until she herself began to laugh at its motions. He remembered how he had kissed the hand and afterwards examined the converging lines on the rosy palm.
Again 'Lordvmercypons!' thought he, crossing himself, bowing, and watching the movements of the bowing deacon's flexible back. 'Then she took my hand and examined the lines and said, "You have a splendid hand!" and he glanced at the deacon's stumpy hand and at his own.
'Well, it will soon be over now,' he thought. 'No  I believe it is all going to begin again,' and he listened to the prayer.
There he is, bowing down to the ground. That always happens just before the end.'
Having stealthily received a three-rouble note into his hand under its velvet cuff, the deacon said he would put down Levin's name, and went briskly into the chancel, his new boots clattering over the paved floor of the empty church.
A minute later he put his head out and beckoned to Levin.
The sealed-up thoughts began stirring in Levin's head, but he hastened to drive them away. 'It will get settled somehow,' he thought, and went to the ambo.
On going up the steps and turning to the right he saw the priest.
The latter, an old man with a thin grizzled beard and kind, weary eyes, stood beside the lectern turning over the leaves of a missal.
Bowing slightly to Levin he began at once in his stereotyped tone to read the prayers.
At the end he bowed to the ground and turned to Levin.
'Christ, though unseen, is here present to receive your confession,' he said, pointing to a crucifix. 'Do you believe in the teachings of the Holy Apostolic Church?' continued the priest, turning his eyes away and folding his hands beneath his stole.
The priest paused a few seconds to see whether Levin would say anything more, and then closing his eyes said rapidly, with a strong provincial accent:
What are your particular sins?' he continued without the slightest pause, as if anxious not to waste time.
Sometimes I even doubt the existence of God,' said Levin involuntarily, and was horrified at the impropriety of his words.
'What doubt can there be of the existence of God?' he asked with a faint smile.
'What doubt can you have of the Creator when you see His creation?' continued the priest in his rapid, stereotyped voice. 'Who has adorned the vault of Heaven with luminaries?
How could it all be, without a Creator?' he asked, with an inquiring glance at Levin.
'I don't understand it at all,' said Levin, blushing, and feeling that his words were silly and that they could not but be silly.
Pray to God,' he repeated hurriedly.
'I hear you are about to enter into holy matrimony with the daughter of my parishioner and spiritual son, Prince Shcherbatsky?' he added with a smile. 'A splendid young woman!'
'Yes,' answered Levin, with a blush for the priest. 'Why need he ask me that at confession?' he thought.
Then what sort of education can you give your little ones if you do not conquer in yourself the temptations of the devil, who is leading you into unbelief?' he asked in mild rebuke. 'If you love your offspring, then you, as a kind father, will desire not only riches, luxury, and honours for your child, but will desire his salvation, his spiritual advancement by the light of truth.
That is wrong!' The priest ceased and, with his head on one side, regarded Levin with mild kindly eyes.
This time Levin did not reply, not because he did not wish to enter upon a discussion with a priest, but because no one had ever yet put such questions to him; and also because, before his little one could begin asking such questions, there would be plenty of time to consider what the answers should be.
'You are entering upon a time of life,' the priest went on, 'when you must choose your path and keep to it, so pray that God in His goodness may help you and have mercy on you!' he concluded. 'May the Lord our God Jesus Christ, in the goodness and bounty of His love for mankind, pardon thee...'; and having pronounced the absolution, the priest blessed him and let him go.
When he got home that day Levin felt relieved at having done with an unpleasant episode in such a way that he had not been obliged to tell lies.
Besides, he was left with a vague feeling that what the nice kind old man had said to him was not as stupid as it had seemed at first, and that there was something in it that ought to be elucidated.
'Of course, not now,' thought he, 'but later on.' He felt more than ever before that there was a kind of vagueness in his soul, a want of clearness, and that with regard to religion he was in the same position that he saw so distinctly and disliked in others; and for which he found fault with his friend Sviyazhsky.
He spent that evening with his betrothed at the Oblonskys' and was in particularly high spirits. Explaining to Oblonsky the state of elation he was in, he said he felt as pleased as a dog that was being taught to jump through a hoop, and which, having accomplished what was demanded of it, barks and wags its tail and jumps for joy upon the tables and window-sills.
ON HIS WEDDING-DAY Levin, according to custom  the Princess and Dolly insisted on his strictly conforming to custom  did not see his bride, and dined at his hotel with three bachelors who happened to drop in.
Sergius Ivanich, Katavasov, an old fellow-student at the university and now a professor of Natural Science, whom Levin had chanced to meet in the street and induced to come, and Chirikov, his best man, a Moscow magistrate, and a bear-hunting comrade of Levin's.
Katavasov, feeling that his originality was observed and appreciated, showed it off.
'There now!' said Katavasov with a drawl, a habit he had fallen into when lecturing. 'What a talented fellow our friend Constantine Dmitrich used to be!
I am speaking of one who is not with us, because he is no more.
In those days he loved science. When he left the university he had human interests; but now half his talents are bent on self-deception, and the other half toward justification of that deception.'
Do you know,' said Levin turning to his brother, 'Katavasov is writing a work on nutriment and...'
The idea that his wife would not allow it seemed so agreeable that he was prepared to forgo the pleasure of ever setting eyes on a bear again.
Levin did not wish to deprive him of the illusion that some-where there could be something good without her, therefore he said nothing.
'Of course he feels so, but won't own up,' said Katavasov, and burst out laughing.
One is a she-bear.
A hopeless case!' said Katavasov. 'Well, let us drink to his recovery, or let us wish that at least a hundredth part of his dreams come true.
When he was alone, Levin, thinking over the remarks of the three bachelors, once more asked himself whether there was in his soul any of that regret for his freedom that they had been speaking about.
Happiness consists only in loving and desiring: in wishing her wishes and in thinking her thoughts, which means having no freedom whatever; that is happiness!'
'But do I know her thoughts, wishes, or feelings?' a voice suddenly whispered.
The smile faded from his face and he pondered.
'Supposing she does not love me?
Supposing she is only marrying me just to get married?
Supposing she does not herself know what she is doing?' he asked himself. 'She might bethink herself and only when she is already married find out that she does not and never could love me...'
And strange and most evil thoughts about her came into his mind. He became jealous of Vronsky just as he had been the year before, as if it had been but yesterday that he saw her with him.
He suspected that she had not told him the whole truth.
'No, this won't do!' he said to himself despairingly. 'I will go to her and tell her for the last time that we are now free, and that perhaps we had better keep so!
Anything would be better than continual shame, misery, infidelity!' With his heart full of despair and bitterness toward every one, toward himself and her, he left the hotel and went to her.
He found her in one of the back rooms.
'Oh!' she cried when she saw him, and her face lit up with joy. 'Why have you...?
'Ah, that is very nice;' he said gloomily, with a glance at the maid.
I will call you,' said Kitty. 'What is the matter with you?' she asked as soon as the maid was gone.
She had noticed his strange expression, at once excited and gloomy, and was seized with alarm.
I cannot bear it alone,' he cried in a despairing tone, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes.
Already in her loving, truthful face he could read that what he was going to tell her would lead to nothing, yet he felt that he still wanted to hear her disavowal.
I... you'd better tell me...' he went on without looking at her. 'I shall be unhappy, of course.
'I don't understand,' she said, thoroughly frightened. 'Do you mean you refuse...
'Are you mad?' she exclaimed, flushing with vexation; but his face was so piteous that she suppressed her vexation, and throwing the dresses on a chair sat down closer to him.
'O God, what can I do...' she cried, and began to weep.
'Oh, what have I done!' he exclaimed, and kneeling before her he began kissing her hands.
When the Princess came in five minutes later she found them quite reconciled.
Kitty had not only assured him that she loved him, but had even given him, in answer to his question, the reasons why.
She told him she loved him because she completely understood him, because she knew that it was necessary for him to love, and that all that he loved was good.
When the Princess entered they were sitting side by side on the trunk, sorting the dresses and disputing because Kitty wanted to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had worn when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted that that dress should not be given to anyone and that she should give Dunyasha a blue one instead.
She is dark and it won't suit her...
When the Princess heard why he had come, she grew angry half in fun and half in earnest, and told him to go home and dress and not to delay Kitty, whose hair had to be done by the hairdresser, due to arrive immediately.
'She has scarcely eaten anything all these days and has grown quite plain; and here you come and upset her with your nonsense!' said she. 'Be off, be off, my dear!'
Guilty and ashamed, but comforted, Levin returned to his hotel.
Dolly had to return home to fetch her son, who, his hair oiled and curled, was to drive in the bride's carriage and hold an icon.
Oblonsky, standing in a comically-solemn attitude beside his wife, took the icon and told Levin to bow to the ground; then he blessed him, smiling a kindly amused smile, and kissed him three times.
Dolly did the same, then she hurried away and again became confused about the arrangements for the carriages.
'Then this is what we must do: you go and fetch him in our carriage, and Sergius Ivanich, if he will be so kind, will go first and will send the carriage back.'
'Yes, they have,' replied Levin, and told Kuzma to get his things out that he might dress.
A police-officer, unmindful of the frost, stood at the entrance looking brilliant in his blue uniform.
The archdeacon, as if to draw attention to the value of his time, coughed impatiently, making the windows vibrate.
The priest continually sent a chanter or deacon to see whether the bridegroom had arrived, and he himself, in his purple surplice with the embroidered girdle, went with increasing frequency to the side door in expectation of the bridegroom.
At last one of the ladies looked at her watch and said, 'Well, this is strange!' and then all the guests became restless and expressed their surprise and dissatisfaction aloud.
The best man went to find out what had occurred.
All this while Kitty, long since ready in her white dress, long veil, and crown of orange blossoms, stood with an old lady who was to accompany her and her sister, the Princess Lvova, at a window of the ballroom at the Shcherbatskys' for the last half hour vainly expecting her best man to come and announce that the bridegroom had reached the church.
Levin meanwhile, in trousers but without coat or waistcoat, was pacing up and down his room, perpetually putting his head out at the door and glancing up the corridor.
But in the corridor there was nobody, and in despair he returned and addressed Oblonsky, who was quietly smoking.
'Was ever a man in such a terribly idiotic position' he demanded.
He glanced at his crumpled shirt-front. 'And suppose the things have already gone to the station!' he exclaimed in despair.
The fact of the matter was that when Levin told his old servant Kuzma to get his things ready, Kuzma had duly brought his dress coat, waistcoat and what else he considered necessary.
He had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and having been told to pack everything and send it to the Shcherbatskys', whence they were to start that evening, he had done so and had left out only the dress suit.
Meantime in the church every one was waiting for the bridegroom; while he was pacing up and down like a caged beast, looking despairingly along the corridor, remembering all he had said to Kitty and wondering what she must be thinking now.
'Only just in time  they were hoisting the trunk into the cart,' he gasped.
Three minutes later Levin, not looking at the clock to avoid upsetting himself still more, ran as fast as he could down the corridor.
There he is!
And look at her, poor dear! More dead than alive!' people in the crowd were saying as Levin met his bride at the door and entered the church with her.
Oblonsky told his wife the reason of the delay, and the guests smiled and whispered to one another.
Levin saw no one and nothing; he did not take his eyes off his bride.
Every one said she had grown plainer during the last few days, and in her bridal dress was nothing like so pretty as usual; but Levin thought otherwise.
He looked at her hair dressed high beneath the long veil and white flowers, at the high frill that covered her long neck at the sides and showed it in front in a particularly maidenly way, and at her strikingly slender waist. He thought she was prettier than ever: not that those flowers, the veil, or the dress ordered from Paris enhanced her beauty in any way, but because, despite all the carefully planned richness of her attire, the look on her sweet face and lips was still that look of innocent truthfulness.
'I thought you meant to run away,' she said, smiling at him.
I am ashamed to tell it,' he said with a blush, and was obliged to turn round to the approaching Sergius Ivanich.
The difference is ten roubles,' he added, puckering his lips into a smile.
'I have settled it, but perhaps you will not be satisfied.' Though he knew it was a joke, Levin could not smile.
'Well, I'm very glad that question is settled,' said Oblonsky with a smile. 'How stupid people do become under these circumstances!' he went on, turning to Chirikov, when Levin with an absentminded glance at him moved off toward his bride.
'Kitty, mind you step first upon the mat!' said Countess Nordston, coming up to them. 'You are a fine fellow!' she added, addressing Levin.
Wait a moment, put your head down,' said Kitty's sister, Princess Lvova, and raising her plump, beautiful arms she adjusted the flowers on Kitty's head.
'Take the bride's hand and lead her,' said the best man.
For a long time Levin could not be made to understand what he had to do, and they were a long while trying to set him right. Just as they were going to give it up because he would either use the wrong hand or else take her by the wrong one, he at last comprehended that he with his right hand, without changing his position, must take her by her right hand.
When at last he had taken her hand properly, the priest went a few steps in front of them and halted at the lectern.
The old priest, with his sacerdotal headgear and his locks of grey hair, glistening like silver, combed back behind his ears, drew his small old hands out from beneath his vestments of heavy silver cloth with a large gold cross on the back, and began turning over some pages on the lectern.
The priest lit two wax candles decorated with flowers, and holding them askew in his left hand so that the wax kept slowly dripping, turned to the young couple.
He looked wearily and sadly at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and disengaging his right hand from the vestments, held it up in blessing over the bridegroom, and then over the bride; only in his manner when he placed his fingers on Kitty's bowed head there was a shade of tenderness.
Then he gave them the candles, took the censer, and slowly stepped away from them.
'Is it really true?' thought Levin, and glanced round at his bride.
He could see her profile slightly from above, and by the just perceptible movements of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of his look.
She did not turn, but her high frilled collar moved, rising to her pink little ear.
He saw that a sigh had been suppressed within her breast and that the little hand in its long glove holding the candle trembled.
All the worry about his shirt, his lateness, the conversation of their relatives, their displeasure and his ridiculous mishap, suddenly vanished from his mind and he felt happy though scared.
The handsome, tall senior deacon in a silver cloth alb, his curled hair parted down the middle, came briskly forward lifting his stole with a practised movement of two fingers, and stopped opposite the priest.
Levin listened to the words and was struck by them. 'How did they find out that it is help, exactly help that I need?' he wondered, remembering his late fears and doubts.
'Eternal God who joinest them that are separate,' he read in his mild sing-song voice, 'and hast ordained for them an indissoluble union in love; Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and hast kept Thy promise to their heirs, bless these Thy servants, Constantine and Catherine, and lead them on the path of righteousness! Most merciful God, Lover of man, we praise Thee!
'"Joined them that were separate"  what a depth of meaning is in those words, and how well they fit in with what I am feeling at this moment!' thought Levin. Does she feel the same?'
Looking round he met her eyes.
From the expression in them he concluded that she understood them as he did; but this was not so.
She could neither listen nor understand, so deep was the one feeling that filled her soul and became ever stronger and stronger.
It was a feeling of joy at the fruition of what had been for the last month and a half going on in her soul, of that which for those six weeks had gladdened and tortured her.
On the day when, in the ballroom of the house in Arbat Street, she in her brown dress had gone up to him and silently plighted herself to him, on that day and in that hour a complete rupture seemed to have taken place within her soul between her former life and this other new and entirely unknown life  although in fact the old life still went on.
Those six weeks had been the most blissful and at the same time the most trying of her life.
The whole of her life, all her desires and hopes, were concentrated on this one man, still incomprehensible to her, to whom she was bound by a feeling  even more incomprehensible than the man himself  which now attracted and now repelled her.
Meantime she went on living under the conditions of her old life and was horrified at herself, at her utter and unconquerable indifference to all her past, the things, habits, and people who had loved and still loved her, to her mother who was hurt by her indifference, to her dear, affectionate father whom she had previously loved more than anyone else on earth.
At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, and the next moment rejoiced at that which caused her indifference.
She could not think of or desire anything but life with this man; but, as that life had not yet begun, she could not even clearly picture it to herself.
There was only anticipation, fear, and joy at something new and unknown; and now at any moment the anticipation and uncertainty, and the remorse at repudiating her former life, would all come to an end and something new would begin.
This new life could not help being terrible in consequence of its incertitude, but terrible or not it was already an accomplished fact within her soul six weeks ago, and was now only being sanctified.
Again turning to the reading-desk the priest with some difficulty picked up Kitty's little ring, and asking Levin for his hand put the ring on the tip of his finger. 'The servant of God, Constantine, is betrothed to the servant of God, Catherine,' and having put a big ring on Kitty's slender, rosy finger, pathetic in its weakness, the priest repeated the same words.
When what was necessary had at length been complied with, he made the sign of the cross over them with the rings and again gave the larger one to Kitty and the little one to Levin, and again they blundered and passed the rings twice backwards and forwards without doing what was necessary.
'Thou hast from the beginning created them male and female,' read the priest when they had exchanged rings. 'Through Thee the wife is knit to the husband for a helpmeet and to procreate the human race.
Levin felt more and more that his ideas of marriage and his dreams of how he would arrange his life had been but childishness, and that this was something he had never understood and was now still further from understanding, although it was happening to him; and in his breast a tremor rose higher and higher, and the unruly tears came to his eyes.
In the circle nearest the bride were her two sisters, Dolly the elder and the calm and beautiful Princess Lvova, who had come from abroad.
'With her complexion it's her only salvation,' replied Princess Drubetskaya.
I was married in the evening too,' answered Mrs. Korsunskaya, and sighed as she remembered how sweet she had looked that day, how funnily enamoured her husband then was, and how different things were now.
'They say that one who has been best man more than ten times never marries, and I wanted to be one for the tenth time to make myself safe, but was too late,' Count Sinyavin was saying to the pretty young Princess Charskaya, who had designs on him.
She was looking at Kitty and thinking of the time when she would be standing there beside Count Sinyavin, just as Kitty now stood, and how she would then remind him of his joke.
Young Shcherbatsky told the old Maid of Honour Nikolayeva that he intended to put the crown on Kitty's chignon, to make her happy.
'One ought not to wear a chignon,' replied the Maid of Honour, who had long ago made up her mind that if the old widower for whom she was angling ever married her, their wedding should be of the simplest.
Koznyshev was talking to Dolly, jokingly assuring her that the custom of going away after the wedding was spreading because newly-married couples always felt rather uncomfortable.
'I am past all that, Darya Alexandrovna,' he answered, and his face became unexpectedly sad and serious.
Oblonsky was telling his sister-in-law the pun he had made about 'dissolving marriages.'
'I must put her wreath straight,' she replied, without listening.
'What a pity she has grown so much plainer!' remarked Countess Nordston to the Princess Lvova. 'All the same he is not worth her little finger.
'No, I like him very much, and not just because he will be my brother-in-law,' answered the Princess.
'How well he behaves! And it is so difficult to behave well under these circumstances, and not be ridiculous  and he is not ridiculous or stiff, and is evidently touched.'
Her eyes were moist and she could not have spoken without bursting into tears.
She rejoiced at the sight of Kitty and Levin, but going back to the past she thought of her own wedding, kept glancing at the beaming Oblonsky, and, forgetting the present, recollected nothing but her own young and innocent love.
She remembered not herself only, but all the women with whom she was intimate or acquainted: thought of them as they had been at that most solemn moment of their lives when, like Kitty, they had stood beneath the nuptial crown with love, hope and fear in their hearts, renouncing the past and entering upon the mystic future.
Among the brides that came to her mind was her dear Anna, about whose impending divorce she had heard a while ago.
'And now? How strange!' she murmured.
'Why is her face so tear-stained?
Is she being married against her will?'
'Against her will, indeed, to such a fine fellow!
Is he a Prince?'
'And is that her sister in white satin?...
It seems he will take her to his estate straight off.'
That's why they have given her to him.'
But whatever you may say, one does feel sorry for a girl.' So chattered the crowd of women who had managed to get inside the church.
Often as they had heard the saying that the one who stepped first on the mat would be head of the household, neither Levin nor Kitty could think of that as they took those few steps, nor did they hear the loud remarks and disputes of those who maintained that he was first, and of others who said that they did it both together.
Triumph and radiant joy filled her heart more and more as the ceremony proceeded, and made it impossible for her to be attentive.
They prayed: 'That they may live in chastity for the good of the fruits of the womb, and find joy in their sons and daughters.' It was declared that God had created woman from Adam's rib, and that 'For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh'; and that 'This is a great mystery.'
They prayed that God should make them fruitful and bless them as he blessed Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they should see their children's children. 'It is all very beautiful,' thought Kitty as she heard these words, 'and could not be different.'
'Put it quite on!' came the words of advice when the priest had put crowns on their heads and Shcherbatsky, his hand in its three-buttoned glove trembling, held the crown high above Kitty's head.
'Put it on,' she whispered, smiling.
Levin glanced round at her, was struck by the joyous radiance of her face, and was involuntarily infected by her feeling.
He felt bright and joyous as she did.
With light hearts they drank the warm wine and water from the shallow cup, and their spirits rose still higher when the priest, throwing back his vestments, took their hands in his and led them round the lectern while a bass voice sang, Rejoice O Isaiah!
Levin fancied that the priest and deacon wanted to smile just as he did.
Levin glanced at Kitty and thought he had never seen her like that before, so enchanting with the new light of happiness irradiating her face.
He wished to speak to her, but did not know whether it was all over yet.
The priest helped him out of the difficulty, saying softly, with a smile on his kindly mouth, 'Kiss your wife; and you, kiss your husband!' He took the candles from their hands.
Levin kissed her carefully on her smiling lips, offered his arm, and with a feeling of strange closeness led her out of the church.
He could not believe it was all true and only realized it when their surprised and timid glances met and he felt that they were already one.
A handsome head-waiter, his thick hair greased with pomatum and parted from the nape upward, dressed in a swallow-tail coat, with a wide lawn shirt-front and a bundle of charms dangling on his rotund stomach, with his hands in his pockets, his eyes screwed up contemptuously, was answering a bystander's questions in a severe tone.
Hearing steps ascending the stairs at the other side of the entrance, the waiter turned and recognized the Russian Count who occupied the best rooms in the hotel. He respectfully took his hands out of his pockets, bowed, and said that the courier had been, and that the business of renting the palazzo was settled.
Vronsky took off his soft, broad-brimmed hat and wiped his perspiring forehead and his hair, which he had allowed to grow half-way down his ears and wore brushed back so as to hide his bald patch.
After an absent-minded glance at the man who was still standing there watching him, he was about to go in.
With a mixture of vexation at the impossibility of evading his acquaintances anywhere and of desire to find something to distract the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked round again at the man, who had first moved away and then halted; and at the same moment the eyes of both brightened.
It was really Golenishchev, his fellow-student in the Corps des Pages.
On that occasion Vronsky found that Golenishchev had chosen some high-flown Liberal activity and therefore felt he must despise Vronsky's profession and activities.
Consequently Vronsky had then treated him with the cold, proud aloofness of which he was master, which meant: 'You may like or dislike my way of life. It is a matter of absolute indifference to me, but if you wish to know me you must respect me.'
Vronsky would never have thought he could be so pleased to see Golenishchev, but probably he was himself unaware how bored he was.
He forgot the unpleasant impression left by their last encounter, and with an open and joyful countenance held out his hand to his old schoolfellow.
'How pleased I am to see you!' said Vronsky, a friendly smile disclosing his fine white teeth.
And according to the usual way with Russians, instead of saying what he wanted to hide from the servants in Russian, he began speaking French.
I am now going to her,' he said in French, attentively watching Golenishchev's expression.
I did not know,' Golenishchev replied in a tone of indifference, though he was quite aware of it. 'Been here long?' he added.
Three days,' answered Vronsky, still attentively scrutinizing his friend's face.
'Yes, he is a decent fellow and looks at the matter in the right way,' said Vronsky to himself, understanding the meaning of the other's look and the change of subject. 'I can introduce him to Anna, as he sees the matter rightly.'
During the three months he had spent abroad with Anna, Vronsky when coming across new people had always asked himself how the new person would be likely to regard his relations with Anna, and in most cases he had found that the men he met understood it in the 'right' way.
But had he, and those who understood the matter in the 'right' way, been asked what this understanding amounted to, they would have been much puzzled how to reply.
Vronsky at once guessed that Golenishchev was one of that sort, and was therefore doubly pleased to have met him; and Golenishchev behaved to Anna, when he had been introduced, as well as Vronsky could have wished.
Evidently he avoided, without the least effort, everything in conversation that might have sounded awkward.
He had never met Anna before and was struck by her beauty, and still more by the simplicity with which she accepted her position.
She blushed when Vronsky showed Golenishchev in, and the childlike flush that suffused her open and handsome face pleased him exceedingly.
But what pleased him most was that at once and apparently intentionally to prevent any possibility of misapprehension in the stranger's mind, she called Vronsky simply Alexis, and said that they were about to move into a house of their own, called a palazzo, which they had just taken.
This straightforward and simple attitude toward her own position pleased Golenishchev.
Noticing Anna's good-natured, bright, and energetic manner, he thought that, knowing both Karenin and Vronsky as he did, he quite understood her.
He thought he understood what she herself was quite unable to understand: how, though she was the cause of her husband's unhappiness and had abandoned him and her son, and lost her own good name, she could feel energetic, cheerful and happy.
'It is mentioned in the guide-book,' said Golenishchev, referring to the palazzo Vronsky was taking. 'There is a fine Tintoretto there... one of his later period.'
You say it's hot' she asked, stopping at the door and looking inquiringly at Vronsky, while a bright flush again suffused her face.
From her look Vronsky understood that she did not yet know what attitude he wished to adopt toward Golenishchev, and was afraid she might not have behaved suitably.
'No, not very hot,' he said.
She thought she had understood him completely and above all that he was satisfied with her. She gave him a smile and went out with rapid steps.
The two friends looked at each other, and in both faces appeared an embarrassed expression, as if Golenishchev  who obviously admired her  tried but failed to hit on the right thing to say about her; and as if Vronsky both feared and wished that he should succeed.
'You are still busy at the same thing?' he went on, recollecting that he had heard the other was writing something.
We in Russia are slow to realize that we are the inheritors of Byzantium,' and he began a long and heated explanation.
At first Vronsky felt uncomfortable because he did not know even the first part of Two Principles, which the author mentioned as if it were well known.
But later on, when Golenishchev began expounding his view, and Vronsky was able to follow him, even though he was ignorant of Two Principles he listened with interest, for the man talked well.
The longer he talked the more his eyes flashed, the more hastily he retorted on imaginary opponents, and the more agitated and offended became his face.
Remembering him as a thin, active, good-natured, and noble boy, always at the head of his class, Vronsky could not understand the cause of the agitation, nor approve of it.
What most displeased him was that Golenishchev, a man belonging to good Society, should put himself an the same level with certain scribblers who irritated him and made him angry.
He did not like this, but nevertheless he felt that Golenishchev was not happy and he was sorry for him.
Signs of distress, of insanity almost, were apparent in his mobile and rather good-natured face when, without even observing that Anna had re-entered the room, he continued expressing his views with haste and warmth.
When Anna returned with her hat and mantle on, and stood beside him toying with her sunshade with quick motions of her beautiful hand, Vronsky with a feeling of relief turned from Golenishchev's eyes which were fixed on him plaintively. With renewed love he glanced at his charming companion, so full of vitality and joy.
With an effort Golenishchev recollected himself, but he was at first dejected and morose. Anna however, who at that time was amiably disposed to every one, soon revived him by her simple and cheerful behaviour.
After trying several topics of conversation she led him on to the subject of art, about which he talked very well, and listened to him with attention.
'Alexis will have a nice studio. You must certainly have that room, Alexis,' she added, having understood that Golenishchev was to be on an intimate footing with them and that there was no need to pretend in his presence.
DURING THIS, THE FIRST PERIOD of her freedom and rapid recovery, Anna was unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life.
The memory of her husband's grief did not poison her happiness.
On the one hand this memory was too terrible to dwell upon, and on the other hand her husband's misfortune had meant for her too great a joy for repentance to be possible.
The recollection of all that had happened to her since her illness; her reconciliation with her husband, the rupture, the news of Vronsky's wound, his reappearance in her husband's house, the preparations for divorce, the parting from her home and son  all now seemed a delirious dream from which she had wakened abroad and alone with Vronsky.
The memory of the evil done to her husband aroused in her a feeling akin to repulsion, such as a man might feel who when in danger of drowning had shaken off another who clung to him.
One comforting reflection about her conduct had come to her in the first moment of the rupture, and when she now remembered the past she also recalled that reflection. 'I was the inevitable cause of unhappiness to him,' she thought, 'but I don't wish to profit by his calamity.
I too am suffering and must suffer: I am losing what I most cherished  my good name and my son. I have done wrong, and therefore do not ask for happiness and do not want a divorce.
I must go on suffering from the degradation and by the separation from my son.' But sincerely as Anna desired to suffer, she was not suffering.
The parting from her son, whom she loved, did not trouble her at first either.
The little girl, his child, was so sweet, and Anna had grown so attached to her since she was the only child left to her, that she rarely thought of her son.
The desire to live, enhanced by her recovery, was so powerful, and the conditions of her life were so novel and pleasant, that Anna felt unpardonably happy.
The better she knew Vronsky the more she loved him.
She loved him both for his own sake and for his love of her.
To possess him entirely was a continual joy to her. His nearness was always pleasant.
All the traits of character, with which she became better and better acquainted, seemed inexpressibly delightful.
His appearance, altered by civilian dress, was as attractive to her as to a girl in love.
In all he said, thought, or did, she saw something peculiarly noble and exalted.
She herself was frightened at the rapture with which he inspired her; she sought, but could not find, anything in him that was not beautiful.
She dared not let him see her consciousness of her own inferiority. To her it seemed that if he knew of it he would the sooner cease to love her, and there was nothing she now feared more  though she had no reason to do so  than the loss of his love.
But she could not help being grateful to him for his treatment of her, and showing him how much she valued it.
He, who in her opinion had such a decided vocation for statesmanship, in which he ought to have played a conspicuous part, had sacrificed his ambitions for her and never showed the least regret.
He was even more lovingly respectful to her than before, and the thought that she must never be allowed to feel the awkwardness of her situation never left his mind for a moment.
He, so virile a man, not only never contradicted her, but where she was concerned seemed to have no will of his own and to be only occupied in anticipating her every wish.
She could not help appreciating this, although his strained attentiveness, the atmosphere of solicitude with which he surrounded her, became burdensome at times.
Vronsky meanwhile, in spite of the complete fulfilment of what he had so long desired, was not completely happy.
He soon felt that the realization of his longing gave him only one grain of the mountain of bliss he had anticipated.
When first he united his life with hers and donned civilian clothes, he felt the delight of freedom in general, such as he had not before known, and also the freedom of love  he was contented then, but not for long.
Soon he felt rising in his soul a desire for desires  boredom.
Involuntarily he began to snatch at every passing caprice, mistaking it for a desire and a purpose.
Sixteen hours daily had to be filled somehow, living abroad as they did completely at liberty, quite cut off from the round of social life that had filled his time in Petersburg.
The pleasures of a bachelor's life, enjoyed by him on his previous travels abroad, were not to be thought of now, for one attempt of that kind had produced in Anna an unexpected fit of depression quite disproportionate to the offence of a late supper with some acquaintances.
Sight-seeing, apart from the fact that he had already seen everything, had for him  a Russian and an intelligent man  none of that inexplicable importance the English manage to attach to it.
As in his youth he had shown aptitude for art, and not knowing how to spend his money had begun to collect engravings, he now settled down to painting and began to work at it, putting into it the surplus stock of desire which demanded satisfaction.
He had a talent for understanding art and for imitating it with accuracy and good taste, and he imagined that he possessed the real power an artist needs. After wavering for some time between various kinds of art  religious, historical, genre or realistic  he began to paint.
He understood all the different kinds and was able to draw inspiration from all, but he could not imagine that it is possible to be quite ignorant of the different kinds of art and to be inspired directly by what is in one's own soul, regardless of whether what one paints belongs to any particular school.
As he did not know this, and was not inspired directly by life but indirectly by life already embodied in art, he found inspiration very readily and easily, and equally readily and easily produced paintings very similar to the school of art he wished to imitate.
He liked the graceful and effective French School of painting best, and in that style began painting a portrait of Anna dressed as an Italian, and he, as well as every one else who saw it, considered the portrait a great success.
THE NEGLECTED OLD PALAZZO with its high stucco ceilings, its wall frescoes and mosaic floors, with heavy yellow damask hangings at the big windows, vases standing on brackets and mantelshelves, carved doors, and sombre halls filled with pictures,  that palazzo, when they had moved into it, by its very appearance kept alive in Vronsky the pleasant delusion that he was not so much a Russian landowner and equerry without a post as an enlightened connoisseur and art patron, and withal a modest artist himself, who had renounced the world, his connections and ambitions, for the sake of the woman he loved.
The role Vronsky had chosen, with their removal to the palazzo, was quite successful; and having through Golenishchev made the acquaintance of several interesting persons, he felt tranquil for a time.
Mediaeval Italian life had at that time become so fascinating to him that he even began to wear his hat and throw his cloak across his shoulder in a mediaeval manner which was very becoming to him.
'Here we live and know nothing,' said Vronsky one morning to Golenishchev, who had come to see him. 'Have you seen Mikhaylov's picture?' and he passed his visitor a Russian newspaper that had just arrived, and pointed to an article on a Russian artist who was living in that town, and had just finished a picture long talked of and bought before completion.
'I have,' answered Golenishchev. 'Of course he is not without talent, but his tendency is quite a false one.
'What is the subject of his picture' asked Anna.
Led on by this question about the subject of the picture to one of his favourite topics, he began to explain.
'And is it true that this Mikhaylov is so poor?' inquired Vronsky, thinking that he, as a Russian Maecenas, ought to help this artist regardless of whether his picture was good or bad.
Have you seen his portrait of Vasilchikova?
But it seems he does not want to paint any more portraits, so it is possible he may be in want.
Better have one of Annie' (as she called her little girl). 'There she is!' she added, looking from the window at the beautiful Italian nurse who had taken the baby into the garden, and then immediately glancing round at Vronsky.
The beautiful nurse, whose head Vronsky was painting for his picture, was the only and secret sorrow of Anna's life.
Vronsky painted her, admired her beauty and her 'mediaevalness,' and Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of being jealous of the nurse; so she treated the woman with special kindness and spoilt her and her little son.
But he is a crank and quite uneducated.
You know, he is one of those heathenish new folk one so often meets nowadays; you know! One of those freethinkers who have been brought up from the beginning in disbelief, negation, and materialism.
Formerly,' Golenishchev went on, either not noticing or not wishing to notice that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, 'formerly a freethinker was a man brought up with ideas of religion, law, and morality, who himself, through struggle and pain, had attained freedom of thought; hut now a new type of born freethinkers has appeared. These grow up without so much as hearing that there used to be laws of morality and religion, and that there was once authority in these things; they grow up simply with the idea of negation  that is, as heathens.
He is the son of a head footman, I think, and has had no education.
When he entered the Academy and won a reputation for himself he, not being stupid, wanted to get same education.
So he resorted to what seemed to him to be the wellspring of education  the magazines.
You see, formerly a man who wished to get an education  a Frenchman, let us say  would have commenced studying all the classics, theologians, dramatists, historians, and philosophers, and with what mental labour he would have been confronted!
But among us at the present day he tumbled straight into the literature of negation and rapidly assimilated the essence of the negative teaching, and there he was! And that is not all.
Twenty years ago he would have found in that kind of literature signs of the struggle with authority and of an outlook centuries old, and from that struggle would have deduced that something else had existed; but as it is, he stumbles on a kind of literature that does not even deign to dispute the old point of view, saying straight off, "There is nothing but evolution, selection, the struggle for existence, and nothing more"!
Having learnt from the house-porter's wife who came out to meet them that Mikhaylov allowed visitors into his studio, but was at that moment at his lodgings a few steps away, they sent her with their cards to beg permission to see his pictures.
Every morning he worked in the studio at his big picture.
On returning home he had been angry with his wife because she had not managed to pacify the landlady, who clamoured for the rent.
At best you are only a fool, and when you begin arguing in Italian you become a treble fool!' he said at the end of a long dispute.
'Shut up, for heaven's sake!' cried Mikhaylov with tears in his voice, stopping his ears with his hands as he went into his workroom behind a partition and locked the door behind him. 'What a duffer!' he muttered to himself as he seated himself at the table, and having opened a portfolio he at once set to work with particular ardour at an unfinished drawing.
He never worked with such ardour or so successfully as when things were going badly with him, and especially after a quarrel with his wife. 'Oh dear!
If only I could escape somewhere!' he thought as he worked. He was sketching the figure of a man in a fit of anger.
Where is it?' He went back to his wife, and frowning, without looking at her, asked his eldest little girl where the paper was that he had given them.
The paper with the drawing that he had thrown away was found, but it was dirty now and spotted with candle grease.
Nevertheless, he took it, put it on his table, and, stepping backward and screwing up his eyes, began examining it.
Suddenly he smiled and flung up his arms joyfully.
'That's it! That's it!' he said, and taking up his pencil he began drawing rapidly.
He copied that new pose, and, suddenly remembering the energetic pose and prominent chin of a shopman from whom he had bought cigars, he gave the figure that man's face and chin.
But while making these corrections he did not alter the pose but only removed what interfered with its character.
He went out to his wife.
'Come, Sasha, don't he angry,' he said, smiling timidly and tenderly. 'You were wrong and so was I. I'll settle it all!'
Having made it up with his wife he put on an olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar, and a hat, and went to the studio.
Now he was pleased and excited by the visit to his studio of these grand Russians who had come in a carriage.
About his picture  the one at present on the easel  he had at the bottom of his heart a firm opinion: that no one had ever painted anything like it.
He did not consider his picture better than all Raphael's, but he knew that what he wanted to express in that picture had never yet been expressed by anyone.
Of that he was firmly convinced, and had long been so  ever since he had begun painting it; yet the opinion of others, whoever they might be, seemed to him of great importance, and disturbed him to the depths of his soul.
Every remark, even the most trivial, which showed that those who judged it saw even but a small part of what he himself saw in it, moved him deeply.
He always attributed to those judges a better understanding than his own, and always expected to hear from them something he had himself not noticed in his work, often fancying that in their criticisms he had really found that something.
With rapid steps he approached the door of his studio, and in spite of his excitement was struck by the soft light on Anna's figure as she stood in the shadow of the porch listening to something Golenishchev was vehemently saying, and at the same time evidently wishing to look at the approaching artist.
He was himself unconscious that as he approached them he seized and absorbed this impression, just as he had retained the tobacconist's chin and hidden it away where he could find it when it was wanted.
The visitors, already disenchanted by Golenishchev's account of the artist, were still further disillusioned by his appearance.
Of medium height, thick-set and with a loose gait, Mikhaylov in his brown hat, olive-green overcoat and narrow trousers (at a time when wide ones had long since come into fashion), and especially his commonplace broad face, expressing a combination of timidity and a desire to be dignified, created an unpleasant impression.
'Come in, please!' he said, trying to put on an air of indifference, as he entered the hall and took a key from his pocket to unlock the door.
ON ENTERING HIS STUDIO the artist again cast a glance at his visitors and took note of Vronsky's face, especially his jaw.
Although his artistic perceptions never slept, and although he was growing more and more excited as the moment approached when his picture was to be criticized, he quickly and shrewdly, from imperceptible data, formed his opinion of these three persons.
Of Golenishchev he thought, 'That one is a Russian who lives here.'
Mikhaylov did not remember his name or where he had seen him or what they had talked about; he remembered only his face, as he remembered every face he had ever seen; but he also remembered that it was one of the faces he had mentally put aside with the enormous class of falsely important faces, faces lacking expression.
Well, he knew the dilettantes' way of examining the studios of modern artists (the cleverer they were the worse they were) with the one purpose of being able to say afterwards that art had deteriorated and that the more modern art one sees the more evident it becomes that the old masters were inimitable.
He expected all this, saw it in their faces, in the careless indifference with which they talked among themselves, looked at the lay figures and busts and unconcernedly walked about while waiting for him to uncover his picture.
But in spite of all this, as he turned over his studies, pulled up the blinds, and withdrew the sheet from his picture, he felt very excited  all the more so because, though he regarded distinguished and wealthy Russians as mostly beasts and fools, Vronsky and especially Anna pleased him.
'There!' he said, stepping aside with his loose gait, and pointing to the picture.
'This is Pilate's Admonition  Matthew, chapter xxvii.,' he went on, conscious that his lips were beginning to tremble with excitement; and he stepped behind the visitors.
In those few moments he believed in advance that the highest and justest of criticisms was going to be pronounced by these very visitors whom he had so despised a moment before.
He forgot all that he had thought of his picture during the three years that he had worked at it, forgot all its merits, which he had not doubted, and saw it from the fresh point of view of an indifferent stranger, and he saw nothing good in it.
Each of those faces that with so much searching, so many faults and corrections, he had evolved with its own character, each representing so much pain and pleasure, and all of them so often placed and replaced to obtain harmony; all the shades of colour and tone elaborated with such effort all this, regarded as a whole from those others' point of view, now seemed trivialities a thousand times repeated.
The face that was most dear to him, that of Christ, the centre of the picture, which had so enraptured him when he first discovered it, now, regarded from the others' standpoint, seemed quite worthless.
He saw a well-painted  and not even that, for he detected a multitude of errors  repetition of those innumerable Christs: Titian's, Raphael's, Rubens's, with the same warriors and the same Pilates.
It was trivial, poor, old, and even badly painted, weak and lacking harmony. They would be in the right when they began to say falsely-polite things in the presence of the artist, and to pity and laugh at him behind his back.
To break it and to appear calm, he made an effort and addressed Golenishchev.
'I think I have had the pleasure of meeting you?' he said, glancing uneasily now at Anna and now at Vronsky, in order not to lose any detail of their expressions.
Noticing, however, that Mikhaylov was waiting to hear his criticism of the picture, he said:
One can so well understand that man, a kind, first-rate fellow, but an official to his very backbone, who does not know what he is doing.
Little as he valued Golenishchev's capacity to understand art, unimportant as was his remark about the truth of Pilate's official expression while what was important remained unmentioned, and offensive as this trivial (it might have seemed to him) remark before anything had been said about what was most important Mikhaylov was delighted with it.
He took a liking for Golenishchev because of that remark, and his depression changed suddenly into delight.
In an instant his whole picture became alive before his eyes, with the inexpressible complexity of everything that lives.
He wished to say that it was just so that he understood Pilate, but his trembling lips would not obey him and he was unable to speak.
That expression pleased her more than all else she saw and she felt that it was the centre of the picture, and that therefore praise of it would be agreeable to the artist. 'One sees he is sorry for Pilate.'
This too was one of a million just remarks which might have been made with reference to his picture and the figure of Christ.
She said he was sorry for Pilate.
All this and much more floated through Mikhaylov's mind; and again his face shone with ecstasy.
One could walk round it,' said Golenishchev, showing evidently by this remark that he did not approve of the content and idea of the figure.
'Yes, yes, wonderful!' chimed in Golenishchev and Anna. In spite of his elation, this remark about technique grated painfully on Mikhaylov's heart, and, glancing angrily at Vronsky, he suddenly frowned.
He had often noticed  as now when his picture was being praised  that technique was contrasted with inner quality, as if it were possible to paint well something that was bad.
If the things he saw had been revealed to a little child, or to his cook, they would have been able to remove the outer shell from their idea.
And the most experienced and technical painter could never paint anything by means of mechanical skill alone, if the outline of the subject-matter did not first reveal itself to his mind.
Moreover, he saw that if technique were spoken of, then he could not be praised for it.
In all he painted and ever had painted he saw defects that were an eyesore to him, the results of carelessness in removing the shell of the idea, which he could not now remedy without spoiling the work as a whole.
And in almost all the figures and faces he saw traces of wrappings that had not been entirely removed and that spoilt the picture.
'It is, that you have made Him a man-God, and not a God-man.
Golenishchev did not agree with this, and keeping to his first contention that unity of impression is indispensable in art, he confuted Mikhaylov. The artist was perturbed, but could find nothing to say in defence of his opinion.
ANNA AND VRONSKY HAD LONG BEEN exchanging glances regretting their friend's clever loquacity, and at last Vronsky without waiting for his host crossed the room to look at another and smaller picture.
Charming!' he and Anna began both at once.
He had forgotten all the sufferings and raptures he had gone through on account of that work, when it alone had occupied him unremittingly day and night for three months. He had forgotten it, as he forgot all his finished pictures.
He did not even like looking at it, and had only brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who wished to buy it.
'That's nothing  only an old study,' he said.
The elder had just thrown the line and, quite absorbed in his occupation, was carefully drawing the float from behind a bush; the younger one lay in the grass, leaning on his elbows with his fair tousled head in his hands, and with dreamy blue eyes gazing at the water.
What was he thinking about?
Their delight in his picture aroused in Mikhaylov his former excitement, but he feared and disliked their idle interest in his past work, and therefore, though their praises gave him pleasure, he tried to draw his visitors' attention to a third picture.
To Mikhaylov, in his excitement over their visit, this mention of money matters was very disagreeable.
'It is put out for sale,' he replied, frowning darkly.
When the visitors had left, Mikhaylov sat down before his picture of Pilate and Christ and mentally reviewed all that had been said, and even what was not said but only hinted by the visitors.
Strange to say, what had had weight with him while they were there and he looked at things from their point of view suddenly lost all significance now.
He looked at his picture with his artistic perception fully alert, and reached that assurance of the perfection, and consequent importance, of his picture which he needed to attain the intensity of effort  excluding all other interests  without which he could not work.
He took his palette and commenced working.
While correcting the foot he kept glancing at the figure of John in the background, which the visitors had not even remarked, but which he knew to be the height of perfection.
When he had completed the foot he was about to do something to that figure, but felt that he was too agitated.
He could work neither when he was too indifferent nor when he was too highly roused and saw everything too distinctly.
There was only one stage between calmness and inspiration, at which work was possible, and to-day he was too excited.
He was about to cover his picture, but paused, and holding up the sheet stood a long time with a rapturous smile gazing at the figure of John.
At length, tearing himself away from it regretfully, he let the sheet fall over the picture and went home, tired but happy.
They talked about Mikhaylov and his pictures.
They said that it was impossible to deny his talent, but that his talent could not develop because of his lack of education  the common misfortune of our Russian artists.
How well he has hit it off, and how simply!
On the appointed day he came and began working.
It was strange that Mikhaylov had been able to discover that special beauty. 'One needed to know and love her as I love her, to find just that sweetest spiritual expression of hers,' thought Vronsky, though he himself had only learnt to know that 'sweetest spiritual expression' through the portrait.
'How long have I been struggling without accomplishing anything?' he said, referring to the portrait he was painting; 'and he just looked, and painted this!
'That will come in good time,' said Golenishchev, consolingly. In his opinion Vronsky had talent, and especially the education that gives a lofty outlook on art.
Golenishchev's conviction that Vronsky possessed talent was supported by the fact that he required Vronsky's sympathy and praise for his articles and ideas, and felt that praise and encouragement should be mutual.
In another man's house, and particularly in Vronsky's palazzo, Mikhaylov was quite a different man from what he was in his studio.
He was unpleasantly deferential, as if fearful of intimacy with persons whom he did not respect.
He addressed Vronsky as 'Your Excellency,' and never stayed to dinner, though Anna and Vronsky both invited him, and he never came except for a sitting.
Anna was even kinder to him than to others, and was grateful for her portrait.
Vronsky was more than polite to him, and was evidently interested in the artist's opinion of his (Vronsky's) picture.
Anna felt by his look that he liked looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her.
When Vronsky talked about his art Mikhaylov remained stubbornly silent, and as stubbornly silent when they showed him Vronsky's picture, and he was evidently oppressed by Golenishchev's discourses, to which he made no rejoinder.
Altogether, his reserved, disagreeable, and apparently hostile attitude when they came to know him better much displeased them, and they were glad when the sittings were over, the beautiful portrait was theirs, and his visits ceased.
'We won't say "jealous" because he has talent, but he is vexed that a man of the Court, a rich man, and a Count into the bargain (men like him hate all that), should, without any particular difficulty, do as well or even better than he, who has devoted his whole life to the work.
Especially, there is the education which he lacks.'
Vronsky took Mikhaylov's part, but in the depth of his heart he believed what Golenishchev said, for he considered that a man of that other and lower world must envy him.
He went on, however, with his mediaeval picture.
And he, as well as Golenishchev, and especially Anna, thought it very good because it resembled famous pictures much more than Mikhaylov's did.
Meanwhile Mikhaylov, though Anna's portrait had much engrossed him, was even better pleased than they when the sittings were over and he was no longer obliged to listen to Golenishchev's disquisitions on art and was able to forget Vronsky's paintings.
He knew it was not possible to forbid Vronsky to trifle with art, knew that he and all the dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked  but to him it was unpleasant.
One cannot forbid a man's making a big wax doll and kissing it.
But if the man came and sat down with his doll in front of a lover, and began to caress it as the lover caresses his beloved, it would displease the lover.
It was this kind of unpleasantness that Mikhaylov experienced when he saw Vronsky's pictures: he was amused, vexed, sorry, and hurt.
He had sufficient taste for art to be unable to finish his picture.
He ceased painting it because he was dimly conscious that its defects, little noticeable at first, would become striking if he went on.
The same thing happened to him as to Golenishchev, who, feeling that he had nothing to express, continually deceived himself by saying that his thought had not yet ripened and that he was bringing it to maturity and preparing materials.
With characteristic firmness he left off painting, without any explanations or excuses.
But without that occupation his life and Anna's  who was surprised at his disenchantment  appeared very dull in the Italian town. All of a sudden the palazzo became so obviously old and dirty, so disagreeably familiar were the stains on the curtains, the cracks in the floor, the cracked stuccoes of the cornices, and so wearisome became Golenishchev, the Italian professor, and the German traveller, who were also always the same, that a change was necessary.
In Petersburg Vronsky planned to separate his property from his brother's, and Anna to see her son.
He was happy, but in quite a different way from what he had expected.
At every step he met disillusionments in his old fancies and new and unexpected enchantments.
He was happy, but having embarked on family life he saw at every step that it was not at all what he had anticipated.
At every step he took he felt as a man would feel who, after admiring the smooth happy motion of a little boat upon the water, had himself got into the boat.
He found that besides sitting quietly without rocking he had to keep a lookout, not for a moment forget where he was going, or that there was water under his feet, and that he had to row, although it hurt his unaccustomed hands; in short, that it only looked easy, but to do it, though very delightful, was very difficult.
As a bachelor seeing the married life of others  their petty cares, their disputes, their jealousies  he used mentally to smile contemptuously.
In his future married life he was sure he would have nothing of this kind, and even the external forms of his married life would be quite unlike other people's.
And now, behold! his life with his wife had not shaped itself differently, but was all made up of those petty trifles which he had formerly so despised, but which now, against his will, assumed an unusual and incontestable importance.
Levin saw that the arrangement of all those trifles was not at all so easy as he had formerly supposed.
Though he had imagined his ideas about family life to be most exact, he, like all men, had involuntarily pictured it to himself as merely the enjoyment of love  which nothing should be allowed to hinder and from which one should not be distracted by petty cares.
He should, he thought, do his work, and rest from it in the joys of love.
But like all men, he forgot that she too must work; and was surprised how she, the poetic, charming Kitty, could, during the very first weeks and even in the first days of married life, think, remember, and fuss about tablecloths; furniture, spare-room mattresses, a tray, the cook, the dinner, and so forth.
During their engagement he had been struck by the definiteness with which she declined a trip abroad and decided to go to the country, as if she knew of something that was necessary, and could think of something besides their love.
He had been pained by it then, and now was repeatedly pained by her petty cares.
But he saw that this was necessary to her, and, loving her, though he could not understand what it was all about, and laughed at her worries, he could not help admiring them.
He laughed at the way she placed the furniture that had been brought from Moscow, and rearranged his and her own rooms, hung up curtains, decided about rooms for future visitors and for Dolly, arranged the room for her new maid, gave orders about dinner to the old cook, and entered into discussions with Agatha Mikhaylovna, taking the commissariat into her own hands.
He saw the old cook smile admiringly and listen to her inexperienced and impossible orders; saw that Agatha Mikhaylovna shook her head thoughtfully and kindly at her young mistress's arrangements in the storeroom; saw that Kitty was peculiarly charming when she came, half laughing and half crying, to report that her maid, Masha, was used to considering her merely as a young lady in her mother's house, and that therefore no one would obey her.
It struck him as very charming, but strange, and he thought it would have been better without all that.
He did not realize the feeling of change that she was experiencing after her life at home. There she had sometimes wished for cabbage with kvas, or sweets, and could not have them; but now she might order whatever she pleased, and could if she liked buy heaps of sweets, spend any amount of money, and order all the puddings she pleased.
She looked forward joyfully to Dolly's coming with the children, especially because she meant to give each of them their favourite puddings, and because Dolly would appreciate her new arrangements.
Without herself knowing why or wherefore, the management of the house attracted her irresistibly.
Instinctively feeling the approach of spring, and knowing that there would be wet weather, she built her nest as she could, hastening to build it while yet learning how to do it.
Kitty's absorption in these trifles, quite contrary to Levin's early ideal of lofty happiness, was one of his disappointments; yet that sweet absorption, the meaning of which he could not understand but which he could not help liking, was also one of his new enchantments.
Levin had never thought it possible that between him and his wife there could ever be any but tender, respectful, and loving relations, and yet from the very beginning they had quarrelled: she had said he did not love her, but only loved himself, and began to cry and wave her arms.
This first quarrel arose because Levin had ridden over to see his new farm and returned half an hour late, having attempted a short cut home and lost his way.
He rode home thinking only of her, of her love and of his happiness, and the nearer he came the warmer grew his tenderness for her.
He ran into the room with the same feelings as, and even stronger ones than, those with which he had gone to the Shcherbatskys' house to propose and to his astonishment was met with such a dismal look as he had never seen on her face before.
He tried to kiss her but she pushed him away.
'You seem merry...' she began, wishing to say something calmly stinging.
But directly she opened her mouth, words of reproach, senseless jealousy, and everything else that had been torturing her during the half-hour she had sat motionless waiting at the window, burst from her.
Then it was that he first clearly understood what he did not realize when leading her out of church after the wedding: that she was not only very close to him but that he could not now tell where she ended and he began.
He understood this by a tormenting sensation of cleavage which he experienced at that moment.
Far an instant he was offended, but immediately knew he could not be offended with her because she was himself.
For a moment he felt like a man who, receiving a blow from behind, angrily and revengefully turns round to find his assailant and realizes that he has accidentally knocked himself, that there is no one to be angry with and that he must endure and try to still the pain.
Never again did he feel this so strongly as this first time, and for a long time he could not recover his balance.
His natural feelings prompted him to justify himself and prove that she was in the wrong; but to prove her in the wrong would mean irritating her still more, and widening the breach which was the cause of all the trouble.
One impulse, an habitual one, drew him to shift the blame from himself and lay it upon her; but another, and more powerful one, drew him to smooth over the breach as quickly as possible and not allow it to widen.
To remain under so unjust an accusation was painful, but to justify himself and hurt her would be still worse.
Like a man half-asleep and oppressed with pain, he wanted to tear off the aching part and cast it from him, but found on waking that the aching part was  himself.
All he could do was to try to soothe the ache and endure it, and this he did.
Having realized that she was in the wrong, though she did not acknowledge it, she became more tender to him, and they enjoyed a new and doubled happiness in their love.
He was in his study and sat at the table writing.
She, in the dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of her marriage and which was specially memorable and dear to him, sat with her embroidery on that same old leather-covered sofa which had stood in the study through his father's and grandfather's times.
As he sat thinking and writing he was all the while blissfully conscious of her presence.
He had not abandoned his work on the estate, or on the book in which the foundations of a new farming system were to be explained; but as those thoughts and that work formerly appeared to him trivial and insignificant in comparison with the gloom that overshadowed all existence, so now they appeared trivial and insignificant in comparison with his future prospects all bathed in the bright sunshine of happiness.
He went on with his work with a feeling that the centre of gravity of his attention had shifted, and that he consequently saw the matter differently and with greater clearness.
Formerly this work had been his salvation from life.
He used to feel that without it life would be too dismal, and now he needed it in order that his life should not be too monotonously bright.
Having set to work again on his manuscript and read over what he had written, he was glad to find, that the work seemed worth doing.
Many of his former thoughts now appeared superfluous and extreme, but many omissions became clear to him when he went over the matter afresh.
While he was writing his thoughts, she was thinking about his unnatural attention to young Prince Charsky, who had been very tactlessly paying court to her on the day before their departure from Moscow. 'Why, he's jealous!' she thought.
'Oh dear! How sweet and silly he is, jealous of me!
If he only knew that all the rest of them are no more than Peter the cook to me!' and she glanced with a feeling of proprietorship strange to herself, at the nape of his red neck. 'Though it's a pity to interrupt him at his work (but he'll have time enough) I must see his face.
Will he feel that I am looking at him!
Well!' and she opened her eyes wider, trying thereby to increase the force of her look.
'Yes, they divert all the sap, they produce a false glamour,' he muttered, pausing, and feeling that she was looking at him he turned round smiling.
'Well?' he asked with a smile, and rose.
'He has turned!' she thought.
'Nothing, I only wanted to make you turn round,' said she, gazing at him and trying to discover whether he was vexed at the interruption.
For me, I mean...' he said, coming toward her with a beaming smile of happiness.
Go and write, don't let me distract you,' she said, puckering her lips. 'And I must cut out these little holes, you see!'
Taking up her scissors she began cutting.
'Come, tell me what it was,' he said, sitting down beside her and watching the circular movement of her tiny scissors.
It is too beautiful!' he said, kissing her hand.
'Your hair comes to a point behind,' he said, carefully turning her head round. 'A point?
'Be quick and come,' she said as she left the study, 'or else I shall read all the letters without you.
Left alone, having put away his papers in the new portfolio she had bought, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the new and elegant utensils that had also appeared through her agency.
He smiled at his thought and shook his head disapprovingly at it. A feeling resembling repentance tormented him.
There was something contemptible, effeminate, Capuan, as he called it, in his present life. 'It is not right to live so,' he thought.
The farm work  why, I hardly even go and see about that! Sometimes I am sorry to part from her, sometimes I can see she is dull.
Of course it is not her fault; there is nothing to reproach her with.
I ought to have been firmer and upheld my independence as a man.
This way I shall get into bad habits and teach them to her too...
Of course it is not her fault,' he said to himself.
But it is difficult for a dissatisfied man not to reproach some one else, namely, the person most closely connected with the subject of his dissatisfaction.
And Levin dimly felt that though she was not herself in fault  she never could be in fault  it was the fault of her bringing up, which was too superficial and frivolous. 'That fool Charsky!
I know she wanted to stop him but did not know how,' he thought. 'Yes, except for the interest she takes in the housekeeping,  that interest she certainly has,  her clothes, and her embroidery, she has no real interests.
She takes no interest in our work, in the farm, in the peasants, or in music, though she is quite good at that, or in books. She does nothing and is quite content.'
In his heart he blamed her, but he did not understand that she was preparing herself for a period of activity which was inevitably coming, when at one and the same time she would be her husband's wife, the mistress of the house, and a bearer, nurturer, and educator of her children.
He did not understand that, but she knew it instinctively; and while getting ready for her gigantic task she did not reproach herself for the moments of careless and happy love that she now enjoyed while building her nest for the future.
WHEN LEVIN CAME UPSTAIRS his wife was sitting beside the new silver samovar with a new tea-service before her, reading a letter from Dolly, with whom she kept up a regular and active correspondence.
She had made old Agatha Mikhaylovna sit at a little table with a cup of tea she had poured out for her.
'You see, your lady has made me sit with her,' said Agatha Mikhaylovna, glancing with a friendly smile at Kitty.
He perceived that despite Agatha Mikhaylovna's grief at the advent of the new mistress who had taken the reins of management into her own hands, Kitty had conquered and had made the old woman love her.
I've read your letter,' said Kitty, handing him a badly-written letter. 'It is from that woman, I think  your brother's...
But Levin did not listen. He blushed as he took Mary Nikolavna's letter.
This was the second letter he had received from the woman who had been his brother's mistress.
In the first she wrote that his brother had sent her away for no fault of hers, adding with touching naivet that, though she was again in want she did not ask or desire anything, but wrote because she was crushed by the thought that Nicholas Dmitrich would perish without her, his health being so bad.
She begged Levin to keep watch over his brother.
This time she wrote differently: she had found Nicholas Dmitrich, had joined him in Moscow, and had gone with him to a provincial town where he had obtained a post in the Civil Service.
But he had quarrelled with his chief, and they had started again for Moscow, when he fell so ill on the way that it was hardly likely he would ever get up again. She wrote: 'He keeps on thinking of you; besides, there is no money left.'
'Read it... Dolly writes about you,' Kitty began with a smile, but paused suddenly, noticing the changed expression on her husband's face.
'She writes that my brother Nicholas is on his deathbed.
'When are you going?' she asked.
What do you mean?' he said reproachfully.
'What, indeed?' she replied, offended that he seemed opposed to and vexed at her offer. 'Why should I not go?
'At such an important time, she thinks only of how dull it will be for her alone here,' he thought; and this motive in connection with something so important vexed him.
'It is impossible,' he replied sternly.
Agatha Mikhaylovna, seeing that a quarrel was imminent, softly put down her cup and went out.
Kitty did not even notice her.
The tone in which her husband had said these words hurt her, especially as he evidently disbelieved what she had said.
'And I say that if you go I shall go with you. I will certainly go!' she said hastily and angrily.
'Well, if only because that woman is there, with whom you cannot associate...'
'There, you see! You always attribute bad and vile motives to me,' she began, with tears of anger and resentment.
'I am all right, not weak, nor anything... I feel that it's my duty to be with my husband when he is in trouble, but you wish to hurt me on purpose, you purposely don't want to understand me!'
'No, this is awful... being a sort of slave!' exclaimed Levin, unable to restrain his annoyance any longer, but immediately conscious that he had dealt a blow to himself.
Why, since you are repenting?' she said, and jumped up and ran into the drawing-room.
When he came in after her, she was sobbing.
He began speaking, trying to find words not so much to dissuade as to pacify her.
But she did not listen and did not agree to anything he said.
He stooped and took her resisting hand; he kissed her hand, her hair, and again her hand, but she remained silent.
But when he took her face in his hands and said 'Kitty!' she suddenly recovered, cried a little, and then they made it up.
Levin told his wife he believed she only wanted to go that she might be of use, and agreed that Mary Nikolavna's presence at his brother's would not make it at all improper; but he was going, dissatisfied in the depths of his heart with both himself and her.
He was dissatisfied with her because she could not face letting him go when it was necessary (and how strange it was to think that he, who such a short time ago dared not believe in the happiness of her loving him, now felt unhappy because she loved him too much!), and dissatisfied with himself because he had not maintained his authority.
Still less could he with conviction agree that the woman who was with his brother did not matter, and he thought with terror of all the encounters that might take place.
The single fact that his wife, his Kitty, would be in the same room with a girl off the streets made him shudder with repulsion and horror.
Vexed with his wife because his expectations were being realized  namely, that, at the moment of arrival when his heart was seized with agitation at the thought of his brother's condition, he was obliged to consider her instead of running to him at once  Levin led her to the room.
'Go, go!' she said with a timid, guilty look at him.
He went out silently, and at the very door came upon Mary Nikolavna, who had heard of his arrival but had not dared to enter.
She was just the same as he had seen her in Moscow  the same stuff dress without collar or cuffs, and the same kindly, dull, pock-marked face, only somewhat stouter.
'Well? How is he?
For a moment he did not understand the cause of her confusion, but she immediately explained it.
'I will go... I will go to the kitchen,' she brought out.
'He will be pleased. He heard; and he knows and remembers her abroad.'
Levin understood that she referred to his wife, and did not know what to say.
'Come along, come!' he said.
But he had hardly moved when the door opened and Kitty looked out.
Levin blushed with shame and vexation at his wife for having placed herself and him in this awkward position; but Mary Nikolavna blushed still more.
She shrank together, flushed till tears filled her eyes, and seizing the ends of her shawl began twisting them in her red fingers, not knowing what to say or do.
At the first glance Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the look with which Kitty gazed at this incomprehensible and terrible woman, but it lasted only an instant.
'Well, how is he?
How is he?' she said, addressing first her husband and then the woman.
'Dear me, we can't talk in the corridor!' said Levin, looking crossly at a man who was just passing along with jerky steps, ostensibly on business of his own.
'Well, then, come in,' said Kitty to Mary Nikolavna, who had regained her self-control; 'or better still, you go on and send for me,' she continued, noticing her husband's frightened look, and then returned to their room. Levin went to his brother.
He had not expected what he saw and felt when he reached his brother's side.
He had expected to find him in that state of self-deception which, he had heard, was frequent in consumptive cases and which had so struck him at the time of his brother's visit to him in the autumn.
He had expected to feel the same sorrow at the loss of a loved brother and the same horror of death he had then experienced, but to a greater degree, and had prepared himself for all this; but what he found was quite different.
'Impossible that this terrible body can be my brother Nicholas,' he thought.
But he drew nearer, saw the face, and doubt was no longer possible.
In spite of the dreadful change on the face, Levin had only to glance at those living eyes raised toward him, to notice the slight movement of the mouth beneath the clammy moustache, in order to understand the dreadful truth that this dead body was his living brother.
Levin at once felt the reproach in the look fixed on him, and a sense of repentance because of his own happiness.
'You did not expect to find me like this?' he said, speaking with difficulty.
'Yes... no...' said Levin, confusing his words. 'How is it you did not let me know sooner, I mean at the time of my marriage?
He was impelled to speak in order not to remain silent, but did not know what to say, especially as his brother made no reply but only gazed fixedly at him, evidently trying to fathom the meaning of every word.
Levin told his brother that his wife had come with him.
Nicholas seemed pleased at this, but said he was afraid the condition he was in might frighten her.
From his expression Levin expected him to say something specially significant and important, but Nicholas only talked about his health.
He found fault with the doctor, and regretted that he could not have a celebrated Moscow doctor; so Levin understood that he was still hoping.
Taking advantage of the first moment of silence, Levin got up, wishing to free himself if only for a few minutes from his painful sensations, and said he would fetch his wife.
Tidy up,' said the invalid with an effort. 'And when you have finished, go away,' he added, with a questioning look at his brother.
He had said he would bring his wife but now, analysing the impressions he was experiencing, he made up his mind that he would on the contrary try to dissuade her from entering the sick-room. 'Why should she too be tortured as I am?' he reflected.
'Well, how is he?'
Kitty was silent a moment, looking timidly and pitifully at her husband, then she approached and took hold of his elbow with both hands.
Just take me there and then go away,' she began. 'Try and realize that for me to see you and not to see him is much more painful.
Please let me!' she entreated as if her happiness depended on it.
He was obliged to yield, and having recovered, and quite forgotten Mary Nikolavna, he returned with Kitty to his brother.
Stepping lightly and glancing repeatedly at her husband, showing him a brave face full of sympathy she entered the sick-room, and, turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door.
With noiseless steps she advanced toward the bedside, went round so that he need not turn his head, and at once grasping his enormous skeleton hand with her fresh young one, pressed it, and with that sympathetic, quiet animation which gives no offence and is natural only to women, she began to talk to him.
'It was in Soden we met, but we were not acquainted,' she said. 'You little thought I should one day be your sister?'
'You would not have known me again?' he asked, with a smile that had lit up his face at her entrance.
The sick man's animation did not last long.
She had not finished speaking before that stern reproachful look of jealousy, felt by the dying for the living, settled on his face.
'I'm afraid you are not quite comfortable here,' she said, turning away from his penetrating glance and looking round the room. 'We shall have to ask the landlord for another room, and see that we are nearer to each other,' she said to her husband.
LEVIN COULD NOT LOOK AT HIS BROTHER calmly and could not be either natural or tranquil in his presence.
When he entered the sickroom his eyes and his attention became clouded without his being conscious of it, and he did not see or distinguish the various details of his brother's condition.
He smelt the terribly foul air, saw the dirt and disorder, the agonizing posture of the body, and heard the groans; but he felt there was no help for it.
It never entered his head to consider all these details and imagine how that body was lying under the blanket, how the emaciated, doubled-up shins, loins, and back were placed, and whether it would not be possible to place them more comfortably or do something, if not to make him comfortable, at least to make his condition a little more tolerable.
A cold shudder crept down his back when he began to think of those details.
He was convinced beyond doubt that nothing could be done to prolong that life or to alleviate those sufferings, and the sick man was conscious of his brother's conviction that there was no help for him, and this irritated him.
When she saw the invalid she pitied him, and that pity produced in her woman's soul not the horror and repulsion which it evoked in her husband but a need for action, for finding out all the particulars of his condition, and a desire to help him.
Those very details, the thought of which alone filled her husband with horror, at once arrested her attention.
She sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist's, made the maid she had brought with her help Mary Nikolavna sweep, dust, and wash; and herself washed and scrubbed some articles and spread something under the blanket. At her command things were brought in and taken out of the sick-room.
She herself went several times to their own room and, without paying any attention to the people she met, brought back with her sheets, pillow-cases, towels, and shirts.
The waiter, who was serving a meal to some engineers in the drawing-room, came up several times at her summons with a cross look on his face, but could not help fulfilling her orders; she gave them with such kindly insistence that it was impossible to disobey her.
Above all he was afraid that his brother might get angry about it.
But the sick man, though apparently indifferent to it all, was not angry but only ashamed, and on the whole appeared rather interested in what she was doing for him.
When Levin opened the door, on his return from the doctor's whither Kitty had sent him, he saw the invalid at the moment when at Kitty's command Mary Nikolavna and the waiter were putting a clean shirt on him.
Kitty, having hurriedly shut the door behind Levin, was not looking that way; but the invalid moaned and she came toward him.
'Be quick!' she said.
'Don't come here,' muttered the sick man angrily. 'I can myself...'
But Kitty had heard, and understood that he felt embarrassed and uncomfortable at being stripped in her presence.
'I'm not looking,' she said, helping the arm in. 'Mary Nikolavna, you go round to the other side and put it right,' she added.
'There is a little bottle in my handbag,' she went on, turning to her husband. 'You know, in the side pocket!
When Levin returned with the bottle he found the invalid arranged in bed and everything around him quite altered.
Instead of the foul smell there was an odour of vinegar and of scent, which Kitty  pouting her lips and puffing out her rosy cheeks  was blowing through a little glass tube.
The invalid himself, washed and with his hair brushed, lay between clean sheets in a clean shirt, its white collar round his abnormally thin neck, gazing with a new look of hope at Kitty and not taking his eyes off her.
The doctor whom Levin had fetched, and whom he had found at a club, was not the one who had hitherto attended Nicholas, with whom the patient was dissatisfied.
The new doctor took out a stethoscope and sounded him, shook his head, prescribed some medicine and gave extremely precise instructions about giving the medicine and about diet.
When the doctor had gone the patient said something to his brother of which Levin caught only the last words: 'your Kate'; but by the look he gave her Levin saw that his brother was praising her.
He asked 'Kate,' as he called her, to come nearer.
'I feel much better,' he said. 'Had I been with you I should have recovered long ago.
How pleasant!' He took her hand and drew it toward his lips, but as if fearful that this might be disagreeable to her he changed his mind, let her hand drop, and merely stroked it.
Kitty took his hand in both of hers and pressed it.
'Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed,' he murmured.
No one heard what he said, but Kitty understood him.
She understood because her mind incessantly watched for his needs.
'On the other side,' she said to her husband, 'he always sleeps on that side.
Can you?' she said, addressing Mary Nikolavna.
Dreadful as it seemed to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to grasp those parts under the blanket which he did not wish to remember, yet submitting to his wife, with that determined expression which she knew, he thrust his arms under the blanket, and despite his great strength was struck by the strange heaviness of those emaciated limbs.
While he was turning him, with the enormous lean arm about his neck, Kitty quickly and unostentatiously turned and beat the pillow, and arranged the invalid's head and the hair that again clung to the temples.
The patient retained his brother's hand in his.
Levin felt that he wished to do something with his hand and was pulling at it, and yielded with a sinking heart.
Yes, his brother drew the hand to his lips and kissed it.
'THOU HAST HID THESE THINGS from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes,' thought Levin while talking with his wife that night.
He thought of the Gospel text not because he considered himself wise  he did not  but because he could not help knowing that he was more intelligent than his wife and Agatha Mikhaylovna; he could not help knowing that when he thought about death he thought with all the powers of his soul.
He knew too that many great and virile minds, whose thoughts on that subject he had read, had pondered it, and yet did not know a hundredth part of what his wife and Agatha Mikhaylovna knew on the subject.
Different as were those two women, Agatha Mikhaylovna and Kitty  or 'Kate' as Nicholas called her, and as Levin was also fond of calling her now  in that respect they were exactly alike.
Had Levin now been alone with his brother Nicholas, he would have looked at him with horror, and would have waited about in still greater horror not knowing what to do next.
More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, or how to step. To talk of indifferent things seemed an affront, and he could not do it; to talk of death and dismal things was likewise impossible, and it was equally impossible to keep silent.
'I fear that if I look at him he will think I am watching. If I don't look, he will imagine I am thinking of something else.
If I walk on tiptoe he will be displeased, and yet I am ashamed to tread on the whole of my foot.' But Kitty evidently did not think and had no time to think of herself.
She, prompted by some inner conviction, thought of him, and everything came out right. She talked to him about herself and about her wedding, smiled, sympathized, caressed him, mentioned cases of recovery, and it was all successful, so she evidently knew what she was about.
The proof that her and Agatha Mikhaylovna's behaviour was not instinctive, animal, and unreasoning lay in the fact that they both demanded for the dying man something of greater importance than mere physical care, something that had nothing in common with physical conditions. Agatha Mikhaylovna, speaking of the old man who had died, had said: 'Well, God be thanked!
He received Communion and Extreme Unction; God grant everybody to die so!' Just in the same way Kitty, besides all her cares about linen, bedsores, and cooling drinks, had managed on the very first day to persuade the invalid of the necessity of receiving Communion and Extreme Unction.
When Levin returned to their two rooms for the night he sat with hanging head not knowing what to do.
Not only could he not think of supper, of getting ready for the night, of considering what they were to do, he could not even talk to his wife: he was ashamed to.
She was in that highly-wrought state when the reasoning powers act with great rapidity; the state a man is in before a battle or a struggle, in danger, and at the decisive moments of life  those moments when a man shows once for all what he is worth, that his past was not lived in vain but was a preparation for these moments.
All she did was well done, and before midnight everything was sorted, clean, and neat, so that their apartments showed a resemblance to her own rooms at home: beds made, combs, brushes and looking-glasses laid out, and covers spread.
It seemed to Levin that it would be inexcusable to eat, sleep, or even to talk, and he felt that his every movement was improper.
'I am very glad I have persuaded him to receive Extreme Unction to-morrow,' she said as she sat in her dressing-jacket before her folding-glass and combed her soft fragrant hair with a small comb. 'I have never been present, but Mama told me that there are prayers for the restoration of health...'
'Do you really think he can recover?' he asked, looking at the back of her round little head, at the narrow parting which closed every time she drew the comb forward.
He says he can't live more than three days.
Still, I am very glad I persuaded him,' she said, turning her eyes toward her husband from behind her hair. 'Everything is possible,' she added with the peculiar and rather cunning expression which always appeared on her face when she spoke of religious matters.
Since their talk about religion during their engagement neither he nor she had ever started a conversation on that subject; but she continued to observe the rites, went to church, and prayed, always with the same quiet conviction that it was necessary to do so.
In spite of his assurances to the contrary she was persuaded that he was a Christian, like, and even better than, herself and that all he said about it was one of his funny male whims, like his sayings about her embroidery: that good people darn holes, while she cut holes on purpose... and so on.
'Yes, you see that woman Mary Nikolavna could not arrange all that,' said Levin. 'I...
You are purity itself, and...' He took her hand and did not kiss it (to do so with death so near seemed to him unbecoming), but only pressed it, looking guiltily into her brightening eyes.
'It would have been so painful for you alone,' she said, and raising her arms high so that they hid her cheeks, now flushed with pleasure, she twisted her braided hair and pinned it up at the back of her head. 'No,' she continued, 'she did not know how to...
'It is so terrible to me that I cannot help seeing him as he was when young...
You would not believe what a charming lad he was, and I did not understand him then.'
I feel that we should have been friends, he and I...' she said, and, frightened at her own words, she glanced at her husband, and tears filled her eyes.
'Yes, would have been,' he said sadly. 'He is really one of those of whom it is said, they are not for this world.'
'However, we have hard days before us  let us go to bed,' said Kitty with a glance at her tiny watch.
During the ceremony he prayed fervently.
In his large eyes, fixed upon an icon which had been placed on a little table covered with a coloured cloth, was a look of such passionate entreaty and hope that Levin was frightened at seeing it.
He knew that this passionate entreaty and hope would only make the parting from the life he so loved more difficult.
Levin knew his brother and the direction of his thoughts, knew that he had become a sceptic not because it was easier for him to live without faith, but because step by step modern scientific explanations of the phenomena of the universe had driven out his faith; he knew therefore that this return to the old faith was not legitimate, not a similar result of thought, but was only a temporary, selfish and irrational hope of recovery.
Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened that hope by tales of extraordinary recoveries of which she had heard.
Knowing all this, Levin suffered much as he saw that look full of entreaty and hope, that emaciated hand lifted with effort, in making the sign of the cross, to touch the drawn skin of the forehead, the protruding shoulder-blades and the hollow hoarse chest which could no longer contain that life for which the invalid was praying.
During the sacrament Levin did that which, agnostic though he was, he had done a thousand times before.
He said, addressing himself to God, 'If Thou dost exist, heal this man (such things have often happened), and Thou wilt save both him and me!'
He did not cough once for a whole hour, smiled, kissed Kitty's hand, thanking her with tears in his eyes, and said he felt well, had no pain, but had an appetite and felt stronger.
Hopeless as his case was, obvious as it was that he could not recover, Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement, happy yet timid and fearful of being mistaken.
'Better  Yes, much better.  Wonderful!  It is not at all wonderful. Still, he's better!' they said in whispers, smiling at one another.
The reality of his sufferings destroyed it, leaving no trace nor even any recollection of the former hopes, in Levin, Kitty, or the patient himself.
Not referring to what he had believed half an hour previously, as though he were ashamed to remember it, Nicholas told them to give him a bottle of iodine covered with perforated paper for inhaling.
Levin handed it to him, and at once the look of passionate hope with which the invalid had received Extreme Unction was fixed on his brother, demanding from him a confirmation of the doctor's words to the effect that inhaling iodine worked miracles.
'Kitty is not here?' he asked hoarsely, glancing round when Levin had reluctantly confirmed the doctor's statement. 'No?
Then I can tell you... It's for her sake I went through that comedy  she is such a dear!
Now, in this I do believe,' he said, clutching the bottle with his bony hand and beginning to inhale from it.
Between seven and eight o'clock that evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in their room when Mary Nikolavna rushed in breathless.
'He is dying!' she whispered. 'I'm afraid he'll die immediately.'
Both ran to his room. He was sitting up with his long back bent, leaning his elbows on the bed and hanging his head.
'I feel I am departing,' uttered Nicholas with an effort, but very distinctly, as if he were pressing the words out of his body.
He did not lift his head but only turned up his eyes, failing to reach his brother's face. 'Kate, go away,' he added.
Levin jumped up and in a commanding whisper told her to leave the room.
'Because I am departing,' he repeated, as if that word pleased him. 'It's the end.'
'You had better lie down, you would feel easier,' she said.
'I'll soon be lying,' he said softly. 'Dead!' he added cynically and angrily.
Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and holding his breath gazed at his face.
The dying man lay with closed eyes, but at intervals the muscles of his forehead worked as if he were thinking deeply and intently.
Levin involuntarily meditated upon what was taking place within his brother at that moment, but, in spite of all the efforts of his mind to follow, he saw by the expression of that calm stern face and the play of the muscle above one eyebrow that something was becoming clear to the dying man which for Levin remained as dark as ever:
'That's so!' he drawled in a tone of relief, as if he had found a solution. 'Oh God!' he muttered with a heavy sigh.
Mary Nikolavna felt his feet. 'Growing cold,' she whispered.
For a long, a very long, time as it seemed to Levin the invalid lay motionless, but he still lived and at long intervals sighed.
He felt that despite all his mental efforts he could not understand what was 'so' and was already lagging far behind his dying brother.
He was no longer able to reflect on the actual problem of death, and could not hinder thoughts about what he would soon have to do: to close his brother's eyes, dress him, order a coffin.
And strange to say he felt quite cold, and experienced neither joy nor grief nor a sense of loss, still less of pity, for his brother.
If he had any feeling left for him it was more like envy of that knowledge which the dying man now possessed and which he might not share.
For a long time he sat leaning over Nicholas, waiting for the end.
Levin rose to stop her, but at that moment he heard the dying man move.
'Don't go,' said Nicholas and stretched out his hand.
Levin gave him his hand, signing angrily with the other to his wife.
With his brother's hand in his, Levin sat half an hour, then an hour, and yet another hour.
He was wondering what Kitty was doing, who lived in the next room, and whether the doctor had a house of his own.
Carefully disengaging his hand he felt his brother's feet.
They were cold, but he was still breathing.
Day began to dawn, but the sick man's condition remained the same.
Levin gently disengaged his hand, and without looking at his brother went to his own room and fell asleep.
When he woke, instead of the news he expected, that his brother was dead, he heard that his former condition had returned.
No one, neither his brother nor Kitty, could comfort him.
He was angry with every one, said disagreeable things, blamed everybody for his sufferings, and demanded that they should fetch a celebrated doctor from Moscow.
To all questions of how he felt, he gave the same answer, with an angry and reproachful look: 'I am suffering terribly, intolerably!'
The sick man suffered more and more, especially from bedsores which would no longer heal, and he grew more and more irritable with those about him, particularly because they did not bring the doctor from Moscow.
Kitty tried to help him and comfort him in every possible way, but it was all in vain, and Levin saw that she herself was worn out physically and mentally, though she would not admit it.
That consciousness of death which had been evoked in them all by his farewell to life on the night he had sent for his brother was destroyed.
Every one knew he would soon and inevitably die, that he was already half dead.
Every one wished that he would die quickly, and they all, concealing that feeling, brought him bottles of medicine, went to fetch medicines and doctors, and deceived him and themselves and one another.
It was all a lie: a repulsive, insulting, blasphemous lie; and as a result of his character, and because he loved the dying man more than the others did, Levin felt that lie most painfully.
Levin, who had long wished to reconcile his brothers, even if only at the moment of death, had written to Sergius Ivanich, and having received his answer read it to Nicholas.
Sergius Ivanich wrote that he could not come personally, but, in touching words, asked his brother's pardon.
Another three days of torture went by. The sick man was still in the same condition.
Every one who saw him now desired his death: the waiters in the hotel, the proprietor, all the other visitors there, the doctor, Mary Nikolavna, Levin, and Kitty.
Only the invalid himself did not show that desire, but on the contrary was angry because the doctor had not been fetched, and he continued taking medicine and talking of life.
Only at rare moments, when opium made him forget his incessant sufferings for a moment, did he sometimes when half asleep express what was stronger in his soul than in any of the others': 'Oh, if only it were over!' or 'When will this end!'
There was no position that did not cause him pain; no moments of forgetfulness; no part of his body that did not hurt and torment him.
Even the memories, impressions, and thoughts, within his body now aroused in him the same sort of repulsion as the body itself.
The sight of other persons, their words, his own recollections, gave him nothing but pain.
Those about him felt this, and unconsciously did not permit themselves either to move freely, talk or express their own wishes in his presence.
It was clear the change was taking place within him which would bring him to regard death as a fulfilment of his desires, as happiness.
Formerly every separate desire caused by suffering or privation, such as hunger or thirst, was relieved by some bodily action which brought enjoyment; but now privation and suffering were not followed by relief, but the attempt to obtain relief occasioned fresh suffering. Therefore all his desires were merged into one: a desire to be released from all this pain and from its source  his body.
He had no words to express his desire for this liberation, and therefore did not speak of it; but went on from habit demanding satisfaction of those wishes that could be fulfilled. 'Turn me on the other side,' he said, and immediately afterwards asked to be put back as he had been.
Why don't you speak?' Then as soon as they began to talk he shut his eyes and expressed weariness, indifference, and disgust.
She had a headache, was sick, and could not leave her bed all the morning.
The doctor explained her illness as the result of fatigue and agitation, and ordered mental tranquillity.
After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual to the sick man, taking her embroidery.
Nicholas looked at her sternly when she entered, and smiled contemptuously when she said she had been ill.
That day he continually blew his nose and moaned piteously.
'How do you feel?' she asked him.
'Worse,' he answered with an effort. 'It hurts!'
'To-day it will end, you'll see,' said Mary Nikolavna in a whisper, but so that the invalid, whose senses were very acute, was, as Levin saw, sure to hear her.
Levin said 'Hush!' and turned to look at his brother.
Nicholas had heard, but the words had no effect on him; his look remained reproachful and strained.
'Why do you think so?' Levin asked, when she had followed him into the corridor.
'Like this,' she said, pulling at the folds of her stuff dress.
And Levin noticed that all day long the sick man really kept catching at himself as if wishing to pull something off.
Toward night the patient could no longer raise his hands, and only gazed straight before him without changing the attentive concentrated expression of his eyes.
Even when his brother or Kitty bent over him so that he could see them, he did not look at them.
While the priest read, the dying man showed no sign of life: his eyes were closed.
The prayers were not yet ended when the dying man stretched himself; sighed and opened his eyes.
Having finished the prayer, the priest touched the cold forehead with his cross which he then wrapped in his stole, and after standing in silence another two minutes, touched the enormous bloodless hand, which was growing cold.
'He has passed away,' said the priest and turned to go; but suddenly the clammy moustache of the dying man moved and from the depth of his chest through the stillness came his voice, sharp and distinct:
A moment later his face brightened, a smile appeared under the moustache, and the women who had gathered round him began zealously to lay out the body.
The sight of his brother and the proximity of death renewed in Levin's soul that feeling of horror at the inscrutability, nearness, and inevitability of death which had seized him on that autumn evening when his brother had arrived in the country.
That feeling was now stronger even than before; he felt even less able than before to understand the meaning of death, and its inevitability appeared yet more terrible to him; but now, thanks to his wife's presence, that feeling did not drive him to despair; in spite of death, he felt the necessity of living and loving.
Scarcely had the unexplained mystery of death been enacted before his eyes when another mystery just as inexplicable presented itself, calling to love and life.
FROM THE MOMENT THAT KARENIN UNDERSTOOD from his conversations with Betsy and Oblonsky that all that was asked of him was that he should leave his wife in peace and not trouble her with his presence and that his wife herself wished this, he felt so lost that he could decide nothing for himself, did not know what he now wanted, and having placed himself in the hands of those who with so much pleasure busied themselves with his affairs, he consented to everything.
Only after Anna had left his house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she was to dine with him or alone, did he for the first time clearly understand his position, and he was horror-struck at it.
What was most painful in his situation was his inability to reconcile his past life with the present state of things.
It was not the past when he lived happily with his wife that perplexed him, the transition from that past to the consciousness of his wife's infidelity he had already painfully passed through; that had been trying, but it was comprehensible.
Had his wife then, after confessing her infidelity, left him, he would have been grieved and unhappy, but he would not have felt himself to be in such an unintelligible impasse as now.
He could not at all reconcile his recent forgiveness, his emotion and love for his sick wife and for another man's baby, with the present position: with the fact that, as if in reward for all that, he was now left alone, disgraced, ridiculed, not wanted by anyone and despised by all.
The first two days after his wife's departure Karenin received petitioners, and his private secretary, attended Committee Meetings, and went to the dining-room to dinner as usual.
Without rendering account to himself why he did it, during those two days he tried with all his might to appear calm and even indifferent.
When answering questions as to what should be done with Anna's rooms and belongings, he made the greatest efforts to seem like a man by whom what had taken place had not been unforeseen, and who did not consider it extraordinary. In this he succeeded: no one could have observed in him any signs of despair.
But on the third day, when Korney brought him a bill from a firm of milliners which Anna had forgotten to pay, and informed him that the shopman had come in person, he had him brought in.
But if you wish us to address ourselves to her Excellency, please be so good as to let us have her address!'
Karenin appeared to be considering, when suddenly he turned round and sat down at the table.
Dropping his head on his hands he sat thus for a long time, tried several times to speak, but stopped short.
Comprehending his master's emotion, Korney asked the assistant to come again another time.
Karenin, left alone, realized that he could not any longer maintain an appearance of firmness and calm.
He ordered the carriage that was waiting, to be unharnessed, said that he would receive no one, and did not appear at dinner.
He felt that he could not bear the general pressure of contempt and harshness which he had clearly seen in the faces of that shop-assistant and of Korney, and of every one without exception whom he had met during those two days.
He felt that he could not divert from himself people's hatred, because that hatred was caused not by his badness (had it been so he might have tried to be better) but by his disgraceful and repulsive misery.
He knew that for that reason  because his heart was rent in pieces  they would be pitiless toward him.
He knew that the only way of escape from men was to hide his wounds from them. He had unconsciously tried to do so for two days, and now felt himself unable to continue the unequal struggle.
His despair was heightened by the consciousness that he was quite alone in his sorrow.
Not only was there not a soul in Petersburg to whom he could express what he felt, who would pity him, not as a high official, not as a member of a society, but simply as a suffering human being  but nowhere at all had he any such friend.
There were two of them: he had a brother.
They could not remember their father, and their mother died when Alexis Alexandrovich was ten years old.
Having taken a medal on finishing, both at school and at the university, Karenin, by his uncle's help, started at once on a conspicuous path in the Civil Service, and from that time devoted himself entirely to official ambition.
Neither at school nor at the university, nor afterwards, in the Service, did he enter into friendly relations with anyone.
His brother was nearest to his heart, but he served under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and always lived abroad, where he died soon after Alexis Alexandrovich's marriage.
At the time when he was Governor of a Province, Anna's aunt, a rich provincial lady, introduced him, who though not a young man was a young Governor, to her niece, and contrived to put him in such a position that he was obliged either to propose or leave the town.
At that time there were as many reasons for the step as against it, but there was no such decisive reason as to make him neglect his rule of refraining when in doubt. But Anna's aunt intimated to him, through an acquaintance, that he had already compromised the girl, and that he was in honour bound to propose to her.
He proposed, and devoted to his betrothed and to his wife all the feeling of which he was capable.
His attachment to Anna excluded from his soul any need he had felt for affectionate relations with other persons; and now, among all his acquaintances, he had no intimate friend.
He knew many persons whom he could invite to dinner, could ask to take part in anything he was interested in or to use their influence for some petitioner, and with whom he could frankly discuss the actions of other men and of the Government; but his relations with these persons were confined to a sphere strictly limited by custom and habit from which it was impossible to escape.
There was a fellow-student at the university with whom he had subsequently become friendly, and to whom he might have spoken of his grief; but that fellow-student was now curator in a distant educational district.
Of the Petersburg people the most intimate and most likely were the doctor, and Michael Vasilich Slyudin, his private secretary.
Slyudin was an unaffected, intelligent, kindly and moral man, who, Karenin felt, had a personal liking for himself; but their five years' official activity together had built a barrier in the way of any intimate talk between them.
He had prepared a phrase: 'You have heard of my misfortune?' but it ended by his saying merely the usual, 'Then you will get this ready for me?' and letting him go.
Of his women friends, including the principal one among them, the Countess Lydia Ivanovna, Karenin did not think at all.
KARENIN HAD FORGOTTEN THE COUNTESS Lydia Ivanovna, but she had not forgotten him.
At that most painful time of lonely despair she came to his house and entered his study unannounced.
She found him in the posture in which he had long sat, resting his head on his hands.
'I have heard everything. Alexis Alexandrovich, my dear friend!' she continued, firmly clasping his hand in both hers and gazing with her beautiful dreamy eyes into his.
Karenin rose frowning, and disengaging his hand moved a chair toward her.
'If you please, Countess!  I do not receive because I am ill,' he said, and his lips trembled.
'My dear friend!' repeated the Countess with her eyes fixed on him; and suddenly the inner corners of her eyebrows rose, forming a triangle on her forehead, and her plain yellow face grew still plainer; but Karenin felt that she was sorry for him and ready to cry.
He was moved, and seizing her plump hand began kissing it.
'My dear friend!' she repeated in a voice broken by emotion, 'you must not give way to sorrow.
I am no longer a man!' said Karenin, releasing her hand but continuing to gaze into her tearful eyes. 'My position is terrible because I cannot find support anywhere, cannot find it even in myself.'
'You will find support; do not seek it in me, though I want you to believe in my friendship,' she replied with a sigh. 'Love is the only support, that love which He has bequeathed us!
His yoke is easy,' she went on with that ecstatic look he knew so well. 'He will support you and help you!'
Though it was evident that she was touched by her own lofty sentiments, and though her words proceeded from that new, ecstatic, mystic influence which had lately spread through Petersburg and which Karenin had considered superfluous, it was pleasant to him to hear them now.
'It is not you who have performed that great act of forgiveness which fills me and everybody else with rapture, but He that dwells within your heart,' said the Countess Lydia Ivanovna, turning up her eyes ecstatically, 'and therefore you must not be ashamed of your action.'
Karenin frowned, and bending his hands backward began cracking his fingers.
'One must know all the details,' he said in a high-pitched voice. 'Human strength has its limits, Countess, and I have reached the limits of mine.
I could not bear the way my son looked at me.
He did not ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I could not endure his look.
Karenin was going to mention the bill that had been brought him, but his voice shook and he paused.
I see that a woman's word, a woman's direction, is wanted.
Karenin silently and gratefully pressed her hand.
And raising her eyes to Heaven she began to pray, as Karenin understood from her silence.
Karenin listened to her now, and those very expressions, which formerly had seemed to him if not disagreeable at least superfluous, now seemed natural and comforting.
He had formerly regarded the new teaching with coldness and even hostility, and had never discussed it with the Countess Lydia Ivanovna (who was carried away by it), but had carefully and silently evaded her challenges.
Now for the first time he listened to her words with pleasure and without mental rejoinder.
'I am very, very grateful to you, both for your actions and your words,' said he when she had finished praying.
The Countess Lydia Ivanovna once more pressed both the hands of her friend.
'Now I am going to act,' she said, smiling and wiping the traces of tears from her face. 'I am going to see Serezha.
Only in extreme cases will I apply to you,' and she rose and went out.
The Countess went to Serezha's part of the house and there, watering the frightened boy's cheeks with her tears, told him that his father was a saint and that his mother was dead.
The Countess kept her word.
She really took upon herself the care of arranging and managing Karenin's household, but she had not exaggerated when she said she was not good at practical matters.
None of her directions could be carried out without alteration, and the alterations were made by Karenin's valet, Korney, who now imperceptibly directed the whole household. Quietly and tactfully, while helping his master dress, he would inform him of anything that was necessary.
But nevertheless Lydia Ivanovna's help was in the highest degree effective, for it gave Karenin the moral support of the consciousness of her affection and respect, and especially of the fact that she had nearly converted him to Christianity (as it consoled her to believe); that is to say, she had changed him from an apathetic, indolent believer into a fervent and firm adherent of that new interpretation of the Christian teaching which had lately spread in Petersburg.
He saw nothing impossible or incongruous in the notion that death which exists for the unbeliever did not exist for him, and that as he possessed complete faith  of the measure of which he himself was the judge  there was no longer any sin in his soul, and he already experienced complete salvation here on earth.
It is true that the frivolity and falseness of this view of his faith were vaguely felt by Karenin. He knew that when, without thinking that his forgiveness was the act of a Higher Power, he had surrendered to his faith, he had experienced more joy than when, as now, he was perpetually thinking that Christ lived in his soul, and that while signing documents he was fulfilling His will.
But it was absolutely necessary for Karenin to think thus; it was so necessary for him in his humiliation to possess at least this imaginary exaltation, from the height of which he, the despised of all, was able to despise others, that he clung to this mock salvation as if it were the real thing.
THE COUNTESS LYDIA IVANOVNA when quite a young and ecstatic girl was married to a rich, aristocratic, very good-natured, and most jovial profligate.
About two months after their marriage her husband left her, and only answered her ecstatic assurances of tenderness with ridicule and even with animosity  which those who knew the Count's good-nature, and who saw no fault in the ecstatic Lydia, were quite unable to explain.
Since then, though not divorced, they lived apart; and when the husband did meet his wife he always treated her with an unchanging venomous irony which seemed inexplicable.
The Countess Lydia had long ago ceased to be in love with her husband, but since then had never ceased to be in love with somebody else.
She was in love with several persons at once, both men and women; she had been in love with almost every one who was specially notable.
She was in love with all the new Princes and Princesses who became connected with the Imperial family, she was in love with a Metropolitan, a Suffragan, and a priest. She had been in love with a journalist, three Slavs, Komisarov, [A man who saved the life of Alexander II. by knocking the pistol from the hand of a would-be assassin.] one of the Ministers, a doctor, an English missionary, and now with Karenin.
All these passions, ever waxing or waning, did not interfere with her carrying on very widespread and complicated relations with the Court and Society.
But from the time she took Karenin under her special protection after his misfortune  from the time she exerted herself in his house, labouring for his welfare  she felt that all her other passions were unreal and that she now truly loved only Karenin.
The feeling she now had for him seemed to her stronger than any of her former sentiments.
Analysing that feeling, and comparing it with her previous loves, she saw clearly that she would not have been in love with Komisarov had he not saved the Tsar's life, nor with Ristich-Kudzhitsky but for the Slavonic question; but that she loved Karenin for himself, for his lofty, misunderstood soul, for the high-pitched tone of his voice with the long-drawn inflections which she thought charming, for his weary eyes, for his character, and for his soft hands with their swollen veins.
She was not only glad to meet him, but searched his face for signs of the impression she created on him.
She wished to please him not merely by words, but by her whole self.
For his sake she now paid more attention to her dress than ever before.
She caught herself meditating on what might have been had she not married and had he been free.
She blushed with excitement when he entered the room, and could not repress a smile of delight when he said something agreeable to her.
It was necessary to save Karenin from meeting her, necessary even to save him from the painful knowledge that that dreadful woman was in the same town with him, and that he might come across her at any moment.
Lydia Ivanovna found out through acquaintances what 'those disgusting people,' as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended to do, and tried so to direct her friend's steps during those days that he should not meet them.
A young adjutant, a comrade of Vronsky's, through whom she had her information, who hoped through her influence to obtain a concession, told her that they had finished their affairs and were leaving Petersburg next day.
Lydia Ivanovna was beginning to breathe freely again, when next morning she received a note and with horror recognized the handwriting.
Her agitation brought on a fit of asthma, to which she was subject.
When she grew calmer, she read the following, written in French:
I am unhappy at being parted from my son.
I address myself to you, instead of to Alexis Alexandrovich, only because I do not wish to give pain to that high-minded man by reminding him of myself.
Everything in that letter irritated the Countess Lydia Ivanovna: its matter, the hint contained in the word 'magnanimity,' and especially what seemed to her its free and easy tone.
'Say there will be no answer,' said the Countess Lydia Ivanovna, and at once opened her blotter and wrote to Karenin that she hoped to meet him about one o'clock at the Palace, at the Birthday Reception.
He sends a cross, but He also sends strength to bear it,' she added, to prepare him somewhat.
'How would it do to appoint Countess Mary Borisovna, Minister of War? and Princess Vatkovskaya, Chief of the Staff?' said a grey-haired old man in a gold-embroidered uniform to a tall and beautiful Maid of Honour, in answer to her question about the promotions
'How do you do, Prince?' added the old man, shaking hands with some one who had just come up.
'I thought he had it already.'
Just look at him,' said the old man, pointing with his gold-trimmed hat to Karenin who, in Court uniform, with a new red ribbon round his shoulder, stood in the doorway with an important member of the State Council. 'As happy and contented as a brass farthing,' he added, pausing to shake hands with an athletic, handsome chamberlain.
'No, he has aged,' said the chamberlain.
He will not release that unfortunate fellow until he has expounded everything, point by point.'
[He has love affairs] I think that now the Countess Lydia Ivanovna is jealous of his wife.'
'But is it bad that she is in love with Karenin?'
'And is it true that his wife is here?'
'Of course not here in the Palace, but she is in Petersburg.
I met her and Alexis Vronsky walking arm in arm on the Morskaya.'
'C'est un homme qui n'a pas...' [That's a man who has not...] began the chamberlain, but stopped short to make way for and to bow to a member of the Imperial family who passed by.
In this way they chattered unceasingly about Karenin, blaming him and laughing at him, while he, barring the way to the member of the State Council whom he had buttonholed, and not pausing for a moment for fear he might slip away, expounded point by point some financial project of his.
Almost at the same time that his wife had left Karenin, the most painful thing that can befall an official  the cessation of his ascent in the Service  had befallen him.
That cessation was an accomplished fact, clearly visible to every one, though Karenin himself had not yet realized that his career was at an end.
Whether it was his conflict with Stremov or the misfortune with his wife, or simply that he had reached his predestined limit  at any rate it had that year become obvious to every one that his career was over.
He still held an important post, was member of many Commissions and Committees, but he was finished, and from him nothing further was to be looked for.
Whatever he might say, whatever he might propose, he was listened to as if all he was proposing had long been known and was what no one wanted.
But Karenin was not sensible of this: on the contrary, being now outside Government work, he saw more clearly than ever the defects and mistakes made by others, and considered it his duty to point out how those mistakes might be rectified.
Soon after the parting with his wife he began writing a pamphlet on the new legal procedure, the first of an innumerable series of unwanted pamphlets on every administrative department which it was his fate to write.
But Karenin, far from noticing the hopelessness of his position in officialdom and being troubled by it, was more satisfied with his work than ever.
'He that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife... but he that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord and how to please the Lord,' says the Apostle Paul; and Karenin, who was now guided in all his actions by the Scriptures, often recalled that text.
He thought that since he had been without a wife he had served the Lord by means of these very projects more than before.
The evident impatience of the Member of the Council did not trouble Karenin, who left off expounding his project only when the Councillor, profiting by a royal personage's passing, slipped away.
Left alone, Karenin bowed his head, collecting his thoughts; and then turned absent-mindedly toward the door where he hoped to meet the Countess Lydia Ivanovna. 'How strong and healthy they all are physically,' he thought, glancing at the powerfully-built chamberlain with his well-brushed and perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck of a Prince in a tightly-fitting uniform, whom he had to pass on his way.
Moving his feet deliberately, Karenin, with his usual air of weariness and dignity, bowed to those gentlemen who were talking about him, and his eyes searched through the doorway for the Countess.
'Ah, Alexis Alexandrovich !' cried the old man with a malevolent gleam in his eyes as Karenin passed him bowing coldly. 'I have not yet congratulated you,' he went on, pointing to Karenin's newly-awarded ribbon.
'Thank you,' replied Karenin. 'What a beautiful day it is,' he added, laying, as was his wont, peculiar stress on the word 'beautiful.'
He knew that they were laughing at him, but he no longer looked for anything except hostility from them; he was already accustomed to it.
Having caught sight, just as she entered, of the Countess Lydia Ivanovna's yellow shoulders emerging from her corset, and of her beautiful dreamy eyes summoning him, Karenin smiled, revealing his white impeccable teeth, and went up to her.
Lydia Ivanovna's dress had cost her a great deal of trouble, as was the case with all her attire of late.
Her purpose in dressing was now quite the reverse of what she had had in view thirty years ago.
Then she had wished to adorn herself somehow, the more the better; now, on the contrary, she was obliged to be adorned so unsuitably to her age and figure, that she was only concerned that the incongruity between these adornments and her own appearance should not be too dreadful.
As far as Karenin was concerned she attained her object, and to him she seemed attractive.
In his eyes she was the only islet, not of kindly feeling only but of affection, in the ocean of hostility and ridicule which surrounded him.
As he now ran the gauntlet of those mocking eyes he was drawn toward her enamoured look as naturally as a plant is drawn toward the sun.
'I congratulate you,' she said, indicating the ribbon by a look.
Repressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders and closed his eyes, as if to say that it could not give him pleasure.
The Countess Lydia Ivanovna knew very well that it was one of his greatest pleasures, though he would never confess it.
'How is our angel ?' asked she, meaning Serezha.
Sitnikov was the tutor to whom Serezha's secular education was entrusted. 'As I told you, he shows a certain coldness toward those most important questions which should stir the soul of every man and child,' he went on, speaking on the only subject which interested him outside the Service  the education of his son.
When with Lydia Ivanovna's help he had returned to life and activity, he had felt it his duty to take his son's education in hand.
Never having occupied himself with educational matters before, he devoted some time to studying the matter theoretically. After reading several books on anthropology, pedagogics, and didactics, he formed a plan of education, and having engaged the best Petersburg educationalist for supervision, he set to work.
'Yes, but his heart!
I see in him his father's heart, and with such a heart a child can't be bad!' said Lydia Ivanovna, enthusiastically.
I had a letter from her.
Karenin started at the reference to his wife, but immediately his face assumed a death-like immobility which showed utter helplessness in the matter.
'I expected it,' he said.
The Countess Lydia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and her eyes filled with tears of rapturous admiration at the loftiness of his soul.
She was changing her dress.
'Well, now we can sit down quietly,' said she with an agitated smile, as she squeezed herself in between the table and sofa, 'and have a chat over our tea.'
After a few words of preparation the Countess, breathing heavily and blushing, handed him the letter she had received.
When he had read the letter Karenin was silent for a long time.
'I don't consider that I have a right to refuse,' he said timidly, raising his eyes.
His face expressed uncertainty and a desire for advice, support, and guidance in a matter he did not understand.
'No,' she interrupted him, 'there are limits to everything!
I understand immorality,' she said, not quite sincerely, for she never could have understood that which leads women to immorality, 'but I do not understand cruelty... and to whom?
How can she stay in the town you are in?
But it's quite true, "Live and learn"! And I am learning to understand your loftiness and her baseness.'
'But who will throw the stone?' said he, evidently pleased with his role. 'I have quite forgiven her; and therefore cannot refuse her what her love for her son demands.'
Granted that you have forgiven her, and do forgive her; but have we the right to act thus toward the soul of that angel?
He thinks she is dead. He prays for her and asks God to forgive her her sins, and it is better so.
But this... what will he think?'
'I had not thought of that,' said Karenin, evidently agreeing with her.
The Countess covered her face with her hands and remained silent.
'If you ask my advice,' she said, when her prayer was ended and she uncovered her face, 'I do not advise you to do it!
If there is anything human left in her, she herself should not desire it.
No, I advise you unhesitatingly not to allow it, and with your permission I will write to her.'
To remind your son of you might lead to his asking questions which it would be impossible to answer without implanting in his soul a spirit of condemnation for what should be holy to him, and therefore I beg you to take your husband's refusal in the spirit of Christian love.
This letter achieved the secret purpose which the Countess Lydia Ivanovna hid even from herself. It wounded Anna to the depths of her soul.
Karenin too, on returning home from Lydia Ivanovna's, could not give his attention to his usual occupations nor find that spiritual peace of a believer who has found salvation, which he had felt before.
The memory of his wife who was so guilty toward him, and toward whom he was so saintly, as the Countess Lydia Ivanovna had justly told him, should not have upset him; but he was not at ease: he could not understand the book he was reading, could not drive away tormenting memories of his relations with her, and of the mistakes which, as it now appeared to him, he had committed in regard to her.
The memory of the manner in which, when returning from the races, he had received her confession of unfaithfulness (especially the fact that he had demanded of her only external propriety and had not challenged Vronsky) tormented him like remorse.
The memory of the letter he had written to her also tormented him; above all his forgiveness, which no one wanted, and his care for another man's child, burned his heart with shame and regret.
He now felt a similar sense of shame and remorse when thinking of his whole past with her, and recalling the awkward words in which, after much hesitation, he had proposed to her.
'But wherein am I to blame?' he asked himself, and as usual that question suggested another: Did those others  those Vronskys and Oblonskys and those fat-calved chamberlains  feel differently, love differently, marry differently?
And there rose before his mind's eye a whole row of those vigorous, strong, self-assured men, who had always involuntarily attracted his curiosity and attention.
He drove these thoughts from him, and tried to convince himself that he was not living for the present temporal life but for eternal life, and that his soul was full of peace and love.
But the fact that in this temporary insignificant life he had committed, as it seemed to him, some trivial errors, tormented him as much as if the eternal salvation in which he believed did not exist.
But this temptation did not last long and soon that tranquil elevation, thanks to which he could forget the things he did not wish to remember, was re-established in his soul.
'WELL, KAPITONICH?' SAID SEREZHA, as on the day before his birthday he returned rosy and bright from a walk, and gave his overcoat to the tall old hall-porter, who looked smilingly down from his height at the little fellow.
'Serezha!' said his tutor, a Slav, stopping in the doorway that led to the inner rooms, 'take it off yourself.'
But Serezha, though he heard his tutor's weak voice, paid no heed to it.
He stood holding on by the porter's shoulder-strap and looking into his face.
'Well, and has Papa done what he wanted?'
Serezha had met him in the hall, and had heard him piteously begging the porter to announce him to Karenin, and saying that he and his children were face to face with death.
'And was he very glad?' he asked.
'How could he help being glad?
He nearly jumped for joy as he went away.'
'Well, sir,' said the porter, shaking his head and whispering, 'there is something from the Countess.'
Go, go! Vasily Lukich is calling you,' said the hall-porter, hearing the approaching step of the tutor, and gently disengaging the little hand in the half-drawn-off glove which held him by his shoulder-strap, as he nodded and winked toward the tutor.
Serezha was in too high spirits, too happy not to share with his friend the hall-porter another family joy about which he had heard from Lydia Ivanovna's niece whom he met walking in the Summer Gardens.
This joy appeared to him particularly important because it coincided with the satisfaction of the official, and his own happiness that a present had been brought.
'Well, and is he pleased?'
'How can he help being pleased at the Tsar's favour?
It shows he's deserved it,' replied the hall-porter sternly and seriously.
Serezha grew thoughtful as he peered into the hall-porter's face, which he had studied in minute detail  especially the chin which hung beneath the grey whiskers and which no one saw but Serezha, who always looked up at him.
'And your daughter, has she been here lately?' The hall-porter's daughter was a ballet-dancer.
'How can she come on week-days?
On entering the schoolroom, instead of sitting down to his lessons, Serezha told his tutor of his guess that the parcel that had been brought must be a railway train. 'What do you think?' he asked.
But Vasily Lukich only thought that Serezha must prepare his grammar lesson, as his teacher was coming at two.
'Oh, but just tell me, Vasily Lukich!' said Serezha, suddenly, after sitting down at the table with a book in his hand. 'What is higher than the Alexander Nevsky?
'Even you don't know!' And Serezha, leaning his elbows on the table, began to reflect.
He imagined his father suddenly receiving the Orders of Vladimir and Saint Andrew, and how much kinder in consequence he would be to-day at lesson-time, and how he himself when he grew up would receive all the Orders, and that they would invent one higher than the Saint Andrew.
As soon as it was invented he would gain it.
A yet higher one would be invented, and he would immediately get that one too.
He did not feel guilty for not having learned his lesson, for try as he would he positively could not do it. While the teacher was explaining, he believed him and seemed to understand, but as soon as he was left alone he positively could not remember or understand how so short and simple a word as suddenly could be an attribute of the manner of action; but all the same he was sorry he had grieved his teacher.
'Michael Ivanovich, when is your birthday?' he suddenly asked.
Serezha looked attentively at his teacher, at his thin little beard and his spectacles which had slipped down the bridge of his nose, and became so engrossed in thought that he no longer heard what his teacher was explaining.
He was aware that the teacher himself did not believe what he was saying; he felt that by the tone in which the words were uttered. 'But why have they all agreed to speak in the same way about the dullest and most useless things?
Why does he repulse me? Why does he not love me?' he asked himself sadly, and could find no answer.
AFTER THE TEACHER'S LESSON Serezha had a lesson from his father.
Before his father came Serezha sat at the table playing with a pocket-knife and thinking.
Among his favourite occupations was keeping a look out for his mother when he went out walking.
He did not believe in death in general, and especially not in her death, despite what Lydia Ivanovna had told him and his father had confirmed, and therefore even after he had been told she was dead, he went on looking for her when on his walks.
He imagined that every well-developed and graceful woman with dark hair was his mother.
At the sight of any such woman a feeling of such tenderness awoke in his heart that he grew breathless and tears came to his eyes.
He expected that at any moment she would approach and lift her veil.
Then he would see her whole face, she would smile, embrace him, and he would smell her peculiar scent, feel the tenderness of her touch, and cry with joy as he had done one evening when he lay at her feet and she tickled him, while he shook with laughter and bit her white hand with the rings on the fingers.
Later on, when he accidentally heard from his nurse that she was not dead, and his father and Lydia Ivanovna explained that to him she was dead because she was bad (which he could not at all believe, for he loved her), he continued to look out for and wait for her.
There had been a lady with a purple veil in the Summer Garden to-day whom he had watched with a sinking heart as she came toward him along the path.
To-day Serezha was more than ever conscious of a flow of love for his mother in his heart, and now as he sat lost in thought, waiting for his father, he notched the whole edge of the table with his knife, looking before him with shining eyes and thinking about her.
Serezha jumped up, approached his father, kissed his hand, and looked at him attentively, trying to find some sign of his joy at receiving the Order of Alexander Nevsky.
'Have you had a nice walk?' asked Karenin, as he sat down in his arm-chair, drew toward him an Old Testament and opened it.
Although Karenin had more than once told Serezha that every Christian ought to be well acquainted with Bible history, he often in Old Testament history had to consult the book, and Serezha noticed this.
'Yes, Papa, it was very amusing,' answered Serezha, sitting down sideways on his chair and beginning to rock it, which was forbidden. 'I met Nadenka' (Nadenka was Lydia Ivanovna's niece, who was being educated at her aunt's house).
You see, if you take pains and learn in order to get a reward, the work will seem hard; but when you work' (Karenin said this remembering how he had sustained himself that morning by a sense of duty in the dull task of signing a hundred and eighteen papers)  'if you love your work, you will find your reward in that.'
Serezha's eyes, that had been shining with affection and joy, grew dull and drooped under his father's gaze.
It was the same long-familiar tone in which his father always addressed him, and to which Serezha had already learnt to adapt himself.
His father always talked to him, Serezha felt, as if he were some imaginary boy out of a book, quite unlike Serezha; and with his father he always tried to pretend to be that boy out of a book.
'You understand me, I hope,' said the father.
'Yes, Papa,' answered the boy, pretending to be that imaginary boy.
Serezha knew the Gospel verses pretty well, but whilst saying them he became so absorbed in the contemplation of a bone in his father's forehead, which turned very sharply above the temple, that he became confused and put the end of one verse where the same word occurred after the beginning of another.
It was evident to Karenin that the boy did not understand what he was saying, and this irritated him.
He frowned and began an explanation that Serezha had heard many times already and could never remember because he understood it too clearly, just as he could not remember that the word suddenly was an attribute of the manner of action.
Serezha looked at his father with scared eyes, and could only think of whether his father would make him repeat what he had just said, as he sometimes did.
This thought frightened him so much that he no longer understood anything at all.
However, his father did not make him repeat it, but went on to the lesson from the Old Testament.
Serezha related the events themselves quite well, but when he had to answer questions as to what some of the events symbolized, he knew nothing about it, though he had been punished before for not knowing this lesson.
The part, however, about which he could not say anything at all but only floundered, cut the table, and rocked his chair, was that about the antediluvian patriarchs.
Previously he had remembered the others' names, but now he had quite forgotten them, chiefly because Enoch was his favourite in the whole Old Testament, and attached to Enoch's being taken up to Heaven there was a long string of thought in his head, which now occupied his mind while he looked fixedly at his father's watch-chain and at a half-unfastened button of his waistcoat.
He did not believe that people he loved could die, nor above all that he himself would die.
But he was told that everybody would die; he had even asked people whom he trusted and they all confirmed it; his nurse too said so, though reluctantly.
Bad people, that is to say those he did not like, might die; but the good ones might all be like Enoch.
His father and the educationalist were both displeased with Serezha, and he really learnt badly.
Yet it could not at all be said that he was an incapable boy.
On the contrary he was far more capable than the boys whom the educationalist set before him as models.
His father from his point of view considered that the boy did not try to learn what he was being taught.
As a matter of fact, he could not learn it.
He could not, because there were more urgent demands on his soul than those put forward by his father and the educationalist.
The two kinds of demands were opposed, and he was in direct conflict with his instructors.
He was nine years old and quite a child, but he knew his soul, it was dear to him, and he guarded it as the eyelid guards the eye, and never let anyone enter his heart without the key of love.
His instructors complained that he would not learn, yet his soul was overflowing with longing for knowledge.
So he learnt, from Kapitonich, from his nurse, from Nadenka, and from Vasily Lukich, but not from his teachers.
The water which his fathers and the educationalists expected would turn their mill-wheels had long since leaked out and was working somewhere else.
His father punished Serezha by not letting him go to see Lydia Ivanovna's niece Nadenka, but this punishment turned out luckily for Serezha.
He did not think about his mother all the evening; but when in bed he suddenly remembered her, and prayed in his own words that tomorrow, on his birthday, she should stop hiding herself and should come to him.
You'd better tell me,' said Vasily Lukich, smiling, which he rarely did. 'Well, lie down, and I'll put out the candle.'
When the candle had been taken away he heard and felt his mother. She stood above him and caressed him with a loving look.
But then windmills appeared, and a knife, and all became confused, and he fell asleep.
On the day they arrived Vronsky went to see his brother. There he met his mother, who had come from Moscow on business.
His mother and his sister-in-law received him just as usual, asked him about his trip abroad and spoke of mutual acquaintances, but did not say a single word about his union with Anna.
His brother, however, having come to see him next morning, asked about her, and Alexis Vronsky told him frankly that he regarded his union with her as a marriage, that he hoped to arrange a divorce for her, and would then marry her, and that meanwhile he considered her his wife, just like any other wife, and he asked his brother to say so to their mother and to his own wife.
The elder brother, who had always respected his younger brother's opinions, was not sure whether he was right or wrong, until the world had decided the point; but for his own part he had nothing against it and went up with Alexis to see Anna.
In his brother's presence Vronsky spoke to Anna merely as to a close acquaintance, as he always did in the presence of a third party; but it was assumed that his brother knew of their relations, and they spoke of Anna's going to Vronsky's estate.
Despite all his experience of the world, Vronsky, in the new position in which he found himself, was making a terrible mistake.
He might have been expected to understand that Society was closed to him and Anna; but some sort of vague notion got into his head that though it used to be so in olden times, yet now, when there was so much progress (without noticing it, he had become an advocate of every kind of progress), public opinion had changed and it was possible that they would be received in Society. 'Of course they will not receive her at Court, but intimate friends can and should see things the right way,' he thought.
It is possible to sit for some hours with one's legs doubled up without changing one's position if one knows there is nothing to prevent one's doing so, but if a man knows that he must sit with his legs doubled up he will get cramp, and his legs will begin to jerk and strain in the direction in which he would like to stretch them.
Though in the depths of his soul he knew that Society was closed to them, he tried whether it would not change and whether it would not receive them.
But he very soon noticed that though the great world was open to him personally, it was closed to Anna.
One of the first Petersburg Society ladies he met was his cousin Betsy.
'At last!' she exclaimed joyfully when they met.
He noticed that Betsy's delight cooled down when she learnt that Anna had not yet been divorced.
'They will throw stones at me, I know,' she said, 'but I shall come and see Anna. Yes, I will certainly come.
And really she came to see Anna that same day; but her manner was very different from what it had formerly been.
She was evidently proud of her boldness and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her friendship.
She did not stay more than ten minutes, chattering Society gossip, and as she was leaving said:
From Betsy's tone Vronsky might have realized what he had to expect from Society, but he made another attempt with his relations.
Of his mother he had no hopes.
He knew that his mother, who had been so delighted with Anna when she first made her acquaintance, was now merciless toward her for having caused the ruin of her son's career.
But he placed great hopes on Varya, his brother's wife.
She, he thought, would cast no stones, but would simply and resolutely go and see Anna and receive her at her own house.
The day after his arrival Vronsky called on her, and having found her alone, expressed his wish.
'You know how fond I am of you, Alexis,' she replied when she had heard him out, 'and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have kept silent because I knew I could be of no use to you and Anna Arkadyevna.' She pronounced the formal 'Anna Arkadyevna' with peculiar precision.
Perhaps in her place I should have done the same. I do not and cannot enter into details,' she added, looking timidly into his gloomy face.
'But we must call things by their real names. You wish me to go and see her and to receive her, and so rehabilitate her in Society; but please understand that I cannot do it!
Suppose I go to see Anna Arkadyevna; she will understand that I cannot ask her to my house, or must do it in such a way that she does not meet those who see things differently. That would offend her.
I am not able to raise her...'
'But I don't consider that she has fallen lower than hundreds of people whom you do receive!' said Vronsky still more gloomily, and rose in silence, having understood that his sister-in-law's determination was final.
'I am not angry with you,' he said just as gloomily, 'but I am doubly pained.
With those words he left her.
One of the most disagreeable features of his position in Petersburg was that Karenin seemed to be everywhere and his name in every mouth.
So at least it seemed to Vronsky, as a man with a sore finger feels that he is continually knocking that finger against everything as if on purpose.
The stay in Petersburg seemed to him still more trying because he noticed all the time in Anna a new and to him incomprehensible mood.
At one moment she appeared to be in love with him, and at the next would turn cold, irritable, and impenetrable.
Something tormented her and she hid it from him, appearing not to notice the insults that were poisoning his life, and which should have been still more painful to her with her acuteness of perception.
ONE OF ANNA'S REASONS FOR RETURNING TO RUSSIA was to see her son.
From the day she left Italy the thought of that meeting did not cease to agitate her.
She did not ask herself how she should contrive it.
It seemed to her natural and simple that she should see her son when she was in the same town with him. But on reaching Petersburg her present social position presented itself clearly to her, and she realized that it would be difficult to arrange the meeting.
The thought of her son did not leave her for an instant, but she had not yet seen him.
She felt she had not the right to go straight to the house where she might encounter Karenin.
Possibly they might even not admit her.
It was painful to her even to think of writing to and coming into contact with her husband: she could be calm only when she did not think of him.
To meet her son when he was out for a walk, after finding out when and where he went, was not enough: she had been preparing herself so for that meeting, had so much to say to him, and so much wanted to embrace and kiss him!
Serezha's old nurse might have helped and advised her, but she was no longer in Karenin's household.
Having heard about Karenin's intimate friendship with the Countess Lydia Ivanovna, Anna on the third day resolved to write her a letter, which cost her much effort, and in which she intentionally mentioned that permission to see her son must depend on her husband's magnanimity.
She knew that if that letter were shown to him he, continuing his magnanimous role, would not refuse her request.
The commissionaire who delivered her letter brought back the most cruel and unexpected reply: that there would be no answer!
Never had she felt so humiliated as when, having called in the commissionaire, she heard from him the full account of how he had waited and had then been told that there would be no answer. Anna felt herself humiliated and wounded, but she saw that the Countess Lydia Ivanovna was right from her own point of view.
Her grief was the more poignant because she had to bear it alone.
She knew that, though he was the chief cause of her misery, the question of her seeing her son would seem to him quite unimportant.
She knew he would never be able to appreciate the depth of her anguish, and that his coldness if the matter were mentioned would make her hate him.
And she feared that, more than anything else in the world, and therefore hid from him everything concerning her son.
Having spent all that day at the hotel considering how she might see her son, she resolved to write to her husband.
She had already composed the letter when she received Lydia Ivanovna's reply.
The Countess's silence had made her feel humble, but the letter and what she read between its lines so irritated her, its malevolence seemed so revolting when compared with her passionate and legitimate love for her son, that she became indignant with others and ceased to blame herself.
'That coldness, that pretence of feeling!' she said to herself. 'They want to wound me and torture the child, and shall I submit to them?
And there and then she resolved that next day, Serezha's birthday, she would go straight to her husband's house and would bribe the servants or deceive them, but would at any cost see her son and destroy that monstrous falsehood with which they surrounded the unfortunate child.
She would have ready in her hand some money to give to the hall-porter and the footman, in order that they should let her in. Without raising her veil she would say she had been sent by Serezha's godfather to wish him many happy returns of the day and that she was to put the toys by his bedside.
The only thing she did not prepare was what she would say to her son. Much as she thought about that she could not prepare the words.
Next morning Anna went alone, and at eight o'clock got out of the hired carriage and rang the bell at the front door of the house which used to be her home.
His assistant, a lad whom Anna did not know, had hardly opened the door when she entered, and taking a three-rouble note from her muff hastily thrust it into his hand.
'Serezha... Sergey Alexeyich!' she said, and walked on.
After examining the note the porter's assistant stopped her at the inner glass door.
'Whom do you want?' he asked.
She did not hear his words, and made no reply.
Noticing the stranger's confusion, Kapitonich himself came out, admitted her, and inquired what she wanted.
'I come from Prince Skorodumov to see Sergey Alexeyich,' said she.
'He is not up yet,' said the hall-porter, carefully scrutinizing her face.
Anna had not foreseen at all that the totally unaltered appearance of the hall of the house where she had lived for nine years would so deeply affect her.
One memory after another, both joyful and painful, rose in her mind, and for a moment she forgot why she had come.
'Would you like to wait?' said Kapitonich, helping her off with her cloak.
Having done so he glanced again at her face and, recognizing her, silently bowed low.
'Come in, Your Excellency,' he said.
She wished to speak, but her voice refused to utter a sound; with a look of guilty entreaty at the old man she went with light steps up the stairs.
Bending forward and catching the steps with his goloshes, Kapitonich ran after her, trying to overtake her.
Anna continued to ascend the familiar steps without understanding what the old man was saying.
I'll just look in,' he said, having overtaken her. He opened a big door and vanished behind it.
Anna paused and waited. 'He's only just woke up,' said the porter when he came out again.
Just as he spoke Anna heard the sounds of a child yawning; she recognized her son by the sound of the yawn and pictured him vividly before her.
'Let me in, let me in!' she cried, and entered at the big door.
To the right of the door stood a bed on which sat the boy, his nightshirt unbuttoned, bending his little body backward, stretching himself and finishing his yawn.
At the moment when his lips were closing they extended into a blissful sleepy smile, and with that smile he again fell slowly and sweetly backwards.
'Serezha!' she whispered, drawing nearer with inaudible steps.
During the time they had been parted and under the influence of that gush of love which she had felt for him of late she had always imagined him as a little fellow of four, the age when she had loved him best.
Now he was not even as she had left him; he was still further removed from the four-year-old child; he had grown still more and had got thinner.
How thin his face was! How short his hair!
How long his arms!
How changed since she had left him!
But still it was he: the slope of the head was his, the lips were his, the soft neck and the broad shoulders.
'Serezha!' she repeated, just above the child's ear.
He raised himself again on his elbow, moved his tousled head from side to side as if seeking for something, and opened his eyes.
Silently and questioningly he gazed for a few moments at his mother, who stood motionless before him, then suddenly smiling blissfully, he closed his heavy eyelids and fell once more, not backward, but forwards into her arms.
'Serezha, my dear little boy!' she uttered, catching her breath and embracing his plump little body.
'Mama!' he muttered, wriggling about in her arms so as to touch them with different parts of his body.
Sleepily smiling with closed eyes, he moved his plump hands from the back of his bed to her shoulders, leaning against her and enveloping her in that sweet scent of sleepiness and warmth which only children possess, and began rubbing himself against her neck and shoulder.
'I knew!' he said, opening his eyes. 'To-day is my birthday.
While saying this he was again falling asleep.
Anna watched him with greedy eyes. She noticed how he had grown and changed during her absence.
She recognized and yet did not quite recognize his bare legs, now so big; which he had freed from the blanket, and his cheeks, now grown thinner, and the short locks of hair at the back of his head where she had so often kissed him.
She touched it all, and could not speak: tears were choking her.
'What are you crying about, Mama?' he asked, now quite awake. 'Mama, what are you crying about?' he exclaimed in a fretful voice.
I won't,' she said, swallowing her tears and turning away. 'But it's time for you to get dressed,' she said after a pause when she had recovered; and without releasing his hands she sat down by his bed on a chair on which his clothes were lying ready.
'Mama! Dearest, darling!' he shouted, again throwing himself upon her, and embracing her, as if he by now, having seen her smile, clearly realized what had happened.
'You don't want that,' he said, taking off her bonnet and on seeing her without it, he began kissing her again as though he had only just seen her.
'I knew! I knew!' he cried, repeating his favourite phrase, and seizing her hand, which was caressing his hair, he pressed her palm to his mouth, covering it with kisses.
MEANWHILE VASILY LUKICH, who had not at first understood who the lady was, having realized from what he heard that she was the mother who had left her husband and whom he, having come to the house only after she had left it, had never seen, hesitated whether to go in or not, or whether to tell Karenin.
Having at last concluded that his duty was to get Serezha up at the appointed time, and that therefore he need not consider who was sitting there  the boy's mother or anyone else  but that he must do his duty, he dressed, went up to the door, and opened it.
But the caresses of the mother and son, the sound of their voices and what they were saying, made him change his mind.
He shook his head, sighed, and closed the door again. 'I will be another ten minutes,' he said to himself, coughing and wiping away his tears.
They all knew that the mistress had come, that Kapitonich had admitted her, and that she was now in the nursery. But the master always went to the nursery before nine, and they all understood that a meeting between him and his wife was inconceivable and must be prevented.
Korney, the valet, went down into the hall-porter's room to inquire who had let her in, and hearing that it was Kapitonich who had done so, he reprimanded the old man.
The hall-porter remained obstinately silent; but when the valet said he 'ought to get the sack,' Kapitonich rushed at Korney and, flourishing his hands about before Korney's face, began to speak out:
'Yes, I daresay you would not have let her in!
I've been in service here ten years, and have had nothing but kindness: you had better go up and tell her, "You be off, please!" You're an artful one, you are!
'Now, judge for yourself, Mary Efimovna,' he said to her.
'He's let her in without telling anybody; and Alexis Alexandrovich will be ready in a minute and will go to the nursery.'
And I'll run and get her out of the way. What a business!'
When the nurse entered, Serezha was just telling his mother how he and Nadenka fell down together when ice-hilling, and turned three somersaults.
She was listening to the sound of his voice, saw his face and the play of his features, felt his hands, but did not understand what he was saying.
She must go away, must leave him  that was all she thought and felt.
She heard Vasily Lukich's step as he came to the door and coughed, and then the steps of the nurse as she entered; but she sat as if turned to stone, powerless to speak or rise.
'Madam, dear!' the nurse began, coming up to Anna and kissing her hands and shoulders. 'What joy God has sent our little one on his birthday!
'I don't live here, I live with my daughter, and have only come to wish him many happy returns, Anna Arkadyevna, dear!'
Serezha, with bright eyes and beaming smile, holding his mother with one hand and his nurse with the other, jumped with his plump bare feet on to the carpet.
The tenderness of his beloved nurse for his mother sent him into raptures.
She often comes to see me, and when she comes...' he began, but stopped, noticing that his nurse was whispering something in his mother's ear and that a look of fear and of something like shame, that did not at all suit her face, appeared there.
She could not say good-bye, but the expression of her face said it and he understood. 'Darling, darling Kutik!' she said, calling him by the pet name she used when he was quite little, 'you won't forget me?
You...' but she could say no more.
How many things she thought of later that she might have said!
But now she did not know what to say and could not speak.
But Serezha understood all she wanted to tell him.
He understood that she was unhappy and that she loved him.
He had caught the words 'always before nine o'clock,' and he understood that they referred to his father and that his mother and father must not meet.
This he had grasped, but he could not make out why that look of fear and shame appeared on her face...
He wanted to ask a question which would clear up his doubts, but dared not; he saw that she suffered and he was sorry for her.
He pressed against her in silence, and then whispered:
'Don't go  he is not coming yet!'
His mother moved him away from her, to see whether he really believed what he was saying; and in the frightened look on his face she saw not only that he was speaking about his father, but that he was, as it were, asking her what he ought to think of him.
'Serezha, my darling!' she said, 'love him! He is better and kinder than I, and I am to blame toward him.
'There is nobody better than you!...' he cried out in desperation through his tears, and seizing her by her shoulders he hugged her with all his might, his arms trembling with the effort.
'Darling little one!' said Anna, and began to cry in the same weak and childlike way as he.
Steps were heard approaching the other door, and the nurse said in a frightened whisper, 'Coming!...' and handed Anna her bonnet.
Serezha sank down on his bed and began to sob, hiding his face in his hands.
Anna moved the hands away, kissed him again on his wet face, and went rapidly out.
Karenin was advancing toward her.
When he saw her, he stopped and bowed his head.
Despite what she had just said,  that he was better and kinder than she was  after casting at him a rapid glance which took in his whole figure to the minutest detail, she was seized by a feeling of loathing and anger toward him and of jealousy for her son.
She swiftly let down her veil and with quickened steps almost ran out of the room.
She had not had time even to unwrap the toys she had chosen with so much love and sadness the day before, and she took them back with her.
GREATLY AS ANNA HAD DESIRED TO SEE HER SON, and long as she had thought of and prepared herself for the interview, she had not at all expected that it would affect her so powerfully.
On returning to her lonely suite in the hotel she could not for a long time understand why she was there. 'Yes, it is all ended and I am alone again,' she said to herself; and without taking off her bonnet she sat down in an easy-chair by the fireplace.
With her eyes fixed on a bronze clock, standing on a table between the windows, she began pondering.
The French maid, whom she had brought from abroad, came and asked whether she would not dress. She looked at her in astonishment and replied, 'Later.'
A waiter offered her coffee. 'Later,' she said.
The Italian nurse, having smartened up the baby girl, came in and held her out to Anna.
The plump, well-nourished baby, as usual when she saw her mother, turned her little hands  so fat that they looked as if the wrists had threads tied tightly round them  palms downward and, smiling with her toothless mouth, began waving them as a fish moves its fins, making the starched folds of her embroidered frock rustle.
It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss the little thing; impossible not to hold out a finger to her, which she caught, screaming and wriggling the whole surface of her little body; impossible not to approach one's lips to her mouth and let her draw them in, her way of kissing.
And Anna did all these things. She took her in her arms, dandled her, and kissed her fresh cheek and bare elbows; but at the sight of this child, she realized still more clearly that what she felt for her could not even be called love in comparison with her feeling for Serezha.
Everything about this baby was sweet, but for some reason she did not grip the heart.
Upon the first child, though by an unloved man, all Anna's unsatisfied capacity for loving was lavished; but the girl was born under most trying conditions and had not received a hundredth part of the care given to the first child.
Besides, everything about the baby was still prospective, while Serezha was already an individual and a beloved one; thoughts and feelings were already struggling in his mind, he understood and loved and judged her, she thought, recalling his words and looks.
And from him she was for ever sundered, not only physically but spiritually, and there was no remedy for it.
She returned the baby to its nurse, sent them away, and opened a locket with Serezha's portrait as a baby about the same age as the little girl.
Rising, she removed her bonnet and took from the table an album in which were photographs of her son at different ages.
He was there in a white shirt, astride a chair, his brows frowning while his mouth smiled.
This was his most characteristic and best expression.
She caught hold of a corner of this photo several times with her deft little hand, the slender white fingers of which moved with special strenuousness that day, but each time they slipped and she could not get the picture out.
There was no knife on the table, and she drew out the photo next to it (one, taken in Rome, of Vronsky with long hair and wearing a round hat), and with it pushed out her son's photo. 'Yes, there he is!' she said with a glance at Vronsky's likeness, and suddenly remembered that he was the cause of her present grief.
She had not called him to mind all that morning; but now, having caught sight of that manly, noble face, so familiar and dear to her, she felt an unexpected flow of love toward him.
'But where is he?
How can he leave me alone in my anguish?' she suddenly thought with a sense of reproach, forgetting that she herself had hidden from him all that concerned her son. She sent to ask him to come up to her at once.
She awaited him, thinking with a sinking heart of the words in which she would tell him everything and of the expressions of his love which would comfort her. The servant returned with the reply that he had a visitor, but would come up at once, and wished to know whether he might bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.
'So he won't come alone,' she thought, 'he won't come so that I can tell him everything, but will bring Yashvin...' And suddenly a strange idea crossed her mind: what if he had ceased to love her?
Going over in her mind the events of the last few days, she thought she perceived in everything a confirmation of that dreadful thought: in the fact that he had not dined at home the day before, and that he had insisted on having separate apartments while in Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming alone perhaps to avoid a tte--tte with her.
'But he must tell me.
If I know it, then I know what I shall do,' she told herself, powerless to imagine the position she would find herself in when she was convinced of his indifference.
She imagined that he had ceased to love her, and she was almost in despair: which roused in her a feeling of peculiar excitement.
She rang for her maid, and going into the dressing-room paid more attention to her toilet than she had done all these days, as if, having ceased to love her, his love might be recalled by her wearing the dress and having her hair done in the style most becoming to her.
She heard the bell before she was ready.
When she entered the drawing-room not his eyes but Yashvin's met hers.
Vronsky was examining her son's photos, which she had forgotten on the table, and did not hurry to look at her.
'We are acquainted,' she said, placing her little hand in the enormous hand of the embarrassed Yashvin, whose confusion did not seem to accord with his huge figure and rough face. 'We have been acquainted since last year's races...
Let me have them,' she added, with a rapid movement taking from Vronsky the photos he was looking at, and glancing at him impressively with glistening eyes.
But of course you don't care for life abroad,' she went on with a pleasant smile: 'I know you and know all your tastes, though we have met so seldom.'
'I am very sorry to hear it, for my tastes are mostly bad,' said Yashvin, biting the left side of his moustache.
After a short talk, noticing that Vronsky looked at the clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying long in Petersburg, and straightening his immense body picked up his cap.
'Not long, I think,' she replied with embarrassment glancing at Vronsky.
'Then we shall not meet again?' said Yashvin, rising; and then turning to Vronsky he asked, 'Where are you dining?'
'Come and dine with me,' said Anna resolutely, as if vexed with herself for her embarrassment, yet blushing as she always did when she revealed her position to a fresh person. 'The dinners here are not good, but at any rate you will see one another.
Of all his regimental friends Alexis liked you best.'
'I shall be very pleased,' said Yashvin, with a smile which showed Vronsky that he liked Anna very much.
'You are going too?' she asked.
'I am late as it is,' he answered. 'Go on!
I shall catch you up in a minute!' he shouted to Yashvin.
She took his hand and looked fixedly at him, trying to think of something to say to prevent his leaving her.
'Wait  I have something to tell you,' she said, and raising his short hand she pressed it to her neck. 'Was it wrong of me to ask him to dinner?'
'You have done very well,' he replied, showing his compact row of teeth in a calm smile, and kissing her hand.
'Alexis, you have not changed toward me?' she asked, squeezing his hand in both hers. 'Alexis, I am in torment here!
You would hardly believe how trying our life here is to me too,' he said, drawing away his hand.
'Well, then go! Go!' she said in an offended tone, and quickly left him.
He was told that, soon after he left, a lady came to see her and they went away together.
Her departure without mentioning where she was going, her prolonged absence, and the fact that she had been away somewhere in the morning without telling him about it, added to her strangely excited look that morning, and the animosity with which in Yashvin's presence she had almost snatched her son's photographs out of his hands, made Vronsky reflect.
He decided that it was necessary to have an explanation with her, and he waited for her in the drawing-room.
But Anna did not return alone, she brought with her her old maiden aunt, Princess Oblonskaya.
Anna seemed not to notice the worried look of inquiry on Vronsky's face, but chattered gaily about what she had been buying.
He saw that something unusual was taking place within her: her eyes glittered with an expression of strained attention when her look rested on him, and in her speech and motions there was that nervous quickness and grace which, during the first period of their intimacy, had so captivated him, but which now troubled and alarmed him.
The Princess asked to be excused for not coming to say good-bye; she was not well, but asked Anna to come and see her between half-past six and nine.
Vronsky glanced at Anna when that definite time was mentioned, which showed that care had been taken to prevent her meeting anyone there; but Anna did not seem to observe it.
'I'm sorry that between half-past six and nine is just the time when I cannot come,' she replied with a faint smile.
Vronsky slightly shrugged his shoulders.
Why had she brought the old Princess, why had she asked Tushkevich to stay to dinner, and, strangest of all, why was she sending him to get her a box for the opera?
Was it conceivable that, in her position, she was going to the opera when Patti was to sing, and when all the subscribers, her Society acquaintances, would be present?
He looked seriously at her, but she answered him with the same provocative glance of high spirits or desperation, the meaning of which he could not make out.
After dinner Tushkevich went to get a box and Yashvin to have a smoke. Vronsky went with Yashvin down to his own rooms, but after sitting with him a while, ran upstairs again.
Anna was already dressed in a light silk dress cut low in front and trimmed with velvet  a dress she had had made in Paris; and on her head she wore some rich, white lace, which outlined her face and set off her brilliant beauty to great advantage.
'You are really going to the theatre?' said he, trying not to look at her.
'Why do you ask in such a frightened way?' she said, again offended because he did not look at her. 'Why should I not go?'
She appeared not to grasp the meaning of her words.
'Of course there is no reason whatever,' he replied with a frown.
'That's just what I say,' she answered, purposely ignoring the sarcasm of his tone and calmly pulling up her long perfumed glove.
For heaven's sake, what has come to you?' he said, trying to recall her to her senses, as her husband once used to do.
He shrugged his shoulders with a bewildered and despairing look.
But don't you know...?' he began.
'I don't want to know'' she almost screamed. 'I don't!
I love you, and it's all the same to me,' she said, changing from French into Russian, while her eyes as she looked at him glittered with a light he could not understand, 'so long as you have not changed toward me!
He looked at her.
He saw all the beauty of her face and of her dress, which suited her as her dresses always did.
'My feelings cannot change, you know that; but I beg you not to go! I entreat you!' he said, again speaking French with tender entreaty in his voice but with a cold look in his eyes.
She did not hear his words, but saw the coldness of his look, and replied irritably:
Ah, here she is!'
VRONSKY FOR THE FIRST TIME FELT VEXED and almost angry with Anna for her unwillingness to realize her position.
This feeling was strengthened by the fact that he could not tell her the reason of his vexation.
Had he told her frankly what he thought he could have said: 'To appear dressed as you are at the theatre, accompanied by the Princess, whom everybody knows, means not only to acknowledge your position as a fallen woman but to throw down a challenge to Society  which means, to renounce it for ever.'
But he could not say this to her. 'But how can she fail to understand it?
And what is happening to her?' he asked himself.
He felt that his regard for her had diminished and his consciousness of her beauty increased simultaneously.
He went down frowning to his rooms, and taking a seat beside Yashvin, who sat with his long legs stretched out on a chair drinking brandy and seltzer, ordered the same for himself.
He is a good horse, and I advise you to buy him,' said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade's gloomy countenance. 'It's true he has a goose rump, but his legs and head leave nothing to be desired.'
This conversation about horses interested him, but he never forgot Anna, and involuntarily listened to the steps in the corridor and glanced at the clock on the mantelpiece.
'Anna Arkadyevna sent me to say that she has gone to the theatre,' said a servant.
Yashvin emptied another glass of brandy into the sparkling water, drank it, and then rose, buttoning his coat.
'Well, let us go,' he said, smiling slightly under cover of his big moustache, and showing by that smile that he understood the cause of Vronsky's depression, but did not attach importance to it.
But why not come to the stalls? Take Krasinsky's place,' Yashvin added as he went out.
'With a wife one has trouble, but with one who is not a wife it's worse,' thought Yashvin as he left the hotel.
Alexander will be there with his wife, and probably Mother also.
Now she has gone in, taken off her cloak and come forward into the light.
Tushkevich, Yashvin, the Princess Barbara...' he pictured them to himself. 'And what of me?
Am I afraid, or have I put her under Tushkevich's protection?
Why does she put me in such a position?' he said with a wave of his arm.
As he made this gesture he struck the little table on which the seltzer and a decanter of brandy were standing and almost knocked it over.
In trying to save it from falling he overturned it, and in his vexation kicked it and rang the bell.
'If you wish to remain in my service,' he said to the valet when the latter came in, 'remember your duties.
The valet, conscious that he was not to blame, was about to defend himself, but, glancing at his master saw by his face that there was nothing for it but to keep silence; so, stooping quickly, he knelt on the carpet and began sorting out the whole and broken glasses and bottles.
The attendant, an old man, helped him off with his overcoat, recognized him and, addressing him as 'Your Excellency,' suggested that he need not take a ticket for his coat, but should merely call for 'Theodore' when he wanted it.
Through a door slightly ajar came the sounds of a muffled staccato accompaniment by the orchestra and of a female voice rendering a musical phrase with precision.
The door was closed immediately and he did not hear the end of the phrase nor the trill after it, but knew from the thunder of applause behind the door that the trill was finished.
When he entered the auditorium, brilliantly illuminated by chandeliers and bronze gas brackets, the noise still continued.
On the stage the singer, in a glitter of bare shoulders and diamonds, was bowing low and smiling as she picked up with the help of the tenor  who held her hand  bouquets that had been clumsily flung across the footlights; she went up to a gentleman; with hair shiny with pomatum and parted in the middle, who was stretching his long arms across the footlights to hand her something  and the whole audience in the stalls and in the boxes stirred, leaned forward, shouted and applauded.
The conductor from his raised seat helped to pass the bouquets, and rearranged his white tie.
To-day he paid less attention than ever to the familiar surroundings: the stage, the noise, and all that well-known, uninteresting, motley herd of audience in the packed theatre.
To these oases Vronsky at once turned his attention and immediately got into touch with them.
The act had just finished when he came in, so before going to his brother's box he went up to the front row and paused beside Serpukhovskoy, who was standing with his knee bent, tapping the wall of the orchestra with his heel. He had noticed Vronsky afar off and welcomed him with a smile.
Vronsky had not yet seen Anna, he intentionally avoided looking her way; but from the direction in which people were looking he knew where she was.
He glanced around unobtrusively, but did not look at her: prepared for the worst, he looked for Karenin.
'How little of the military man is left in you!' remarked Serpukhovskoy. 'You might be a diplomatist, an artist, or anything of that kind.'
'Yes, as soon as I returned home I put on a black coat,' Vronsky replied with a smile, slowly taking out his opera-glasses.
I, when I come back from abroad and put this on again, regret my freedom,' he said, touching his shoulder-knot.
Vronsky, listening with one ear, levelled his glasses first at the lower tier and then at the boxes in the dress circle, taking them all in review.
Next to a lady wearing a turban, and a bald old man who blinked angrily just as Vronsky's moving glass reached him, he suddenly saw Anna's proud head, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in its frame of lace.
The poise of her head on her fine broad shoulders, and the gleam of restrained excitement in her eyes and her whole face, reminded him precisely of how he had seen her at the ball in Moscow.
But her beauty affected him very differently now.
There was no longer anything mysterious in his feelings for her, and therefore though her beauty attracted him even more strongly, it also offended him.
She was not looking his way, but he felt that she had already seen him.
When Vronsky directed his glasses that way again he noticed that the Princess Barbara was very red, and that she was laughing unnaturally and looking round incessantly at the next box, while Anna, tapping with her closed fan the red-velvet edge of the box, was gazing fixedly somewhere else, not seeing, and evidently not wishing to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin's face wore the expression it had when he was losing at cards.
He was frowning and drawing the left side of his moustache further and further into his mouth, looking askance at the adjoining box.
The wife, a thin little woman, was standing up in her box with her back to Anna, putting on an opera-cloak which her husband was holding for her.
Her face looked pale and angry and she was speaking excitedly.
Kartasov, a stout bald-headed man, kept glancing round at Anna while trying to pacify his wife.
When the wife left the box the husband loitered behind, trying to catch Anna's eye and evidently wishing to bow to her.
But Anna, with obvious intention, took no notice of him and, turning round, was saying something to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent toward her.
Vronsky could not make out what had taken place between the Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that it was something humiliating for Anna.
He realized that from what he had seen, and especially from Anna's face, who, he knew, was summoning her utmost strength to sustain the role she had undertaken.
Those who did not know her and her set, and heard none of the expressions of pity, indignation, or surprise uttered by the women because she had allowed herself to appear in public and to show herself so ostentatiously in her lace head-dress and in all her beauty, admired the composure and loveliness of the woman, and did not suspect that she felt as though pilloried.
Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing just what, Vronsky felt painfully agitated, and, hoping to find out something, set out for his brother's box.
Intentionally leaving the auditorium at the opposite side to where Anna was, he encountered the Commander of his old regiment, who stood talking to two acquaintances.
Some other time,' said Vronsky, and ran up the stairs to his brother's box.
In the box was Vronsky's mother, the old Countess, with her iron-grey curls.
Varya and the Princess Sorokina he met in the corridor outside.
Having conducted the Princess Sorokina back to Vronsky's mother, Varya held out her hand to her brother-in-law and at once began to talk of the matter that interested him.
He had rarely seen her so excited.
Madame Karenina...' she began.
'But what has she done?'
Her husband began conversing with her from his box, and Kartasova flew at him!
It seems she said something insulting out loud, and then went out.'
'I have been expecting you all the time,' said his mother with a sarcastic smile. 'I never see anything of you.'
Her son saw that she could not repress a smile of satisfaction.
I was coming to you,' he replied coldly.
'Why don't you faire la cour  Madame Karenine?'[Pay court] she added, when the Princess Sorokina had stepped aside. 'Elle fait sensation.
[She is making a sensation. They are forgetting Patti because of her.]
'Maman! I asked you not to speak to me about that subject,' he answered frowning.
Vronsky did not reply, and after a few words addressed to the Princess Sorokina he left the box.
In the doorway he met his brother.
'Ah, Alexis!' said his brother. 'What a shame.
That woman is a fool, that's all...
I was just going to see her!
He hurried downstairs feeling that he must do something, he knew not what.
He was disturbed both by vexation with Anna for placing herself and him in this false position, and by pity for her sufferings.
He descended to the stalls and went straight to Anna's box, in front of which stood Stremov talking to her.
Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to shake hands with Stremov.
'I am a poor judge,' he replied, looking severely at her.
'Like Prince Yashvin, who considers that Patti sings too loud,' she returned with a smile. 'Thank you!' she said, taking with her small gloved hand a programme Vronsky had picked up for her: and suddenly at that instant her beautiful face quivered.
Noticing that during the next act her box remained empty, Vronsky left the theatre amid cries of 'hush' from the audience, which had become quiet to listen to a cavatina. He went to his hotel.
When Vronsky entered she was still dressed as she had been at the theatre.
She was sitting in the first arm-chair by the wall, fixedly gazing before her.
She glanced at him and immediately resumed her former posture.
'Anna!' he said.
'It's all your fault! Your fault!' she exclaimed with tears of despair and spite in her voice, and rose.
'Unpleasant!' she cried. 'It was awful!
'The words of a silly woman;' he said. 'But why risk it?
'Yes! If you loved me as I love you, if you suffered the anguish I do... ' she replied with a frightened glance at him.
He was sorry for her and yet vexed with her.
He assured her of his love, because he saw that that alone could pacify her now, and did not reproach her with words, though he reproached her in his heart.
And those assurances of love, which to him appeared so trivial that he felt ashamed to utter them, she drank in and gradually became calm.
DOLLY AND HER CHILDREN WERE SPENDING THE SUMMER with her sister Kitty at Pokrovsk.
The house on her own estate was quite dilapidated, so Levin and his wife persuaded her to spend the summer with them.
He said he greatly regretted that his duties prevented his spending the summer with his family in the country, which would have given him the greatest pleasure; and he remained in Moscow, visiting the country occasionally for a day or two at a time.
Beside the Oblonskys with all their children and their governess, the Levins had other visitors  the old Princess, who considered it her duty to watch over her inexperienced daughter in that condition; and also Varenka, Kitty's friend from abroad who was keeping her promise to visit her friend now that she was married.
All these were relations and friends of Kitty's, and, though Levin liked them, he regretted his own  the Levin  world and order of things, which was being submerged by this influx of 'the Shcherbatsky element,' as he put it to himself.
Only one of his relatives, Sergius Ivanich, visited him that summer  and he was a man of the Koznyshev type and not a Levin, so that the Levin spirit was quite overwhelmed.
In the Levin house, so long empty, there were now so many people that nearly every room was occupied and the old Princess was obliged almost daily to count those present before sitting down to a meal. If there chanced to be thirteen, she would make a grandchild sit at the side-table.
And Kitty, who conducted her household with great assiduity, had no little trouble to procure all the chickens, turkeys, and ducks, of which, with the visitors' and the children's summer appetites very many were required.
Dolly's children, their governess, and Varenka were planning where they should hunt for mushrooms; Koznyshev, who by his intellect and learning commanded a respect almost amounting to veneration from all the visitors, surprised every one by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.
I am very fond of looking for mushrooms,' he said with a glance at Varenka. 'I consider it a very good occupation.'
She hastened to say something to her mother so that her glance should pass unnoticed.
After dinner Koznyshev sat down by the drawing-room window, continuing his conversation with his brother over a cup of coffee and glancing now and then at the door through which the children, who were preparing to set out on the mushroom hunt, would enter.
Levin sat down on the window-sill beside his brother.
Kitty stood near her husband, evidently waiting for the end of the conversation  which did not interest her  before speaking to him.
'In many ways you have changed since your marriage and for the better,' said Koznyshev, smiling at Kitty and apparently not much interested in his conversation with his brother; 'but you have remained true to your passion for defending the most paradoxical views.'
'Kate, it is not good for you to be standing,' said her husband, with a meaning look, moving a chair toward her.
In advance of them all, at a sideways gallop, came Tanya in tightly pulled-up stockings, running toward Koznyshev, flourishing a basket and his hat.
Having boldly approached him, her beautiful eyes beaming (eyes so like her father's), she gave him his hat and made a movement as if to put it on him, her shy and gentle smile softening the boldness of the action.
'Varenka is waiting,' she said, carefully placing his hat on his head when she saw from his smile that she had permission to do so.
Varenka, who was wearing a yellow print dress and a white kerchief on her head, stood in the doorway.
'I'm coming, Mlle Varenka,' said Koznyshev, drinking up his coffee and pocketing his handkerchief and cigarcase.
Kitty said to her husband as soon as Koznyshev had risen.
She said it so that the latter could hear, with an evident desire that he should do so. 'And how handsome, how nobly handsome!...
Varenka!' she exclaimed.
Varenka, hearing Kitty's voice and her mother reprimanding her, came up with her light step.
The quickness of Varenka's movements, the colour suffusing her animated face, all showed that something unusual was taking place within her.
Kitty knew what that unusual thing was, and watched her attentively.
She had now called Varenka only to give her a silent blessing for the important event which, according to Kitty, was to happen in the woods that day after dinner.
'Varenka, I shall be very happy if a certain thing comes to pass,' she whispered, kissing her.
'And are you coming with us?' Varenka, quite confused, asked Levin, pretending not to have heard what had been said to her.
Kitty was introducing this new way, which had been employed in her old home, but Agatha Mikhaylovna, to whom this work had formerly been entrusted, and who considered that nothing that used to be done in the Levin house could be wrong, had, despite her directions, put water to the strawberry and the wild strawberry jam, declaring it to be indispensable. She had been detected doing this, and now the raspberry jam was being made in every one's presence, as Agatha Mikhaylovna had to be convinced that without water the jam could turn out well.
Agatha Mikhaylovna, with a flushed face and aggrieved expression, her hair ruffled and her thin arms bared to the elbow, was shaking the preserving pan over the brazier with a circular movement, looking dismally at the raspberries and hoping with all her heart that they would harden and not get cooked through.
The old Princess, conscious that against her, as chief adviser in the matter of jam boiling, Agatha Mikhaylovna's wrath should be directed, tried to look as if she were thinking of other things and was not interested in the raspberries. She talked of other matters, but watched the brazier out of the corner of her eye.
'I always buy dress materials for the maids myself, at the sales,' the Princess said, continuing the conversation. 'Is it not time to take the scum off, my dear?' she added, turning to Agatha Mikhaylovna.
'I will do it,' said Dolly, and she got up and began carefully sliding the spoon over the surface of the bubbling syrup, and now and then, to remove what had stuck to the spoon, she tapped it against a plate already covered with the yellowish pink scum, with blood-red streaks of syrup showing beneath it. 'How they'll lick it up at tea-time!' she thought of the children, remembering how she herself, when a child, used to marvel that the grown-ups did not eat the scum  the nicest part.
'Yes, I remember she wore it on your Name day.'
I would have had one made like it myself if she hadn't had it.
'Oh, how sweet he is  don't frighten him!' exclaimed Kitty unexpectedly, looking at a sparrow that had settled on the railing, turned a raspberry stalk over, and was pecking at it.
'Yes, but keep away from the brazier,' said her mother.
What a skilful matchmaker!' teased Dolly. 'How carefully and adroitly she brings them together!'
He,' he meant Koznyshev, 'could have made the best match in Russia any time; now he is no longer so young, but all the same I am sure many would marry him even now...
She is very good-natured, but he might...'
'Oh, but, Mama, try and understand why nothing better could be imagined either for him or for her.
First of all, she is simply charming!' expostulated Kitty, crooking one finger.
'He certainly likes her very much,' Dolly chimed in.
'Secondly, his position in the world is such that neither property nor the social position of his wife matters to him at all.
'Yes, one certainly can trust her,' again chimed in Dolly.
'Thirdly, she must love him; and that too is... In a word, it would be splendid!
'But don't get excited; there is no need at all for you to get excited,' admonished her mother.
I think he will propose to-day.'
'Ah, how strange it is when and how a man proposes...
There is a sort of barrier, and suddenly down it goes,' said Dolly with a dreamy smile, recalling her past with Oblonsky.
'There was nothing special about it  it was quite simple,' answered the Princess, but her face brightened at the memory.
Kitty felt a particular charm in being able now to talk with her mother as an equal about those chief events in a woman's life.
'Of course he loved me; he used to visit us in the country.'
'But what were the words he said?'
How long ago it seems!' she replied.
She recalled the whole of the winter preceding her marriage and her infatuation with Vronsky.
'There's one thing... that old love-affair of Varenka's,' she said, following the natural sequence of her thoughts. 'I wished to tell Koznyshev somehow, to prepare him.
'You are,' answered Kitty, her eyes smiling dreamily.
'But I do not know,' interposed the Princess, defending her maternal watchfulness over her daughter, 'what there is in your past to trouble him!
Such things happen to every girl.'
'No, excuse me!' her mother continued. 'And then you yourself would not let me talk it over with Vronsky.
'How happily it turned out for Kitty that Anna came,' said Dolly, 'and how unhappily for her!
The exact reverse,' she added, struck by her thought. 'Then Anna was so happy and Kitty considered herself miserable.
I often think of her.'
A horrid, disgusting woman without a heart,' said their mother, unable to forget that Kitty had not married Vronsky but Levin.
'I don't think about it, and don't want to,' she said, listening to her husband coming up the balcony steps. 'I don't want to think about it.'
'About what don't you want to think?' he asked as he came up.
No one answered and he did not repeat the question.
'I am sorry I have intruded into your women's domain,' he said, glancing round at them all with a dissatisfied air, and realizing that they had been talking of something they would not have talked of in his presence.
For an instant he felt that he shared Agatha Mikhaylovna's dissatisfaction that the jam was boiled without water, and with the alien Shcherbatsky influence in general.
'Well?' he asked, looking at her with the expression with which every one addressed her nowadays.
'What? Are you going to take Kitty in the trap?' said her mother reproachfully.
But though he liked and respected her very much, Levin could not address her so without violating his feeling for his dead mother.
Walking is good for me,' and Kitty rose, went to her husband and took his arm.
'Well, Agatha Mikhaylovna, is the jam done?' asked Levin, smiling at her and wishing to cheer her up. 'Has it turned out well the new way?'
'It's better so, Agatha Mikhaylovna: it won't ferment, and we have no ice left in the cellar and nowhere to keep it cool,' said Kitty, immediately seeing her husband's intention and addressing the old woman in the same spirit. 'On the other hand, your pickling is such that Mama says she never tasted anything like it!' she added, smiling and putting the old woman's kerchief straight.
I just look at you and him, and then I feel happy,' she said and that disrespectful way of speaking of her master as him seemed touching to Kitty.
You will show us the right places.' Agatha Mikhaylovna smiled and shook her head, as much as to say: 'Though I should like to be cross with you, I can't do it.'
KITTY WAS PARTICULARLY GLAD of the opportunity of being alone with her husband, for she had noticed the shadow of pain that flitted over his face, which so vividly reflected all his emotions, when he came on the balcony, asked what they were talking about and received no reply.
When they started on their walk in advance of the others and had passed out of sight of the house on to the hard, dusty road, strewn with rye-ears and grain, she leaned more heavily on his arm and pressed it.
He had already forgotten that momentarily unpleasant impression, and being alone with her experienced, now that the thought of her pregnancy never left him, a feeling still novel and joyful to him of pleasure, entirely free from sensuality, at the nearness of a beloved woman.
They had nothing to say to one another, but he wanted to hear the sound of her voice, which like her look had been changed by pregnancy.
In her voice as in her look there was now a certain softness and seriousness, as of a person continually intent on one beloved task.
Lean more on me,' he said.
Both are better,' he said, pressing her hand.
'Ah!' said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to her words, thinking all the while about the road, which now led through the wood, and avoiding places where she might take a false step.
I want it so much,' she went on.
'What do you think about it?' and she looked into his face.
'Yes  that he was in love with that girl who died...'
But since then I have observed him with women: he is amiable and some of them please him, but I feel that for him they are simply human beings, not women.'
He is a peculiar, a wonderful man.
He is a man of too pure and lofty a nature.'
'No, but he is so used to living a purely spiritual life that he cannot reconcile himself to realities, and, after all, Varenka is a reality!'
Levin had by this time become accustomed to express his thoughts boldly, without troubling to put them into precise phraseology; he knew that at such loving moments as the present his wife would understand what he meant from a mere hint, and she did understand him.
'Yes, but in her there is not so much of that reality as there is in me, I know he would never have loved me.
'Yes, he is kind to me, but...'
'But it's not like poor Nicholas... You would have loved one another,' said Levin, finishing her sentence for her.
'Why not speak of him?' he added. 'Sometimes I blame myself for not doing so, it will end by my forgetting him.
Oh, what a dreadful, what a charming man he was!...
Yes, what were we talking about?' he concluded after a pause.
'You think he can't fall in love, then?' said Kitty, putting his thoughts into her own words.
'Not exactly that he can't fall in love,' Levin answered with a smile, 'but he has none of that weakness which is necessary...
'You envy him because he can't fall in love?'
'I envy him because he is better than I am,' replied he, smiling. 'He does not live for himself.
And so he can be calm and contented.'
She could not have expressed the sequence of thoughts that made her smile, but the last deduction was that her husband, in extolling his brother and depreciating himself, was not quite sincere.
But she knew that this insincerity was the outcome of his affection for his brother, of a sense of shame at his own excessive happiness, and especially of that desire to improve which never left him; she loved this in him, and therefore smiled.
What are you dissatisfied with?' she said with the same smile.
Her disbelief in his dissatisfaction with himself was pleasant, and unconsciously he challenged her to give reasons for her disbelief.
'I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself...' he answered.
How can you jump so!' he said, interrupting the conversation to rebuke her for making too quick a movement while stepping over a branch that lay across the path. 'But when I examine myself and compare myself with others, especially with my brother, I feel how bad I am.'
'In what way?' asked she, still smiling. 'Don't you do anything for others?
'No. I feel it now more than ever  and it is your fault,' he answered, pressing her arm, 'that it's not the right thing.
'Well then, what do you say to Papa?' asked Kitty. 'Is he bad too, because he does nothing for the common good?'
But one must have your father's simplicity, clearness, and kindness, and have I got all that?
Before you were there, and that,' he said with a glance at her figure, which she understood, 'I put all my strength into my work; but now I can't and I feel ashamed. I do it just like a task that has been set me.
'Then would you now like to change places with Sergius Ivanich?' asked Kitty. 'Would you prefer to do that public work, and love that given task as he does, and nothing more?'
So you think he will propose to-day?' he added after a pause.
'There, begin! He will propose, he won't...' and she handed him the flower.
'He will, he won't,' said Levin, pulling off the veined white petals.
'No, no!' exclaimed she, watching his fingers excitedly as she seized his hand to stop him. 'You've pulled off two at once.'
'Well then, we won't count this tiny one,' said he, picking off a short ill-formed petal. 'And here's the trap overtaking us.'
VARENKA WITH THE WHITE KERCHIEF OVER HER BLACK HAIR, surrounded by the children and good-naturedly and cheerfully busy with them, and evidently excited by the possibility of an offer of marriage from a man she liked, looked very attractive.
Koznyshev walked by her side and did not cease admiring her.
Looking at her he remembered all the charming things he had heard her say, and all he knew of her that was good, and he grew more and more conscious that what he felt for her was something rare, something he had felt but once before, a long, long time ago, when he was very young.
His sense of pleasure at her nearness went on increasing until it reached a point where, when placing in her basket an enormous wood mushroom with a thin stem and up-curling top, he looked into her eyes and, noting the flush of joyful and frightened agitation that suffused her face, he himself became embarrassed and gave her a smile that said too much.
'If it is so, I must think it over and come to a decision, and not let myself be carried away like a boy by the impulse of the moment,' he told himself.
'Now I will go and gather mushrooms quite on my own account, or else my harvest will not be noticeable,' said he, and went away from the skirts of the wood, where they were walking about on the short silky grass under sparsely growing old birches, and penetrated deeper into the wood, where among the white birch trunks grew grey-stemmed aspens and dark hazel bushes.
When he had gone some forty paces he stepped behind a spindle bush with pink and red earring-shaped blossoms, and paused, knowing that he could no longer be seen.
Only the hum of flies, like that of a swarm of bees, sounded continually high up in the birch trees beneath which he stood, and occasionally the children's voices reached him.
Suddenly, from the skirts of the wood not far off, he heard Varenka's contralto voice calling to Grisha, and a smile of pleasure lit up his face.
Conscious of that smile, Koznyshev shook his head disapprovingly at his own state and taking out a cigar began to light it.
Watching the sheet of smoke, he went on slowly, meditating on his condition of mind.
'Why not?' he thought. 'If it were just a sudden impulse or passion  if I only felt this attraction, this mutual attraction (it is mutual), but felt that it was contrary to the whole tenor of my life, and that by giving way to it I should be false to my vocation and duty...
But it is nothing of the kind. The one thing I can find against it is that when I lost Marie I told myself that I would remain true to her memory.
That is important,' thought Koznyshev, conscious nevertheless that this consideration could not have any importance for him personally, although in the eyes of others it might spoil his poetic role. 'But, apart from that, however much I searched I could find nothing to say against my feeling.
He recalled the women and girls he had known, but try as he would he could not recall one who united in herself to such a degree all, literally all, the qualities which he, thinking the matter over in cold blood, would desire in a wife.
She had all the charm and freshness of youth but was no longer a child, and if she loved him, loved him consciously as a woman ought to love. That was one favourable consideration.
The second one was: she was not only far from worldly, but evidently felt a repulsion from the world, yet she knew the world and had all the ways of a woman of good Society, without which a life-companion would be unthinkable for him.
The third was: she was religious, not irresponsibly religious and kind-hearted like a child  like Kitty for instance but her life was based on religious convictions.
Even down to small details Koznyshev found in her all that he desired in a wife: she was poor and solitary, so that she would not bring into her husband's house a crowd of relations and their influence, as he saw Kitty doing. She would be indebted to her husband for everything, which was a thing he had always desired in his future family life.
And this girl, uniting all the qualities, loved him.
And he loved her.
One of the opposite arguments was his age.
But he came of a long-lived race, he had not a single grey hair, no one thought he was forty, and he remembered that Varenka had said it was only in Russia that men of fifty considered themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty considered himself dans la force de l'ge, [In the prime of life.] while one of forty was un jeune homme.
[A young man.] And what was the use of counting by years, when he felt as young at heart as he had been twenty years ago?
Was it not youth that he was experiencing now, when coming out again on the other side of the wood he saw, in the bright slanting sunbeams, the graceful form of Varenka in her yellow dress and with a basket on her arm, stepping lightly past the trunk of an old birch, and when the impression of Varenka merged into one with the view that had so struck him with its beauty: the view of the field of ripening oats bathed in the slanting sunbeams and the old forest beyond, flecked with yellow, fading away into the bluish distance.
Throwing away his cigar Koznyshev went toward her with resolute steps.
'MLLE VARENKA! WHEN VERY YOUNG I formed my ideal of the woman I should love and whom I should be happy to call my wife.
This was what Koznyshev said to himself when he was already within ten steps of Varenka.
Kneeling and with outstretched arms defending some mushrooms from Grisha, she was calling little Masha.
There are a lot here,' she cried in her delightful mellow voice.
On seeing Koznyshev approaching she did not move; yet everything told him that she felt his approach and was glad of it.
'Well, have you found anything?' she asked from beneath her white kerchief, turning her handsome face toward him, with a gentle smile.
She did not reply, being busy with the children who surrounded her.
'There's another, near the branch,' she said, pointing to a small mushroom cut across its firm pinkish crown by a dry blade of grass from beneath which it had sprung up.
Varenka rose when Masha had picked the mushroom, breaking it into two white pieces. 'It reminds me of my childhood,' she added, moving away from the children with Koznyshev.
Varenka saw that he wanted to speak, and guessing the subject she grew faint with joy and fear.
They had gone far enough not to be overheard, but he still had not begun.
It would have been easier after a silence to say what they wished to say than after talking about mushrooms; yet against her will, and as if by accident, she said:
He was vexed that she had spoken about mushrooms.
He wished to bring her back to her first remark about her childhood; but without wishing to, after a pause, he replied to her last words:
Varenka's heart beat so that she seemed to hear it, and she felt herself growing red and then pale and red again.
To be the wife of a man like Koznyshev after her difficult life with Madame Stahl seemed to her the height of bliss.
Besides, she was almost sure she loved him, and now in a moment it must be decided.
She was frightened: frightened of what he might or might not say.
'He must make his declaration now or never'; Koznyshev also felt this.
Everything  Varenka's look, her blush, her downcast eyes  betrayed painful expectation.
He saw it and was sorry for her.
He even felt that to say nothing now would be to offend her.
His mind went rapidly over all the arguments in favour of his decision.
He repeated to himself the words with which he had intended to propose; but instead of those words some unexpected thought caused him to say:
Varenka's lips trembled with emotion when she replied:
And as soon as those words were spoken, both he and she understood that all was over, and that what ought to have been said would not be said, and their excitement, having reached its climax, began to subside.
'The stem of the birch-tree boletus reminds one of a dark man's beard two days old,' remarked Koznyshev calmly.
They began to return to the children. Varenka felt pained and ashamed, but at the same time she experienced a sense of relief.
Koznyshev when he got home and went again over all his reasons, came to the conclusion that at first he had judged wrongly.
'Gently, gently, children!' shouted Levin almost angrily, stepping in front of his wife to shield her, when the crowd of children came rushing at them with shrieks of delight.
Kitty had no need to question Varenka: from the calm and rather shamefaced look on both faces she knew that her plan had not been realized.
'Well?' inquired her husband on their way home.
'Won't bite,' answered Kitty with a smile and manner of speaking like her father, which Levin often observed in her with pleasure.
'Like this,' she said, taking her husband's hand, raising it to her mouth, and slightly touching it with her closed lips. 'As one kisses the bishop's hand.'
'Who won't bite?' said he, laughing.
They were expecting Oblonsky by the evening train, and the old Prince had written that he would perhaps accompany him.
'Only if he doesn't come I too shall say good-bye to you children,' said the Princess with a sorrowful sigh.
'Oh, what an idea, mama!' rejoined both her daughters.
They did not know that pleasant as it was for her to stay with her daughter and necessary as she felt herself to be there, she suffered keenly, both on her own and on her husband's account, since they gave their last and favourite daughter in marriage and the family nest was left empty.
'What is it, Agatha Mikhaylovna?' Kitty asked suddenly when the old woman stopped in front of her with a look of mystery and importance.
'Oh, that's just right,' said Dolly. 'You go and give your orders, and I will hear Grisha his lesson.
Levin offered to replace her, but having once heard Levin giving the lesson and noticing that he was not doing it the same way as the master who had coached the boy in Moscow, she  though embarrassed and anxious not to offend Levin  told him resolutely that the text-book must be followed in the master's way and that she would rather give the lessons herself.
Levin was vexed with Oblonsky for carelessly leaving it to the boy's mother to look after his lessons which she did not understand, instead of doing it himself, and he was vexed with the masters also for teaching the children so badly; but he promised his sister-in-law to give the lessons in the way she wished.
So he went on teaching Grisha not in his own way but according to the book, and therefore did it half-heartedly and often missed a lesson.
'No, I will go, Dolly! You stay here,' he said.
Even in the Levins' well-ordered household she found ways to be of use. 'I will see about supper,' she said, 'and you stay here'; and she rose to accompany Agatha Mikhaylovna.
'Agatha Mikhaylovna and I will arrange it,' and Varenka went out with the old woman.
'What a nice girl!' said the Princess.
'Not nice, Mama, but so charming that there is no one else like her!'
'So you are expecting Stephen Arkadyevich to-night?' asked Koznyshev, evidently disinclined to join in a conversation about Varenka. 'It would be hard to find two brothers-in-law more unlike,' he went on with his subtle smile; 'the one always on the move, living always in Society like a fish in water; the other, our Constantine here, lively, quick, sensitive to everything, but as soon as he appears in Society either shutting up altogether or floundering about absurdly like a fish on dry land!'
'Yes, he is very thoughtless,' said the Princess to Koznyshev. 'I was just going to ask you to tell him that it is impossible for her'  she indicated Kitty  'to remain here, and that she must certainly come to Moscow.
'Mama, he will do all that's necessary and will agree to everything,' interpolated Kitty, annoyed with her mother for asking Koznyshev's opinion on such a matter.
Dolly had not had time to rise to go to meet her husband, before Levin had jumped out of the window of the room below, where he had been teaching Grisha, and had lifted the boy out too.
'It's Steve!' shouted Levin from under the balcony. 'We have finished, Dolly, don't worry!' he added, running like a boy to meet the carriage.
When he came nearer he saw, sitting beside Oblonsky, a stout handsome young man wearing a Scotch bonnet with long ribbons streaming behind.
It was Vasenka Veslovsky, a second cousin of the Shcherbatskys, a brilliant Petersburg-Moscow young man. 'A most splendid fellow and a passionate sportsman,' as Oblonsky said when he introduced him.
Not at all dismayed by the disappointment he caused by appearing instead of the old Prince, Veslovsky gaily greeted Levin, reminding him that they had met before, and lifting Grisha he caught him up into the vehicle over the pointer Oblonsky had brought with him.
He was rather vexed that the old Prince, whom he liked more and more the better he knew him, had not come, and vexed because this Vasenka Veslovsky, a quite superfluous stranger, had come.
Veslovsky seemed to him still more alien and superfluous when they arrived at the porch  at which the whole animated group of grown-ups and children had gathered  and he saw Vasenka Veslovsky kissing Kitty's hand with a particularly tender and gallant air.
Please get it out of the calche, behind there...' he was saying to those about him. 'How much refreshed you are looking, Dolly, dear!' he went on, kissing his wife's hand again and holding it in his own while he patted it with the other hand.
'Whom was he kissing yesterday with those same lips?' he thought as he looked at Oblonsky caressing his wife.
He looked at Dolly, and was not pleased with her either.
'Of course she does not believe in his love.
Then why is she so pleased?
Disgusting!' thought he.
He looked at the Princess, who a few moments before had seemed so nice, and did not like the way she welcomed that beribboned Vasenka, as if to her own house.
Even Koznyshev, who had also come out of the porch displeased Levin by the feigned friendliness with which he greeted Oblonsky, whom, as Levin knew, he neither liked nor respected.
And Varenka too seemed disgusting because of the manner in which she with her sainte nitouche [Holy unapproachable.] air made that gentleman's acquaintance, while all her thought was how to get married.
But most repugnant of all was Kitty, for the way she fell in with the gay tone of that gentleman, who appeared to consider his arrival in the country a regular festival for everybody, and particularly objectionable was the smile with which she responded to his smiles.
Kitty noticed that something was wrong with her husband.
She tried to seize an opportune moment to speak to him alone; but he hurried away from her, saying that he must go to the office.
It was long since the farm work had seemed so important to him as it did that evening. 'For them it is always a holiday,' he thought, 'yet here we have work that is no holiday task, which cannot be put off, and without which life is impossible.'
Kostya! Wait a moment  what's the matter with you?' said Kitty, hurrying after him, but, without waiting for her, he went away pitilessly with big strides to the dining-room, where he immediately joined in the general animated conversation which was kept going by Vasenka Veslovsky and Oblonsky.
Do let's go!' cried Veslovsky, changing from one chair to another and sitting sideways with one of his fat legs doubled under him.
Levin asked, gazing intently at this leg but with that pretended politeness of his which Kitty knew so well, and which suited him so ill. 'I don't know whether we shall get any snipe, but there are plenty of woodcock, only one must go early.
'Oh, we are quite convinced that you can do without sleep and deprive others of theirs,' said Dolly with that scarcely perceptible irony with which she now generally addressed her husband. 'I think it's already time...
'Oh no, stay here, Dolly dear!' said Oblonsky, stepping across to her side of the long supper-table. 'I have much more to tell you.'
And he is going there again.
'Oh, do tell me! You have been to see her?
How is she?' asked Dolly.
Moreover, he saw his wife had an expression of serious feeling as she gazed attentively at Vasenka's handsome face while he was vivaciously narrating something.
Oblonsky asked his wife.
'I have long wanted to go and certainly shall go,' replied Dolly. 'I know her, and am sorry for her.
She is a splendid woman.
'That's all right,' replied he; 'and you, Kitty?'
Why should I go?' said Kitty, flushing deeply and glancing round at her husband.
'Are you acquainted with Anna Arkadyevna?' Veslovsky asked her.
'Yes,' said Kitty, with a still deeper blush, and she rose and went to her husband.
'So you are off shooting to-morrow?' she asked.
Levin's jealousy during those few minutes had gone far, especially after the blush that had suffused her face when speaking to Veslovsky.
Now as he listened to her question he interpreted it in his own way.
Strange as it seemed to him when he remembered it later, it now appeared clear to him that she asked whether he was going shooting, only because she wanted to know whether he would give that pleasure to Vasenka Veslovsky, with whom he fancied she was already in love.
'Yes, I am going,' he answered in an unnatural voice that was disagreeable to himself.
'No, wait a day, because Dolly has seen nothing of her husband.
You could go the day after to-morrow,' said she.
Levin now interpreted her words thus: 'Do not part me from him.
Your going does not matter to me, but do let me enjoy the society of this charming young man!'
Meanwhile Vasenka, without the least suspicion of the sufferings his presence was causing, rose from the table after Kitty and followed her, smiling pleasantly.
He grew pale and for a moment could hardly breathe. 'How dare he look like that at my wife!' he thought, boiling with rage.
Please let's go!' said Vasenka, sitting down and once more doubling his leg under him, as his habit was.
Already he fancied himself a deceived husband, necessary to his wife and her lover only to provide them with the comforts of life and with pleasures...
But nevertheless he asked Vasenka in an amiable and hospitable manner about his shooting, his gun, his boots  and agreed to go shooting next day.
Happily for Levin the old Princess put a stop to his sufferings by herself getting up and advising Kitty to go to bed.
But he did not escape a fresh pang.
Taking leave of his hostess, Vasenka again wanted to kiss her hand; but Kitty, blushing, drew away her hand, and said with naive rudeness, for which she was afterwards reprimanded by her mother:
In Levin's eyes Kitty was to blame for having laid herself open to such behaviour, and still more to blame for so awkwardly showing that it displeased her.
'What's the good of going to sleep, eh?' said Oblonsky, who after the few glasses he had drunk at supper was in his pleasantest and most poetic mood. 'Look Kitty!' he went on, pointing to the moon rising behind the lime-trees.
Do you know he has a fine voice?
Levin sat listening to them and frowning, in an easy chair in his wife's bedroom, meeting her inquiries as to what was the matter with stubborn silence. But when at length she asked with a timid smile: 'Aren't you displeased about something connected with Veslovsky?' he gave vent to his feelings and told her everything.
He stood before her, his eyes glittering terribly under his frowning brows, and pressed his powerful arms to his breast, as if trying with all his might to restrain himself.
The expression of his face would have been hard and even cruel, but for a look of suffering which touched her.
His jaw trembled and his voice faltered.
'What eyes?' said Kitty, trying to remember as honestly as she could all the words and gestures of the evening and all their shades of meaning.
In the depth of her soul she was conscious that there had been something just at the moment when Veslovsky had followed her to the other end of the table, but she dared not own this even to herself, much less make up her mind to tell him and so increase his pain.
'Ah!' he exclaimed, seizing his head in his hands. 'You had better not say anything!...
'Oh no Kostya! Wait  listen!' she implored with a look of pained commiseration.
For the first moment his jealousy had offended her: she was annoyed that the least relaxation, even the most innocent, was forbidden her; but now she would gladly have sacrificed not merely trifles like that, but anything, to free him from the torments he was suffering.
'Try and understand the horror and absurdity of my position,' he continued in a despairing whisper. 'He is in my house, and strictly speaking he has done nothing improper except by his free and easy manner and doubling up his legs!
'Come, Kostya, you are exaggerating!' remonstrated Kitty, at the bottom of her heart pleased by the force of love for her which was now expressing itself in his jealousy.
'Yes, yes!' said he in a frightened tone.
She told him what they had been talking about, and while she spoke she was breathless with excitement.
Levin paused, and then after scrutinizing her pale, frightened features, suddenly clapped his hands to his head.
'Well then, I will keep him here all the summer on purpose. I will lavish attentions on him,' said Levin, kissing her hands.
NEXT DAY, BEFORE THE LADIES WERE UP, the vehicles  a cart and a small trap  stood at the porch waiting for the sportsmen; and Laska, having long ago made out that they were going shooting, after yelping and jumping about to her heart's content, was sitting in the cart beside the coachman, regarding the doorway whence the sportsmen had not yet emerged, with excitement and with disapproval of the delay.
The first to appear was Vasenka Veslovsky in new boots reaching half-way up his fat thighs, his green blouse girdled with a new cartridge-belt smelling of leather, and on his head the Scotch bonnet with the ribbons. He carried a new English gun without a sling.
Laska jumped down to him and greeted him by leaping about. In her own way she asked him how soon the others would come out but, receiving no reply, she returned to her post of expectancy and again sat motionless with her head turned sideways and one ear pricked up.
At length the door opened noisily and out bounded, spinning round and round in the air, Krak, Oblonsky's yellow spotted pointer, followed by Oblonsky himself with a gun in his hand and a cigar in his mouth. 'Quiet, quiet, Krak!' he said affectionately to the dog, which was throwing its paws up against his stomach and chest and getting them entangled in his game-bag.
Oblonsky was wearing raw hide shoes, bands of linen wound round his feet instead of socks, a pair of tattered trousers and a short coat.
On his head were the ruins of some sort of hat; but his gun was of a new type, as neat as a toy, and his game-bag and cartridge-belt, though much worn, were of the best quality.
He realized it now that he saw Oblonsky in his rags, yet shining with his elegant, well-nurtured, cheerful and gentlemanly figure, and resolved to follow his example next time.
'Well, and where is our host?' he inquired.
I expect he has run back to her.'
Levin had run back to ask his wife once more whether she had forgiven him his foolishness of the previous day, and also to entreat her 'for heaven's sake' to take care of herself; and especially to keep further away from the children who at any moment might collide with her.
Then he had to obtain a repeated assurance that she was not angry with him for going away for two days, and also to beg her to be sure next day to send a man on horseback with a note  only a word or two  that he might know that all was well with her.
It was always painful for Kitty to part from her husband for two days; but seeing his animated figure, which seemed particularly large and powerful in high shooting boots and white blouse, and the radiant exhilaration of the sportsman in him, incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own pain in his gladness and parted from him cheerfully.
'Sorry, gentlemen!' he said, running out on to the porch. 'Is the lunch put in?
'Let them out with the flock,' he said, turning to the herdsman who was waiting for orders about some young sheep. 'Sorry!
Levin jumped down from the cart where he had already seated himself, to meet the carpenter who was approaching with a sazhen measure in his hand.
Now he wanted to use that staircase, adding three steps to it.
It will just stretch from the bottom, you see,' he went on with a persuasive gesture, 'and go up and up till it gets there.'
Levin pulled out his ramrod and drew the staircase in the dust.
'As you please,' said the carpenter, his eyes suddenly brightening; evidently he had at last understood. 'It seems we'll have to make another.'
'Well then, do as I told you,' Levin shouted as he climbed into the cart. 'Drive on!
Having- left the cares of home and estate behind him, Levin experienced such a strong sense of the joy of life and anticipation, that he felt disinclined to talk.
Besides, he experienced that feeling of concentrated excitement which every sportsman knows when approaching the scene of action.
If his mind was occupied with anything now, it was only with questions, whether they would find anything in the Kolpensky marsh, how Laska would compare with Krak, and how he would shoot to-day.
'If only I don't disgrace myself before that stranger! If only Oblonsky's shooting does not beat mine!' was his thought.
Now, as he listened to him, Levin felt ashamed of his injustice toward him the day before.
Levin did not quite like his holiday outlook on life and a sort of free and easy stylishness about him.
He seemed to lay claim to a lofty and unquestionable importance because he had long nails, a Scotch bonnet, and everything else in keeping; but one could forgive him this for the sake of his good-nature and breeding.
He attracted Levin by his good education, his splendid accent in French and English, and by the fact that he belonged to Levin's own class.
He went into raptures over it. 'How delightful it must be to gallop across the Steppes on a Steppe horse, eh?
Don't you think so?' he said.
He seemed to picture a gallop on a Steppe horse as something wild and poetical; nothing came of it, but his navet, in connection with his good looks; sweet smile, and graceful movements, was very attractive.
Whether it was that Veslovsky's nature was congenial to him, or that, to expiate his sin of yesterday, he tried to see only what was good in him, Levin liked Veslovsky's company.
When they had gone about three versts, Veslovsky suddenly missed his cigars and pocket-book, and did not know whether he had lost them or left them on his table.
That will be grand, eh?' he said, preparing to get out.
Levin himself felt inclined to stop at those little places, but, as they were near home, they were always within his reach and they were small, so that there was not room enough for three persons to shoot there.
So he stretched a point and said they would hardly find anything there.
When they came to a small marsh he wished to drive past it, but Oblonsky, with the practised eye of a sport man, noticed the marshy place from the road.
'Oughtn't we to go there?' he asked, pointing to the marsh.
'No, it was enjoyable all the same. You saw?' said Vasenka Veslovsky, climbing awkwardly into the cart with his gun and the peewit.
Suddenly the horses started, Levin knocked his head against the barrel of some one's gun, and there was a report.
What had happened was, that Vasenka Veslovsky when uncocking his gun had pulled one trigger while uncocking the other side.
Oblonsky shook his head and laughed reproachfully at Veslovsky.
But Levin had no heart to admonish him: for one thing because any reproach from him would appear to be provoked by the danger he had escaped and by the bump which had risen on his head and also because Veslovsky was at first so naively grieved, and then laughed so good-naturedly and contagiously at their general perturbation, that Levin could not help joining in the laugh.
'Now you go, and I will remain with the horses,' he said.
'Why don't you stop her?' shouted Oblonsky.
'She won't disturb them,' answered Levin, pleased with his dog and hurrying after her.
Laska became more and more intent on her pursuit, the nearer she got to the hummocks.
A small marsh bird only diverted her attention for an instant.
Levin shouted, feeling his heart beat more rapidly, and suddenly, as if some bar had been withdrawn from his strained sense of hearing, he lost the faculty of measuring distance, and was struck by sounds which reached him clearly but without any order.
He heard Oblonsky's steps and took them for the distant tramp of horses; he heard the crumbling of a bit of hummock on which he stepped and which broke off, pulling out the grass by the roots, and he took it for the noise of a snipe on the wing; behind him he heard too a sound of splashing for which he could not account.
Picking his way, he approached the dog.
Levin raised his gun, but just as he was taking aim the splashing sounded louder and nearer, mingled with Veslovsky's voice shouting strangely and loudly.
Levin knew he was aiming behind the snipe, but fired, nevertheless.
After making sure he had missed, he turned and saw that the trap and horses were no longer on the road but in the marsh.
'What the devil brings him here?' muttered Levin to himself, turning back to the vehicle. 'Why did you leave the road?' he asked drily, and calling the coachman, set to work to get the horses out.
Levin was vexed that he had been put off his shots, and that his horses had been led into the bog, and especially that neither Oblonsky nor Veslovsky (neither of whom knew anything about harness) helped him and the coachman to unharness the horses and get them out of the bog.
But when heated with the work, and seeing Veslovsky pulling at the splashboard so strenuously and zealously that he actually wrenched it off, Levin reproached himself with being influenced by his sentiments of the previous day and with treating Veslovsky too coldly, and he tried to efface his unfriendliness by particular courtesy.
Ce poulet va tomber jusqu'au fond de mes bottes,' [A good appetite! a good conscience! This chicken will go down to the bottom of my boots.] remarked Vasenka, who had brightened up again, repeating a French saying while he finished a second chicken.
I am Automedona'  wait and see how I will drive you!' he said, keeping hold of the reins, in reply to Levin who wanted him to let the coachman drive. 'No, I must expiate my sin, and besides, it's delightful on the box,' and he was off.
Levin was rather afraid Veslovsky would tire out the horses, especially the roan on the left, whom he did not know how to hold in; but he could not resist Veslovsky's high spirits, the songs he sang all the way while sitting on the box, the stories he told, and his representation of the English way of driving four-in-hand; and after lunch they were all in the best of spirits when they reached the Gvozdevo marsh.
Oblonsky evidently wanted the same thing, and on his face Levin noticed the preoccupation, which every true sportsman feels before the shooting begins, and also a little good-natured cunning, characteristic of him.
'Well then, gentlemen,' said Levin with a somewhat gloomy expression, pulling up his boots and examining his percussion caps, 'you see that sedge?' He pointed to a dark-green little island in an enormous half-mown wet meadow stretching along the right bank of the river.
'Well then, who goes to the left and who to the right?' asked Oblonsky. 'The space on the right is broader, so you two go there together, and I will keep to the left,' he added with affected indifference.
Levin knew Laska's method of search  careful and dubious; he knew it, and expected to see a flight of snipe.
'Veslovsky, walk beside me  beside me!' he whispered with bated breath to his comrade, who was splashing in the water behind him, and the direction of whose gun, after the accidental shot by the Kolpensky marsh, involuntarily interested Levin.
The expectation of finding snipe was so strong that the smacking sound of his heel as he drew it out of the rusty mud sounded to Levin like the cry of a bird, and he grasped the butt end of his gun firmly.
Bang!' he heard just above his ear.
Levin had barely time to turn, before he heard the cry of a snipe, then another, and a third, and about eight more rose one after the other.
Levin was not so lucky: he fired at the first snipe too near, and missed; he followed it with his gun when it had already risen, but at that instant another rose just at his feet and diverted his attention, and he missed again.
Oblonsky picked up his two snipe and looked with sparkling eyes at Levin.
'Well, now let's part,' he said, and limping with his left foot, and holding his gun ready, he whistled to his dog and went off in one direction.
Levin, if his first shots were unsuccessful, always became excited and annoyed, and shot badly all the rest of the day.
They kept rising before the dogs and at the very feet of the sportsmen, and Levin might have recovered himself; but the oftener he fired the more he disgraced himself before Veslovsky, who was puffing away merrily, in and out of range, never killing anything, but not in the least abashed thereby.
Levin hurried, grew impatient, and became more and more flurried, until at last he fired almost without hope of killing anything.
Her search became more and more indolent, and she looked round at the sportsmen as if in perplexity and with reproach.
Though there was little hope of finding as many birds in the unmown strips as on the mown part, Levin, having promised Oblonsky to meet him, went with his companion farther on over the mown and unmown strips.
Go, you'll find the way to the mill!' cried Levin, and on looking round was pleased to see Veslovsky making his way out of the marsh toward the peasants, stooping and stumbling with his weary feet and holding his gun at arm's length.
Levin badly wanted a drink of vodka and a bit of bread. He felt faint and could hardly drag his staggering legs out of the bog, and for an instant he was in doubt.
But the dog pointed. His weariness vanished, at once he went easily through the marsh toward the dog.
Just at his feet rose a snipe; he fired and killed it.
Levin fired, but that day he had no luck: he missed, and when he went to look for the bird he had killed, he could not find it.
He tramped all over the sedge, but Laska was incredulous of his having killed anything, and when he sent her to look for it, she only made a pretence and did not really search.
Even without Vasenka, whom he had blamed for his ill-luck, things went no better. Here, too, were plenty of birds, but Levin missed one after another.
The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes were wet through with perspiration and stuck to his body; his left boot, full of water, was heavy and made a smacking sound; down his face, grimy with powder, ran drops of sweat; a bitter taste was in his mouth, the smell of powder and rust was in his nose, and the perpetual cry of the snipe was in his ears; he could not touch the barrels of his gun, they were so hot; his heart thumped with short, quick beats; his hands trembled with excitement and his tired feet stumbled as he dragged them over the hummocks and through the bog; but still he went on and shot.
At last, after a disgraceful miss, he threw his gun, and hat on the ground.
'No! I must pull myself together,' he thought, picked up his gun and hat, called Laska to heel, and got out of the marsh.
When he reached a dry place he sat down on a hummock, took off his boot and emptied it, then went back to the marsh, drank a little of the rusty water, wetted the heated barrels and bathed his face and hands.
Feeling refreshed, he returned to the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved not to get flurried.
His finger pulled the trigger before he had taken aim.
He had only five birds in his bag when he came out of the marsh by the alder grove where he was to meet Oblonsky.
Before he saw him, he saw his dog.
He came toward Levin red and perspiring, with his shirt unbuttoned, still limping as before.
You have been firing a good deal!' he said with a merry smile.
But there was no need to ask, for he already saw the full bag.
One dog for two people is inconvenient,' said Oblonsky, to soften his triumph.
He sat in the middle of the room, holding with both hands to a bench, from which a soldier  a brother of the mistress of the house  was tugging him by his slime-covered boots, and he was laughing with his infectiously merry laugh.
A propos of Vasenka's repeated expressions of delight at the charm of the arrangements for the night, of the scent of hay, and of a broken cart (which he thought was broken, because its fore wheels had been removed), of the good-nature of the peasants who had treated him to vodka, and of the dogs which lay each at its master's feet, Oblonsky told them about the delights of a shooting party with Malthus at which he had been last summer. Malthus was a well-known railway magnate.
'I don't understand you,' said Levin, rising on his heap of hay. 'How is it that those people don't disgust you?
'Granted! But it is work in the sense that his activity yields results: railways.
'What is dishonourable is the acquisition by wrong means: by cunning,' said Levin, conscious that he could not clearly define the boundary between honesty and dishonesty; 'such as the profits made by banks  the acquisition of enormous wealth without work, just as in the days of the drink-monopolists,  only the form has changed. Le roi est mort, vive le roi!
He was obviously convinced of the truth of his own view and was therefore calm and deliberate. 'But you have not defined the boundary between honest and dishonest work.
I receive a bigger salary than my head clerk, though he knows the work better than I do; is that dishonest?'
'Well then, I'll tell you. That you receive for your work on the estate a profit, let's say of five thousand roubles, while our peasant host, work as he may, cannot get more than fifty, is just as dishonest as my receiving more than my head-clerk, or Malthus getting more than a railway mechanic.
Why do we eat and drink, go shooting and do no work, while he is always, always working?' said Vasenka Veslovsky, evidently for the first time in his life thinking of this, and therefore speaking quite genuinely.
A covert hostility had sprung up between the two brothers-in-law of late, as if being married to two sisters had evoked a sense of rivalry as to which of them would make the best of his life, and now this hostility found expression in the personal tone the discussion was assuming.
'Give it to this peasant; he won't refuse.'
'Yes, that is a sophistical explanation,' put in Veslovsky. 'Oh, our host!' he said, addressing a peasant who had opened the creaking barn doors and was entering.
She won't bite?' he asked, cautiously stepping with bare feet.
'Well, then I'll go alone,' said Veslovsky, rising quickly and putting on his boots.
'Isn't he a fine fellow?' said Oblonsky when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had shut the doors after him.
It seemed to him that he had expressed his thoughts and feelings as clearly as he could, yet both the others  sincere and not stupid men  had agreed that he was comforting himself with sophistry.
The words he had used when he said he was acting justly in a negative sense occupied his mind. 'Is it possible that one can act justly only in a negative sense?' he asked himself.
Don't you hear the laughter and his voice?
'Maybe you are stopping here on principle?' said Oblonsky, smiling, as he searched in the dark for his cap.
'D'you know, you will bring trouble on yourself,' said Oblonsky, having found his cap and getting up.
A man should be independent  he has his own masculine interests.
A man must be manly,' said Oblonsky, opening the door.
'Is that to say, he should court the maid-servants?' asked Levin.
'Perhaps!' said Levin drily, and turned on his side. 'To-morrow one should start early, and I shall wake no one but shall start at daybreak.'
Charmante! A perfect Gretchen, and I have already made her acquaintance.
Really, very pretty!' he said in such an approving way, as if she had been made pretty specially for him, and he was satisfied with the maker.
Levin pretended to be asleep, but Oblonsky, having put on his slippers and lit a cigar, left the barn, and their voices soon died away.
He heard his horses chewing hay; then how the master and his eldest son got ready and rode away for the night to pasture their horses; then how the soldier settled down to sleep on the other side of the barn with his nephew, their host's little son; he heard the boy in his treble voice imparting to his uncle his impressions of the dogs, which seemed to him terrible and enormous; then how the boy asked what those dogs were going to catch, and he heard how the soldier replied in a hoarse and sleepy voice that the sportsmen would go next day to the marshes and fire guns, adding, to stop the questioning: 'Sleep, Vaska, sleep, or else look out!' Soon the soldier himself began to snore, and all was still except for the neighing of the horses and the cry of snipe.
I am not manly with her, I have grown effeminate...
Through his sleep he heard laughter and Veslovsky's and Oblonsky's merry talk.
He opened his eyes for an instant: they were standing chatting in the open doorway, brightly lit up by the moon which had now risen.
Oblonsky was saying something about the freshness of a girl, comparing her to a fresh kernel just taken from its shell; and Veslovsky was laughing his merry infectious laugh, and repeating something that had probably been told him by a peasant: 'You'd better strive for a wife of your own!'
WAKING AT EARLY DAWN Levin tried to rouse his companions.
Having put on his boots, taken his gun, and carefully opened the creaking barn doors, Levin went out into the street.
'Why have you risen so early, my dear?' said his aged hostess, who came out of her hut, addressing him cordially as a good old acquaintance.
Carefully stepping with her bare sunburnt feet the old woman showed him the way and lifted for him one of the bars enclosing the threshing-floor.
He did not wish the sun to rise before he reached the marsh.
The moon, which was still giving light when first he went out, now shone only like quicksilver; the streak of dawn, previously so noticeable, now had to be looked for; what had been vague spots on the distant field were now clearly visible.
Still invisible in the absence of the sun, the dew on the tall scented hemp, from which the male plants had already been weeded out, wetted Levin's legs and his blouse to above his belt.
A bee flew past his ear, whistling like a bullet.
Laska walked beside her master, seeking permission to run forward and looking around.
When he had passed the sleeping peasants and reached the first wet place, Levin examined his percussion caps and allowed Laska to go.
One of the horses, a well-fed three-year-old chestnut, on seeing the dog, started, lifted his tail, and snorted.
He stroked her, and whistled as a sign that she might now set off.
Joyful and preoccupied, Laska started running across the bog, which swayed beneath her feet.
On entering the marsh Laska at once perceived, mingled with the various familiar smells of roots, marsh, grass, and rust, and with the unfamiliar smell of horse dung, the scent of the birds  those strong-smelling birds that excited her most  spreading all over the place.
Hardly aware of her legs under her, Laska ran at a strained gallop, which she could cut short at a bound should occasion arise, to the right, away from the morning breeze which blew from the east, and then turned to windward.
After inhaling the air with distended nostrils she knew at once that not their scent only but they themselves were there, before her, not one only but many of them.
They were there, but she could not yet determine exactly where.
To decide this she began working round in a circle, when her master's voice disturbed her. 'Laska!
Here!' he said, pointing to the other side.
She stood still, as if asking him whether it would not be better to continue as she had begun; but he repeated his command in a stern voice, pointing to a group of hummocks covered with water where there could not be anything.
Now that he was not hindering her, she knew what to do, and without looking where she was stepping, stumbling over hummocks and getting into the water, but surmounting the obstacles with her flexible strong legs, she began the circle which was to make everything clear.
Their scent came to her more and more pungently, more and more distinctly, and all at once it became quite clear to her that one of them was here behind a hummock, five steps in front. She stopped and her whole body grew rigid.
The shortness of her legs prevented her seeing anything before her, but from the scent she could tell that it was not five paces off.
Her mouth was slightly open and her ears erect.
One of her ears had turned back while she ran, she breathed heavily but cautiously, and yet more cautiously looked toward her master, turning her eyes rather than her head.
He, with his familiar face but ever terrible eyes, came stumbling over the hummocks, but unusually slowly, she thought.
So it seemed to her, though in reality he was running.
Noticing Laska's peculiar manner of searching, as lowering her body almost to the ground she appeared to be dragging her broad hind paws, he knew that she was pointing at snipe, and while running up to her he prayed inwardly for success, especially with the first bird.
Having come close up to her he looked beyond, and from his height saw with his eyes what she had found with her nose.
In the space between the hummocks, at a distance of about a sazhen, he could see a snipe.
'But I can't go,' thought she. 'Where should I go to?
From here I scent them, but if I go forward I shall not know what I am doing, nor where they are nor who they are.' But now he pushed her with his knee, saying in an excited whisper, 'Seize it, Laska!
'Well, if he wishes it, I will, but I can no longer answer for anything,'. thought Laska, and rushed forward at full tilt between the hummocks.
By the time Levin had turned toward it, it had already gone far: but his shot reached it.
'Now, things will go right,' thought Levin, putting the warm fat snipe into his bag. 'Eh, Laska dear, will things go right?'
The moon had lost all her brilliancy and gleamed like a little cloud in the sky. Not a single star was any longer visible.
Crows were flying to the fields, and a barefooted boy was already driving the horses toward an old man, who had got up from beneath his coat and sat scratching himself.
A boy ran up to Levin.
'Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!' he shouted, following Levin from afar.
And Levin felt increased pleasure in killing three snipe one after another within sight of this little boy, who expressed his approval.
Tired, hungry, and happy, Levin returned to his lodging toward ten o'clock, having tramped some thirty versts and bringing nineteen red-fleshed birds, besides a duck tied to his girdle, as there was no room for it in his bag.
'Wait a bit  wait a bit! I know there are nineteen,' said Levin, for a second time counting his snipe and double-snipe, which no longer had the important appearance they bore when on the wing but were twisted, dried up, smeared with congealed blood, and had heads bent to one side.
He was also pleased that on his return he found a messenger had already arrived from Kitty with a note.
'She has come to see me and finds me perfectly well, and we have got her to stay till your return.
These two joys, his successful shooting and the news from his wife, were so great that two small unpleasantnesses which occurred after the shooting were easy to disregard.
'It was overdriven yesterday, Constantine Dmitrich,' he said. 'Why, it was driven hard for ten versts!'
The other unpleasantness, which for a moment upset his good-humour, but about which he afterwards laughed heartily, was that of all the provisions that Kitty had provided so lavishly that it had appeared impossible to eat them up in a week, nothing was left!
Returning tired and hungry from his sport, Levin so vividly anticipated the pies that on approaching his lodging he seemed to smell and taste them  just as Laska scented game  and he immediately ordered Philip to serve them.
'He has an appetite!' said Oblonsky, laughing and pointing to Vasenka Veslovsky. 'I don't suffer from lack of appetite, but he's quite surprising...'
Levin was so annoyed that he said crossly: 'Something might have been left for me!' and he felt inclined to cry. 'Well then, draw the birds and stuff them with nettles,' said he in a trembling voice to Philip, trying not to look at Veslovsky; 'and ask at least for some milk for me.'
Later on, when he had satisfied his hunger with the milk, he felt ashamed of having shown annoyance to a stranger, and he began laughing at his hungry irritation.
Veslovsky now sang, now recalled with relish his adventures with the peasants who entertained him with vodka and said 'No offence!'; and now his night exploits with hazel nuts, the maid-servant, and the peasant who asked him whether he was married, and learning that he was not said: 'Don't hanker after other men's wives, but above all things strive to get one of your own!' These words particularly amused Veslovsky.
He was glad not only to feel no hostility such as he had felt at home toward Vasenka Veslovsky; but on the contrary to feel quite friendly toward him.
NEXT MORNING AT TEN O'CLOCK Levin, having made the round of his farm, knocked at the door of Vasenka's room.
'Entrez!' shouted Veslovsky. 'Excuse me  I have only just finished my ablutions,' he said smiling, as he stood before Levin in his underclothes.
When they had walked round the garden, visited the stables, and even done some gymnastics together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to the house with his guest and entered the drawing-room with him.
He again thought he noticed something in the smile and conquering air with which the visitor addressed Kitty.
The birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which they promised him, but in which he still could not believe, so extraordinary did it seem, appeared to him on the one hand such an immense and therefore impossible happiness, and on the other such a mysterious event, that this pretended knowledge of what was going to happen and consequent preparations as for something ordinary, something produced by human beings, seemed to him an indignity and a degradation.
But the Princess did not understand his feelings and attributed his unwillingness to think and speak about it to thoughtlessness and indifference, and therefore gave him no peace.
She was now commissioning Oblonsky to see about a house, and called Levin to her.
Do as you think best,' he said.
Why, do you want me to frighten her?
You know, only this spring Nataly Golitsin died because she had a bad doctor.'
'I will do whatever you tell me to,' he replied morosely.
The Princess began telling him, but he did not listen to her.
Though this talk with the Princess upset him, it was not that but what he saw by the samovar which made him morose.
'No, this is impossible,' he thought, glancing occasionally at Vasenka, who was leaning toward Kitty and saying something, with his handsome smile, and at Kitty, blushing and agitated.
There was something impure in Vasenka's attitude, his look and his smile.
Levin even saw something impure in Kitty's pose and smile; and again the light faded from his eyes.
Again, as on the previous occasion, he suddenly, without the least interval, felt thrown from the height of happiness, peace, and dignity into an abyss of despair, malevolence, and degradation. Again everyone and everything became revolting to him.
'Well then, Princess, let it be just as you think best,' he said, turning away.
[A quotation from Pushkin's Boris Godunov.] said Oblonsky banteringly, evidently alluding not only to the Princess's conversation, but also to the cause of Levin's agitation, which he had observed. 'How late you are to-day, Dolly!'
Vasenka only rose for a moment, and with the absence of politeness to women which is characteristic of modern young men, barely bowed and again continued his conversation, laughing at something.
This conversation was unpleasant to Kitty and upset her, both by the subject itself and by the tone in which it was carried on, but especially because she already knew the effect it would have on her husband.
But she was too simple and innocent to know how to stop it, or even how to conceal the superficial pleasure which this young man's evident attentions caused her.
Whatever she did, she knew, would be noticed by her husband and would all be construed into something wrong.
And really when she asked Dolly what was the matter with Masha, and Vasenka  waiting for this uninteresting conversation to finish  gazed indifferently at Dolly, her question seemed to Levin a piece of unnatural and disgusting cunning.
She had been going, out of politeness, to ask Vasenka whether he would go with them, but refrained. 'Where are you going, Kostya?' she asked her husband with a guilty look as he passed by with resolute steps.
This guilty look confirmed all his suspicions.
'The mechanic arrived during my absence and I have not yet seen him,' he answered, without looking at her.
He went downstairs, but had not had time to leave his study before he heard his wife's familiar footsteps following him with imprudent rapidity.
'What is it?' he asked drily. 'We are busy.'
'Excuse me,' she said addressing the German mechanic, 'I have a few words to say to my husband.'
Levin did not answer him but went out with his wife.
'Well, what have you to say to me?' he asked in French.
He did not look her in the face and did not notice that she (in her condition) stood with her whole face twitching, and had a pitiful, crushed appearance.
'I... I want to tell you that it's impossible to live like this  it's torture!' she muttered.
'The servants are there, in the pantry,' he said angrily; 'don't make a scene.'
In the garden they came upon a man weeding a path, and without any longer considering that the man saw her tear-stained eyes and his excited face, or that they looked like people running away from some calamity, they went on with rapid feet, feeling that they must speak out and convince each other, must be alone together, and thereby both escape from the torment both were experiencing.
Why?' she asked, when they had at last reached a secluded seat at the corner of the lime-tree avenue.
'Only tell me this: was there something improper, impure, degradingly horrid in his tone?' he said, standing in front of her in the same attitude as on that night, with fists pressing his chest.
'There was,' she said in a trembling voice. 'But, Kostya, do you really not see that I am not to blame?
Why did he come?
How happy we were!' she said, choking with sobs that shook the whole of her expanded body.
She was walking up and down the room and speaking angrily to a little girl who stood howling in a corner:
'You'll stand in that corner all day, and will have your dinner alone, and you will not see a single doll, and I won't have a new frock made for you!' she was saying, unable to think of any more punishments for the child.
'Oh, she is a horrid child!' she cried, addressing Levin. 'Where do these vile tendencies in her come from?'
'But what has she done?' asked Levin rather indifferently. He wanted to consult her about his own affairs, and was annoyed at having come at an inopportune moment.
'She and Grisha went away among the raspberry canes and there... I can't even tell what she did.
One regrets Miss Elliot a thousand times  this one does not look after the children; she's only a machine...
'That proves nothing; it is not a bad tendency but just mischievousness,' Levin comforted her.
And by the tone of her question Levin knew that it would be easy for him to tell her what he meant to say.
Stop in the corner!' she said turning to Masha, who noticing a scarcely perceptible smile on her mother's face was turning round. 'The world would say he has behaved as all young men behave.
Il fait la cour  une jeune et jolie femme, [He pays court to a young and pretty woman.] and a Society husband should be merely flattered by it.'
Consider!' she went on, laughing. 'You can go to Fanny now,' she said to Masha.
'No, if you like I will tell Steve and he will take him away.
Certainly, he does not suit your household...'
It will be a pleasure for me, a real pleasure,' said Levin with sparkling eyes. 'Come, forgive her, Dolly!
She won't do it again,' he pleaded, referring to the small culprit, who had not gone to Fanny but stood hesitatingly before her mother, looking up from under her brows, expecting and trying to catch her eye.
Dolly looked at her.
The little girl burst into sobs and buried her face in her mother's lap, and Dolly placed her thin tender hand on the child's head.
'What is there in common between us and him?' thought Levin, as he went in search of Veslovsky.
Passing through the hall he ordered the calche to be harnessed to drive to the station.
'He has gone to his room.'
Levin found Vasenka, who had unpacked his portmanteau and spread out his new songs, trying on a pair of leggings and preparing for a ride.
Whether there was something unusual in Levin's face, or whether Vasenka himself felt that 'le petit brin de cour' which he had started was out of place in this family, he was embarrassed (as far as is permissible to a man in Society) by Levin's entry.
'Yes, it's much cleaner,' said Vasenka, placing his fat foot on a chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling good-naturedly.
He was certainly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him and ashamed of himself as a host when he noticed the shyness of Vasenka's look.
'I wished...' He stopped, but suddenly remembering Kitty and all that had happened, he said, looking Veslovsky firmly in the eyes: 'I have ordered the horses to be harnessed for you.'
'It happens that I am expecting visitors,' replied Levin more rapidly, breaking off the splintered bits of the stick with his strong fingers. 'Or no, I am not expecting visitors and nothing has happened, yet I request you to leave.
'I ask you for an explanation,' he said with dignity, having at last understood.
'I can't give you an explanation,' said Levin softly and slowly, trying to control the trembling of his jaw, 'and it is better for you not to ask.'
As the splinters were now all broken off, Levin grasped the thick ends in his fingers and split the stick, carefully catching a piece as it fell.
Probably the sight of those strained arms, those muscles he had felt that morning when doing gymnastics, and the gleaming eyes, low voice and trembling jaws, convinced Vasenka more than the words.
He shrugged his shoulders, smiled contemptuously, and bowed.
The shrug and smile did not irritate Levin. 'What else is there for him to do?' he thought.
'What is this nonsense?' said Oblonsky, when he had heard from his friend that he was being driven out of the house, and had found Levin in the garden, where he was walking while awaiting the departure of his visitor. 'Mais c'est ridicule!
But it's the height of absurdity.] Why, do you imagine that if a young man...'
But the place where the fly had stung Levin was evidently still sore, for he again grew pale when Oblonsky wished to refer to his reason, and hastily interrupted him.
But I don't think it will grieve him much to go away, and his presence is unpleasant to me and to my wife.'
'But he feels insulted! Et puis, c'est ridicule!'
Levin turned away from him quickly and went far down one of the avenues, where he continued walking up and down alone.
Soon he heard the rattle of the tarantas, and through the trees saw Vasenka, seated on hay (unluckily the tarantas had no seat), with the Scotch bonnet on his head, jolting over the ruts as he was driven down the other avenue.
He himself felt not only that he was in the highest degree ridiculous, but quite guilty and disgraced; but recalling what he and his wife had suffered, and asking himself how he would act another time, he answered that he would do just the same again.
Dolly, who had inherited her father's gift of putting things humorously, made Varenka collapse with laughter when she related for the third or fourth time, with ever fresh humorous additions, how she was just putting on some new ribbons in the visitor's honour, and was about to go into the drawing-room, when suddenly she heard the clatter of the old cart.
Who but Vasenka, with his Scotch bonnet and his songs and his leggings, sitting on the hay!'
She was very sorry to grieve her sister and to do anything that was unpleasant to Levin: she felt that they were right in not wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky, but felt it her duty to visit Anna and show her that the altered circumstances could not change her own feelings toward her.
Not to depend on the Levins for that journey, Dolly sent to the village to hire horses; but Levin hearing of it came and reproached her.
Even if it were unpleasant it would be still more unpleasant for me if you did not use my horses,' he said. 'You never told me definitely that you were going.
Dolly had to agree, and on the appointed day Levin had four horses ready for his sister-in-law, as well as a relay  having made it up of farm and riding horses  not at all a handsome team, but one able to get her to her destination in a day.
As horses were also required for the Princess, who was leaving, and for the midwife, it was inconvenient to Levin; but he could not be so inhospitable as to allow Dolly to hire horses while staying with him. Besides, he knew that the twenty roubles she would have had to pay for the journey were of importance to her, and he felt her distressing financial embarrassments as if they had been his own.
The road was good, the calche comfortable, the horses ran merrily, and on the box beside the coachman instead of a footman sat an office clerk whom Levin sent with her for safety.
After drinking tea at the prosperous peasant's house where Levin had stopped when on his way to Sviyazhsky's, and conversing with the women about their children and with the old man about Count Vronsky, of whom he spoke very highly, Dolly continued her journey at ten o'clock.
At home her care of the children never gave her leisure to think, but now, during this four hours' drive, all the thoughts she had repressed crowded suddenly into her mind, and she reviewed her whole life from all sides as she had never done before.
Her thoughts seemed strange to her.
At first she thought of the children, about whom, though the Princess and especially Kitty (she had greater faith in Kitty) had promised to look after them, she still felt anxious. 'If only Masha does not get into mischief again, or a horse does not kick Grisha, and if only Lily's digestion does not get more upset.'
But then questions of the present began to be replaced by those of the immediate future. She began thinking that she would have to move into another house in Moscow for the winter, have the drawing-room furniture re-covered, and a new winter coat made for the eldest girl.
Then came problems of a more remote future: how she should start her children in the world. 'With the girls it will be comparatively easy,' she thought, 'but how about the boys?
And it occurred to her how inaccurate it is to say that woman's curse is the bringing forth of children. 'Travail, that's nothing  but pregnancy is torture,' she thought, with her last pregnancy and the death of her infant in mind.
And she recalled a talk she had had with a young woman at the halting-place.
In answer to the question whether she had any children, the good-looking young peasant wife had cheerfully replied:
'I had one girl, but God released me. I buried her in Lent.'
The old man has plenty of grandchildren as it is.
This answer had seemed horrible to Dolly, despite the good-natured sweetness of the young woman's looks, but now she could not help recalling it.
'Altogether,' she thought, looking back at the whole of her life during those fifteen years of wedlock, 'pregnancy, sickness, dullness of mind, indifference to everything, and above all disfigurement.
Even Kitty  young, pretty Kitty  how much plainer she has become! And I when I am pregnant become hideous, I know.
Dolly shuddered at the mere thought of the pain she had endured from sore nipples, from which she had suffered with almost every baby. 'Then the children's illnesses, that continued anxiety; then their education, nasty tendencies,' (she recalled little Masha's delinquency among the raspberry canes), 'lessons, Latin...
And above all, the death of these children...' And once more the cruel memory rose that always weighed on her mother-heart: the death of her last baby, a boy who died of croup; his funeral, the general indifference shown to the little pink coffin, and her own heartrending, lonely grief at the sight of that pale little forehead with the curly locks on the temples, and of the open, surprised little mouth visible in the coffin at the instant before they covered it with the pink lid ornamented with a gold lace cross.
Again she remembered what the young woman had said. Again the recollection was repulsive to her, but she could not help admitting that there was a measure of crude truth in the words.
'Is it much further, Michael?' she asked the clerk, to dispel the thoughts that frightened her.
All the faces turned toward her seemed to Dolly to be healthy and bright, mocking her with their joy in life. 'Everybody lives, everybody enjoys living,' Dolly continued her reflections when, after passing the peasant women and having reached the top of the incline, they were going at a trot, the old calche comfortably swaying on its soft springs, 'and I, released as from a prison, from the world that is killing me with its worries, have only now collected my thoughts for a moment.
Am I better than she?
In what is she to blame?
I don't even now know whether I did well to listen to her at that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow.
I need him,' she thought of her husband, 'and I put up with him.
I was still attractive then, still had my good looks,' she went on, feeling that she wanted to see herself in a glass.
She had a small travelling looking-glass in her bag, and felt inclined to take it out; but glancing at the backs of the coachman and the clerk who sat swaying beside him, she knew she would feel ashamed if one of them chanced to look round, and she did not take it out.
Yet even without looking in the glass she thought it might not be too late even now. She remembered Koznyshev, who was particularly amiable to her; Steve's friend the good-natured Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children when they had scarlet fever and who was in love with her; and then there was a very young man who considered  so her husband told her as a joke  that she was the handsomest of the three sisters.
And the most passionate and impossible romances occurred to Dolly's fancy. 'Anna has acted excellently, and I at any rate shall not reproach her at all.
She is happy, she is making another happy and is not dragged down as I am, but she is no doubt as fresh, clever, and frank as ever,' she thought; and a roguish smile puckered her lips, chiefly because while thinking of Anna's romance she invented an almost similar romance for herself with an imaginary, collective man who was in love with her.
Like Anna, she confessed everything to her husband, and Oblonsky's surprise and embarrassment at the announcement made her smile.
Wrapped in such dreams she reached the turning from the high road, which led to Vozdvizhensk.
The clerk wished to get down, but then, changing his mind, shouted authoritatively and beckoned to a peasant.
The curly-headed old man, with a piece of bast tied round his head, his rounded back dark with perspiration, increased his speed, approached the calche and put his sunburnt arm on the mud-guard.
To the Count's?' he repeated.
'Are they at home, my good man?' said Dolly vaguely, not knowing how to speak of Anna even to a peasant.
'I expect so,' said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot to the other, leaving in the dust a clear imprint of it with its five toes. 'I expect so,' he repeated, evidently desiring a talk.
'I tell you it's just there, where you come out,' and he went on rubbing his hand along the mud-guard of the calche.
'Could I get a job, harvesting?' he asked.
Here they are themselves!' cried the man, pointing to four persons on horseback and two in a char-a-banc coming along the road.
It was Vronsky with his jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and Princess Barbara with Sviyazhsky in the char-a-banc.
She rode quietly, on a small sturdy English cob with a close-cropped mane and short tail.
Dolly was struck by the beauty of her head with locks of black hair which had escaped from under her top hat, her full shoulders and fine waist in the black riding-habit, and her whole quiet graceful bearing.
For a moment she thought it improper for Anna to be riding on horseback.
In Dolly's mind the idea of horse-riding for women was connected with youthful coquetry, which in her opinion was unsuitable to a woman in Anna's position; but when she saw her closer she at once became reconciled to Anna's riding.
Despite her elegance, everything about Anna  her bearing, clothes and movements  was so simple, quiet, and dignified that nothing could seem more natural.
At Anna's side, on a heated bay cavalry horse, stretching out his fat legs and evidently admiring himself, rode Vasenka Veslovsky, wearing the Scotch bonnet with waving ribbons, and Dolly could not repress a merry smile on recognizing him.
He was on a thoroughbred dark bay, which was obviously heated by galloping, and he was using the reins to hold it in.
Behind him rode a short man dressed as a jockey.
Anna's face immediately brightened into a joyful smile when she recognized Dolly in the little figure pressed back in a corner of the old calche.
She gave an exclamation, started in her saddle and touched her horse into a gallop.
Riding up to the calche she jumped unaided from the horse and, holding up her habit, ran toward Dolly.
You cannot imagine how delighted I am!' she cried, now pressing her face to Dolly's and kissing her, now leaning back to gaze smilingly at her.
'What joy, Alexis!' she said, turning to Vronsky, who had dismounted and was walking toward them.
Vronsky, taking off his grey top hat, approached Dolly.
'You can have no idea how pleased we are that you have come;' he said, putting peculiar emphasis into his words, while a smile exposed his strong white teeth.
Vasenka Veslovsky, without dismounting, raised his cap and welcomed the visitor, joyously waving his ribbons above his head.
'Oh!' said Dolly, and her face involuntarily expressed displeasure.
The Princess Barbara was her husband's aunt, she had long known her and did not respect her.
She knew that the Princess Barbara had all her life been a hanger-on to various rich relatives, but that she  a relation of Dolly's husband  should now be living in the house of Vronsky, a perfect stranger to her, offended Dolly.
Anna noticed Dolly's expression, became confused, blushed, let her habit slip out of her hands, and stumbled over it.
He asked how his friend the crank was getting on with his young wife, and having glanced at the ill-matched horses and the patched mud-guard of the calche, offered the ladies seats in the char-a-bane.
'I will go in that vehicle,' he said. 'My horse is a quiet one, and the Princess drives splendidly.'
'No, stay as you are,' said Anna, who had also come up, 'and we two will go in the calche,' and giving Dolly her arm she led her away.
Dolly was dazzled by the elegant equipage of a kind she had never seen, by the beautiful horses and the elegant, brilliant persons about her.
But what struck her most was the change that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew and loved.
Another woman less observant, who had not known Anna before, especially one who had not thought the thoughts that were in Dolly's mind on the way, would not have noticed anything peculiar in Anna.
But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty which only comes to women in moments of love, and which she now found in Anna's face.
Everything in that face: the definiteness of the dimples on cheeks and chin, the curve of her lips, the smile that seemed to flutter around her face, the light in her eyes, the grace and swiftness of her movements, the fullness of her voice, even the manner in which she replied  half-crossly, half-kindly  to Veslovsky, who asked permission to ride her cob that he might teach it to lead with the right leg when galloping  everything about her was peculiarly attractive, and she seemed to know it and to be glad of it.
Anna was abashed by the attentively inquiring look Dolly bent upon her; Dolly, after Sviyazhsky's remark about the 'vehicle,' felt involuntarily ashamed of the ramshackle old calche, in which Anna had taken a seat beside her.
The clerk, to hide his embarrassment, bustled about, helping the ladies in, but Philip became morose and made up his mind not to be imposed upon by this eternal superiority.
He smiled ironically as he glanced at the raven trotter of the char-a-banc, deciding that that horse was good for nothing but a promenade, and could not do its forty versts on a hot day at one go.
'Glad they are: have not met for a long time!' said the curly-haired old man with the piece of bast tied round his head.
Is that a woman in breeches?' cried one, pointing to Vasenka Veslovsky, who was getting into the side-saddle.
'No, it's a man.
See how easily he jumped up!'
'What chance of a sleep to-day?' said the old man blinking at the sun. 'It's too late!
ANNA WAS LOOKING AT DOLLY'S THIN WAN FACE with its dust-filled wrinkles, and wishing to tell her just what she thought: that Dolly looked thinner and worse. But remembering that her own looks had improved and that Dolly's eyes had told her so, she sighed and began talking about herself.
'You are looking at me,' she said, 'and wondering whether I can be happy, placed as I am?
I have wakened up! I have lived through sufferings and terrors, but for a long time past  especially since we came here  I have been happy!...' she said, looking at Dolly timidly and with a questioning smile.
'I am so glad!' answered Dolly, smiling, but in a colder tone than she intended. 'I am very glad for your sake.
Dolly wanted to tell Anna what she had been thinking that morning, but for some reason it now seemed out of place.
What are all those buildings? Quite a town!' she asked, to change the subject, pointing to the red and green roofs visible above a living green wall of acacias and lilacs.
But Anna did not answer her.
What?' she asked.
'I imagine...' Dolly began; but at that moment Vasenka Veslovsky, who had got the cob to lead with the right foot, galloped past in his short jacket, bumping heavily on the leathers of the side-saddle.
'It goes all right, Anna Arkadyevna!' he shouted.
Anna did not even glance at him; but it still seemed to Dolly out of place to begin to discuss this big subject in the calche, so she briefly replied:
'I don't take any view. I always loved you, and if one loves, one loves the whole person as he or she is, and not as one might wish them to be.'
Anna, turning her eyes away from her friend and screwing them up (this was a new habit of hers and unfamiliar to Dolly), grew thoughtful, trying thoroughly to grasp the meaning of the remark.
Having evidently understood it in the sense she wished, she glanced at Dolly.
'If you had any sins,' she said, 'they would all be forgiven you for coming here and for those words!'
And Dolly noticed that tears had started to her eyes.
What a lot of them there are!' said she after a moment's silence, repeating her question.
He is very fond of this estate, and  a thing I never expected of him  he is quite enthusiastic in managing the place.
But of course his is such a talented nature!
Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly!
He is not only not bored, but passionately engrossed in his occupations.
He has grown into a first-rate, prudent landlord, as I recognize; in farming matters he is even stingy, but only in farming.
Where it is a question of thousands he does not count them,' she said, with that joyous sly smile with which women often speak of the secret characteristics, discovered by them alone, of the man they love. 'Do you see that big building?
That is his hobby just now.
And do you know why he started it?
The peasants asked him to let them some meadows at a reduced rent, I think, and he refused, and I reproached him with being stingy.
Of course it was not that alone, but one thing with another caused him to start that hospital, to show, you know, that he is not stingy.
It was his grandfather's, and it has not been altered at all on the outside.'
Where is the Count?' she asked the two elegant footmen who had rushed out. 'Ah, there he is!' she went on, seeing Vronsky and Veslovsky coming out to meet her.
Vronsky asked in French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for her answer he once more welcomed Dolly, and this time he kissed her hand. 'The large room with the balcony, I should think.'
Well, let's go in,' said Anna, who had given her favourite horse the sugar the footman had brought.
'Et vous oubliez votre devoir,'[And you forget your duty.] said she to Veslovsky, who was also standing in the portico.
'Pardon! J'en ai tout plein les poches,' [Pardon me, my pockets are full of it.] he answered with a smile, plunging his fingers into his waistcoat pocket.
'Mais vous venez trop tard,' [But you have come too late.] she said, wiping with her handkerchief the hand which the horse had wetted as it took the sugar.
That's impossible.' 'I have promised... and the children,' answered Dolly, feeling embarrassed because she had to get her bag out of the calche and because she knew her face was covered with dust.
And this room needing an apology was full of luxuries, such as Dolly had never lived among, which reminded her of the best hotels abroad.
'Well, dearest! How happy I am!' said Anna, who in her riding-habit had sat down for a moment beside Dolly.
'Tell me about yourselves. I meet Steve in passing, but he can't tell me about the children.
Grown a big girl, I suppose?'
'Yes, quite big,' answered Dolly shortly, and was herself surprised that she could talk so coldly about her children. 'We are very comfortable at the Levins',' she added.
You know Steve and Alexis are old and great friends,' she added and suddenly blushed.
But really, dear, I am so glad to see you,' said Anna, kissing her again. 'You have not yet told me how and what you think about me, and I want to know everything.
All she saw when driving up to the house and passing through it, and now in her room, gave her the impression of abundance and elegance and of that novel European luxury which she had read about in English novels, but had never yet seen in Russia in the country.
The smart lady's maid with hair stylishly done, and wearing a dress more fashionable than Dolly's, who came to offer her services, was as new and expensive as everything else in the room.
Dolly found her politeness, tidiness, and attention pleasant, but did not feel at ease with her; she was ashamed to let her see the patched dressing jacket, which as ill-luck would have it she had brought by mistake.
She was ashamed of the very patches and darns on which she at home prided herself.
At home it was clear that six jackets required twenty-four arshins of nainsook at sixty-five kopeks, which comes to more than fifteen roubles, besides the trimmings and the work; and she had saved all that.
But before the maid she felt not exactly ashamed but uncomfortable.
Dolly felt much relieved when Annushka, whom she had known a long time, came into the room.
The smart maid had to go to her mistress, and Annushka remained with Dolly.
Dolly noticed that she wanted to express her opinion of her mistress's position, and especially of the Count's love of and devotion to Anna, but Dolly carefully stopped her whenever she began to speak about that subject.
'I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; she is dearer to me than anything.
And how he seems to love...'
Anna was now no longer embarrassed. She was free and at her ease.
Dolly saw that she had quite got over the impression produced by her arrival, and had adopted a superficial tone of equanimity which seemed to close the door that led to the compartment where her feelings and intimate thoughts were kept.
'Well, and how is your little girl, Anna?' asked Dolly.
'Annie?' (so she called her daughter Anna).
Would you like to see her?
Come, I'll show her to you...
I've had such trouble with the nurses,' she began. 'We had an Italian wet nurse for her.
We wanted to send her back, but the child is so used to her that we are still keeping her.'
'Well, and how have you arranged... ?' Dolly began, meaning to ask what name the little girl would bear; but seeing a sudden frown on Anna's face she changed the question and said: 'How have you arranged?
Have you already weaned her?'
You wished to ask about her name? Am I not right?
That is, her name is Karenina,' said Anna, screwing up her eyes till only the meeting lashes could be seen. 'However, we will talk about all that later,' said she, suddenly brightening.
'Come! I will show her to you.
When they entered the little girl was sitting in her chemise in a little arm-chair at a table, having her dinner of broth which she was spilling all over her little chest.
On hearing Anna's voice a smart tall Englishwoman with an unpleasant face and an impure look came into the room, rapidly shaking her fair curls, and at once began excusing herself, though Anna had not accused her of anything.
The dark-browed, dark-haired, rosy little girl, with her firm ruddy little body covered with goose flesh, pleased Dolly very much, despite the severe expression with which she regarded the new visitor; she even felt a little envious of the child's healthy appearance.
The way the little girl crawled also greatly pleased Dolly.
Not one of her children had crawled like that.
The baby looked wonderfully sweet when she was put down on the carpet, with her little frock tucked up behind.
Glancing round at the grown-up people with her large radiant black eyes, like a little animal, evidently pleased that she was being admired, she smiled, and turning out her feet, energetically supported herself on her hands, drew her lower limbs forward, and then again advanced her hands.
Only by the fact that a nice woman would not have accepted a post in such an irregular household as Anna's could Dolly explain to herself how Anna, with her knowledge of character, could have engaged for her little girl such an unpleasant and fast Englishwoman.
Besides that, from a few words she heard, Dolly at once understood that Anna, the wet nurse, the head nurse, and the baby did not get on with one another, and that the mother's appearance was not a usual occurrence.
Anna wished to get the baby her toy and could not find it.
'I feel it hard sometimes that I am as it were superfluous here,' said Anna on leaving the nursery, lifting her train to avoid the toys that lay beside the door. 'It was quite different with the first one.'
You know I have seen him, Serezha,' said Anna, screwing up her eyes as if peering at something far off. 'However, we will talk about that afterwards.
Would you believe it, I am just like a starving woman to whom a full meal has been served, and who does not know what to begin on first?
I must speak out about everything. Yes, I must give you a sketch of the people you will meet here,' she began.
'I will begin with the woman: Princess Barbara.
You know her, and I know your and Steve's opinion of her.
Steve says the one aim of her life is to prove her superiority to Aunt Catherine Pavlovna. That is quite true; but she is kind, and I am very grateful to her.
Just then she turned up.
Really she is kind. She made my position much easier.
I see you do not realize all the difficulty of my position... there in Petersburg,' she added. 'Here I am quite tranquil and happy; but about that later on.
Then there's Sviyazhsky: he is a Marshal of Nobility and a very decent fellow, but he wants something from Alexis.
You see, with his means, now that we have settled in the country, Alexis can have great influence.
Then there is Tushkevich: you have met him, he was always with Betsy.
Now he has been deposed and has come to us.
As Alexis says he is one of those men who are very agreeable if one takes them for what they wish to appear, et puis, il est comme il faut, [And then, he is good form.] as the Princess Barbara says.
He is a nice boy,' she said, and a roguish smile puckered her lips. 'What outrageous affair was that with Levin?
Il est trs gentil et naf,' [He is very nice and naive.] she added with the same smile. 'Men need distraction, and Alexis needs an audience; so I value all this company.
He is a German, very good, and knows his business.
Then there's the doctor, a young man, not exactly a Nihilist, but  you know, eats with his knife... but a very good doctor.
You wanted so much to see her,' said Anna as she and Dolly came out onto the large stone verandah where in the shade, before an embroidery frame, the Princess Barbara sat embroidering a cover for an easy-chair for Count Vronsky. 'She says she won't have anything before dinner, but will you order lunch?
The Princess Barbara received Dolly affectionately but rather patronisingly, and at once began explaining that she was staying with Anna because she had always loved her more than did her sister Catherine Pavlovna, who had brought Anna up, and that now, when everyone had thrown Anna over, she considered it her duty to help Anna through this transitional and most trying period.
'Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to my solitude; but at present I can be of use and I fulfil my duty, however hard it may be, not like others... And how kind you are, and how well you have done to come!
Every one does what he likes till dinner.
You know, through his mother and brother he can do anything. And then they do much good.
Has he not told you about his hospital?
Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men in the billiard-room and brought them back with her to the verandah.
'Une partie de [A game of.] lawn tennis,' suggested Veslovsky with his pleasing smile. 'We will be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna!'
Dolly was somewhat embarrassed and troubled by the quite novel circle she found herself in.
In the abstract, theoretically, she not only excused but even approved of Anna's action.
As is frequently the case with irreproachably moral women who become tired of the monotony of a moral life, she from a distance not only excused a guilty love but even envied it.
Besides, she loved Anna from her heart.
But actually seeing her among these people so alien to herself, with their fashionable tone which was quite new to her, Dolly felt ill at ease.
In particular it was disagreeable to her to see the Princess Barbara, who forgave them everything for the sake of the comforts she enjoyed there.
In general, in the abstract Dolly approved the step Anna had taken, but it was unpleasant to her to see the man for whose sake the step had been taken.
Besides, she had never liked Vronsky.
She considered him very proud, and saw nothing in him to justify that pride; except his wealth.
But involuntarily he, here in his own house, imposed on her more than ever, and she could not feel at ease with him.
She experienced the same kind of shyness in his presence that she had felt when the lady's maid saw her jacket.
As with the maid she felt not exactly ashamed but uncomfortable about the patches, so with him she felt not exactly ashamed but ill-at-ease about herself.
Feeling embarrassed, she tried to think of something to talk about.
Though she thought that, being so proud, he would not be pleased to hear his house and garden admired, yet not finding any other subject for conversation, she said she liked his house very much.
'Yes, it is a very handsome building and in a good old style,' he said.
'Oh no!' he replied, and his face lit up with pleasure. 'If you had only seen that courtyard in spring!'
And he began, at first with reserve but more and more carried away by his subject, to draw her attention to various details of the adornment of the house and garden.
One could see that, having devoted great pains to the improvement and decoration of his place, Vronsky felt compelled to boast of them to a fresh person, and was heartily pleased by Dolly's praises.
Shall we go?' he suggested, glancing at her face to assure himself that she really was not bored.
'Will you come, Anna?' he said, turning to her.
We must send to let them know. Yes, it is a monument he is erecting here,' said Anna to Dolly, with the same sly knowing smile with which she had previously spoken about the hospital.
But, not to seem to be making up to Vronsky, he immediately added a slightly condemnatory remark. 'But I am surprised, Count, that you, who are doing so much for the people from a sanitary point of view, should be so indifferent to the schools!'
I have been carried away. This is the way to the hospital,' he said, turning to Dolly and pointing to a turning that led out of the avenue.
After several turnings they passed through a gate, and Dolly saw on the high ground before her a large, red, nearly completed building of a fanciful shape.
'That will be the doctor's quarters and the dispensary,' replied Vronsky; and seeing the architect in his short jacket coming toward them, he apologized to the ladies and went to meet him.
Avoiding the pit from which the men were taking mortar, he stopped and began heatedly discussing something with the architect.
'The pediment is still too low,' he answered Anna's question as to what it was all about.
'Yes, I am very much interested in it,' said Anna to Sviyazhsky, who expressed surprise at her knowledge of architecture.
Don't go near the window!' said Anna, feeling whether the paint was dry. 'Alexis, the paint is dry already,' she added.
Then he showed the marble baths and the beds with peculiar spring mattresses.
Then he took them to one ward after another: to the store-room, the linen-room, showed the stoves built on a new plan, then some silent trolleys to convey necessary articles, and much besides.
Dolly was simply surprised at what she had never before seen, and wishing to understand it all, asked for information about every detail, which evidently gratified Vronsky.
Despite his courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.
'This is not a maternity home but a hospital, and is intended for all illnesses, except infectious ones,' he said. 'But have a look at this... 'and he moved a chair for convalescents, just arrived from abroad, toward Dolly.
Everything interested Dolly and everything pleased her, especially Vronsky himself with his natural and naive enthusiasm. 'Yes, he is a very nice, good fellow,' she thought again and again, not listening to him but looking at him, understanding his expression, and mentally putting herself in Anna's place.
In this animated state she liked him so much that she understood Anna's being able to fall in love with him.
'NO, I THINK THE PRINCESS DARYA ALEXANDROVNA IS TIRED and horses do not interest her,' said Vronsky to Anna, who was suggesting that they should go to the stud farm where Sviyazhsky wanted to look at a new stallion. 'You go, and I will see the Princess back to the house and will have a talk with her  if you do not mind?' he added, turning to Dolly.
She saw by Vronsky's face that he wanted something of her.
As soon as they had passed through the gate back into the garden, he glanced in the direction Anna had taken, and having assured himself that she could not hear or see them, he began.
'You have guessed that I want to talk to you,' he said, looking at her with laughter in his eyes. 'I know that you are a friend of Anna's.'
Alone with him she suddenly felt frightened: his laughing eyes and stern expression scared her.
Many diverse suppositions as to what he was about to say flitted through her brain. 'He will ask me to come and stay with them and bring the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to get together a circle for Anna in Moscow...
Or maybe it's about Vasenka Veslovsky and his relations with Anna?
Or possibly about Kitty, and that he feels guilty toward her?' Everything she surmised was unpleasant, but she did not hit on what he actually wished to speak about.
'You have so much influence over Anna and she is so fond of you,' he said. 'Help me!'
Dolly looked with timid inquiry at his energetic face, which was now wholly and now partly in the sunlight that fell between the lime trees, and then was again darkened by their shadow. She waited for what more he would say; but he walked by her side in silence, prodding the gravel with his stick as he went.
'As you have come to see us and you are the only one of Anna's former friends who has (I do not count the Princess Barbara)  I feel you have done so not because you consider our position normal, but because, realizing all the hardship of that position, you love her as before and wish to help her.
Have I understood you rightly?' he asked, turning toward her.
'Oh, yes!' answered Dolly, closing her sunshade, 'but...'
'No,' he interrupted; and forgetting that he was placing his companion in an awkward position, he stopped, so that she was obliged to stop also. 'No one feels all the hardship of Anna's position more than I do; and that is naturally so, if you do me the honour of regarding me as a man with a heart.
'I understand,' said Dolly, involuntarily admiring him for the frank and firm way in which he said it. 'But just because you feel you have caused it, I'm afraid you exaggerate it,' she said.
'I understand that her position in Society is a hard one.'
'In Society it is hell!' he said quickly with a dark frown. 'It is impossible to imagine greater moral torments than those she endured for two weeks in Petersburg...
'Society!' he exclaimed with contempt. 'What need can I have of Society?'
I see that Anna is happy, quite happy, she has already told me so,' said Dolly smiling; and involuntarily while saying it she doubted whether Anna was really happy.
'Yes, yes,' he said. 'I know that she has revived after all her suffering; she is happy; she is happy in the present.
He stood before her.
'I see she is happy,' he repeated, and the doubt as to whether Anna was really happy struck Dolly yet more strongly. 'But can it continue?
Whether we acted rightly or wrongly is another question; the die is cast,' he said, changing from Russian into French, 'and we are bound together for life.
Yet the law and the circumstances of our position are such that thousands of complications appear which at present, while resting after all her sufferings and trials, she neither sees nor wishes to see.
My daughter is not mine by law, but Karenin's.
I hate this falsehood!' he said with an energetic gesture of denial, and looked at Dolly with a gloomily questioning expression.
'Some day a son may be born, my son, and he will by law be a Karenin, and not heir either to my name or my property, and however happy we may be in our family life, and whatever children we may have, there will be no legal bond between them and me. They will be Karenin's!
I have tried to speak to Anna about it, but it irritates her.
She does not understand and I cannot speak out about it to her.
I am happy, happy in her love, but I need an occupation.
Dolly observed that at this point his explanation was confused, and she could not quite understand why he had wandered from the point, but she felt that having once begun to speak of his intimate affairs, of which he could not speak to Anna, he was now telling her everything, and that the question of his work in the country belonged to the same category of intimate thoughts as the question of his relations with Anna.
'Well, to continue!' he said, recovering himself. 'The principal thing is that when working I want the assurance that the work will not die with me, that I shall have heirs; and that I have not got.
Imagine the situation of a man who knows in advance that children born of him and of the woman he loves will not be his, but some one else's  some one who will hate them and will have nothing to do with them!
'Well, this brings me to the point of my talk,' he went on, calming himself with an effort. 'Anna can do it;. it depends on her...
Her husband was willing to have a divorce  your husband had almost arranged it  and I know he would not refuse now.
He then replied definitely that if she expressed the wish, he would not refuse.
Of course,' he said gloomily, 'that is one of those Pharasaic cruelties of which only heartless people are capable.
He knows what torture every recollection of him causes her, and knowing her he still demands a letter from her.
I understand that it is painful for her, but the reasons are so important that one must passer pardessus toutes ces finesses de sentiment.
[One must act out all these refinements of sentiment. The happiness and existence of Anna and her children depend on it.]
I do not speak of myself, though it's very hard on me, very hard,' he said with a look as if he were menacing some one for making it so hard on him. 'And so, Princess, I shamelessly cling to you as an anchor of salvation!
Help me to persuade her to write to him and demand a divorce!'
'Yes, certainly,' said Dolly thoughtfully, vividly remembering her last conversation with Karenin. 'Yes certainly,' she repeated resolutely, remembering Anna.
'Use your influence with her, get her to write, I don't wish and am almost unable to speak to her about it.'
'Very well, I will speak to her.
But how is it she herself does not think of it?' asked Dolly, suddenly remembering that strange new habit Anna had of screwing up her eyes. And she remembered that it was just when the intimate side of life was in question that Anna screwed up her eyes.
'As if she were blinking at her life so as not to see it all,' thought Dolly. 'Certainly I will speak to her, for my own sake and for hers,' she said in reply to his expression of gratitude.
FINDING DOLLY ALREADY RETURNED, Anna looked attentively into her eyes as if asking about the talk she had had with Vronsky, but she did not ask in words.
'I think it's nearly dinner-time,' she said. 'We have not yet seen anything of one another...
Dolly went to her room, feeling amused.
She had nothing to change into as she was already wearing her best dress; but to give some sign that she had prepared for dinner, she asked the maid to brush her dress, and she put on clean cuffs, pinned a fresh bow to her dress and placed some lace in her hair.
'This is all I was able to do,' she smilingly said to Anna, who came to her in a third dress, again extremely simple.
'Yes, we are very formal here,' Anna remarked, as if excusing her own smartness. 'Alexis is seldom so pleased about anything as he is at your having come.
He is decidedly in love with you,' she added. 'But aren't you tired?'
Vronsky introduced the doctor and the steward to his visitor; the architect had already been presented at the hospital.
The fat butler  his round, clean-shaven face and starched white tie shining  announced dinner.
Veslovsky offered his arm to the Princess Barbara before Tushkevich could do so, so that the latter, the steward, and the doctor went in by themselves.
Dolly observed all this luxury, which was new to her, and, as a housewife herself controlling a household, she could not help noting the details (though she had no hope of putting what she observed to practical use in her own home, so far was such luxury above her way of life) and asking herself how it was all done and by whom.
Vasenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviyazhsky and many others whom she knew, never thought about these things, and readily believed, what every decent host wishes his guests to feel, that all that is so well arranged at his house has cost him no trouble but has come about of itself.
Dolly, however, knew that not even a milk pudding for the children's lunch comes of itself, and that therefore so complicated and splendid an organization must have needed some one's careful attention; and from the way Vronsky surveyed the table, gave a sign with his head to the butler, and asked her whether she would take fish-broth or soup, she concluded that it had all been done by, and depended on, the master's care.
'Nicholas Ivanich,' she said (referring to Sviyazhsky), 'was struck by the way the new building had grown since his last visit; even I, who go there every day, am always surprised how quickly it gets on.'
'It is pleasant to work with his Excellency,' answered the architect with a smile. He was a dignified, respectful and quiet man.
'It is not like having to do with the Local Authorities,' said he. 'Where they would scribble over a whole ream of paper, I merely report to the Count; we talk it over, and three words settle the matter.'
The conversation passed on to the abuses in the government of the United States, but Anna quickly turned it to another theme so as to draw the steward out of his silence.
'Have you ever seen a reaping machine?' she asked Dolly. 'We had been to look at them when we met you.
Anna took a knife and a fork in her beautiful white hands, sparkling with rings, and began to demonstrate.
She was obviously aware that her explanation would not be understood, but as she knew that she spoke pleasantly and that her hands were beautiful, she went on explaining.
'Rather like penknives!' said Veslovsky playfully, never taking his eyes from her.
'Is it not true, Karl Fedorich, that it is like scissors? she asked, turning to the steward.
'Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,' [Oh, yes! It is quite a simple thing.] and he began to explain the construction of the machine.
The price of the wire must be allowed for.] and the German, drawn from his silence, turned to Vronsky. 'Das lsst sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht!'
The German was already putting his hand to the pocket where he kept a notebook with a pencil in which he made all his calculations, but remembering that he was at dinner, and noticing Vronsky's cold look, he desisted. 'Zu complicirt, macht zu viel Klopot,' [Too complicated, too much trouble.] he concluded.
'And we thought we should find you on the field, Vasily Semenich! Were you there?' she said to the doctor, a sickly-looking man.
'And how is the old woman?
'No, it's not exactly typhus, but she's not in a good state.'
'What a pity!' said Anna, and having thus paid the tribute of politeness to the retainers, she turned to her friends.
'All the same, it would be difficult to construct a reaper from your description, Anna Arkadyevna,' Sviyazhsky chaffed her.
'Oh, why not?' said Anna, with a smile which said that she knew there had been something engaging in her way of describing the reaper and that Sviyazhsky had noticed it.
Once Dolly was stung to the quick; and so aroused that she even flushed up, and afterwards wondered whether she had said anything superfluous and disagreeable.
Sviyazhsky began talking about Levin and mentioned his peculiar view that machines only did harm in Russian agriculture.
'I have not the pleasure of knowing the gentleman,' said Vronsky with a smile, 'but probably he has never seen the machines which he condemns; or if he has seen and tried them, has done it just anyhow, and not with a foreign-made but with a Russian machine.
'I cannot defend his opinions,' said Dolly, flaring up, 'but I can say that he is a very well-informed man, and if he were here he would be able to answer you, though I cannot.'
[But, excuse me, he is a little cracked.] For instance, he maintains that the Zemstvos and Magistrates are quite unnecessary, and he won't have anything to do with them.'
'I know no one who fulfils his duties more strictly,' said Dolly, irritated by Vronsky's superior tone.
'I, on the contrary,' continued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason touched to the quick by this conversation, 'I, on the contrary, such as I am, feel very grateful for the honour they have done me, thanks to Nicholas Ivanich'  he indicated Sviyazhsky  'by electing me Justice of the Peace.
To Dolly it sounded strange to hear how assured he was of being in the right, here at his own table.
She remembered how Levin, who held the opposite opinion, was equally positive in his opinions at his own table.
But she was fond of Levin, and therefore sided with him.
'And I rather agree with your brother-in-law,' said Anna, 'though I do not go to his lengths,' she added with a smile. 'I'm afraid we have too many of these public obligations nowadays.
Alexis has not been here six months, and I think he is already a member of five or six different institutions: Guardian of the Poor, Justice of the Peace, a Member of a Council, a juryman, and Member of some Commission on Horses...
Du train que cela va,' [At the rate at which it is going.] all his time will be taken up that way.
Of how many institutions are you a member, Nicholas Ivanich?' she asked, addressing Sviyazhsky; 'more than twenty, isn't it?'
Although Anna spoke playfully, irritation was perceptible in her tone.
Dolly, who was attentively watching her and Vronsky, noticed it at once.
Noticing these things, and that the Princess Barbara hastened to change the subject by speaking of their Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering that in the garden Vronsky had spoken about his activities inopportunely, she understood that with this question of public work some private difference between Anna and Vronsky was connected.
The dinner, the wine, the service were all very good but they were all such as Dolly  though she had become unused to them  had seen before at dinner-parties and balls, and like those functions they bore a character of impersonality and strain; therefore on an everyday occasion and in a small gathering they produced an unpleasant impression on her.
Dolly tried to play, but was long unable to understand the game, and by the time she did understand it she was so tired that she sat down beside the Princess Barbara to watch the others.
He was too eager, but to make up for that his gaiety inspired his companions.
He, as well as the other men, had with the ladies' permission taken off his coat, and his large handsome figure in white shirt-sleeves, his ruddy perspiring face and impetuous movements, stamped themselves on the memories of the onlookers.
As soon as Dolly that night had gone to bed and closed her eyes, she saw Vasenka Veslovsky rushing hither and thither on the croquet lawn.
But not to disturb the others and to while away the time, after resting she rejoined the players and pretended to like it.
All that day she felt as if she were acting in a theatre with better actors than herself, and that her bad performance was spoiling the whole affair.
She had come with the intention of staying two days if she could adapt herself to the life.
But that evening during the game she resolved to leave next day.
Those painful maternal worries, which she had so hated on her journey, now after a day spent without them appeared in quite a different light and drew her back to them.
When, after evening tea and a row in the boat at night-time, Dolly entered her bedroom alone, took off her dress and sat down to do up her thin hair for the night, she felt great relief.
Even the thought that Anna would come in a moment was disagreeable to her.
She wished to be alone with her thoughts.
DOLLY WAS READY TO GET INTO bed when Anna in her nightgown came into the room.
Several times during the day Anna had begun to talk about intimate matters, but after a few words she had always paused, saying: 'Later on when we are alone we will talk it all over. I have so much to say to you!'
It seemed to her at that moment as if everything had already been said.
'Well, and how's Kitty?' she asked with a deep sigh and a guilty glance at Dolly. 'Tell me the truth, Dolly: is she not angry with me?'
'But she hates and despises me?'
Is she happy?
They say he's a fine fellow.'
'It is not enough to say he's a fine fellow; I do not know a better man.'
I am very glad! It is not enough to say he's a fine fellow,' she repeated.
But imagine me living alone, without him, alone, and that will happen... everything shows that it will often happen,  that he will spend half his time from home,' she said, rising and taking a seat nearer to Dolly. 'Of course,' she went on, interrupting Dolly, who was about to reply, 'of course I won't keep him against his will!
One day there are races and his horses are running; he goes.
She smiled. 'Well then, what did he talk about to you?'
'He talked about what I myself wanted to ask you, so it is easy for me to be his advocate: about whether it isn't possible... whether it can't...' Dolly hesitated, 'how to remedy, to improve your position... you know my opinions...
'That is, get a divorce?' said Anna. 'Do you know, the only woman who called on me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya?
You know her, of course?
Au fond c'est la femme la plus dprave qui existe. [At bottom, she's the most depraved woman in existence.]
She had a liaison with Tushkevich, deceiving her husband in the worst way, and she told me that she did not wish to know me as long as my position was irregular...!
Well then, what did he say to you?' she repeated.
'He said that he suffers on your account and on his own.
He wants, first of all, to legitimatize his daughter and to be your husband and have a right to you.'
'What wife, what slave could be such a slave as I am in my position?' Anna sullenly interrupted her.
'But the chief thing he wants is that you should not suffer.'
'And his most legitimate wish is that your children should not be nameless.'
'What children?' said Anna, screwing up her eyes and not looking at Dolly.
And in spite of her agitation Anna smiled on noticing the naive expression of curiosity, surprise and terror on Dolly's face.
To her this was one of those discoveries which leads to consequences and deductions so enormous that at the first moment one only feels that it is impossible to take it all in, but that one will have to think over it again and again.
This discovery, which suddenly explained to her those hitherto incomprehensible families where there were only one or two children, awoke in her so many thoughts, reflections and contradictory feelings that she could say nothing, and only stared at Anna with wide-open eyes full of astonishment.
It was the very thing she had dreamt of, but now on learning that it was possible, she was horrified.
'N'est-ce pas immoral?' [Isn't it immoral?] was all she said after a pause.
Remember I have to choose between two things: either to become pregnant, that is ill, or to be the friend and comrade of my husband  for he is my husband all the same,' said Anna, in a tone of intentional levity.
'Well, yes, of course,' said Dolly, listening to the very arguments which she had put to herself but not finding them so convincing as before.
'For you and for others,' said Anna, as if guessing her thoughts, 'there may still be some doubt, but for me...
Remember, I am not a wife, he loves me as long as his love lasts!
Well, how am I to keep his love?
She curved her white arms in front of her stomach.
With unusual rapidity, as happens at times of great agitation, thoughts and recollections crowded into Dolly's mind. 'I could not attract Steve,' she thought 'he left me for others, and the first one for who he betrayed me did not hold him, though she was always pretty and bright!
He threw her over and took another.
If he looks for that sort of thing he will find women whose dresses and manners are still brighter and more attractive.
And however white and shapely her bare arms may be, however beautiful her full figure and her flushed face surrounded by that black hair  he will find others still more beautiful, as my horrid, pitiable and dear husband looks for and finds them!'
But you must consider,' she went on. 'You forget my position.
By the very fact of their birth they would have to be ashamed of their mother, their father, their birth!'
She wanted to reproduce the arguments with which she had so often convinced herself.
'I should always feel guilty toward those unhappy children,' said she. 'If they don't exist at any rate they are not unhappy, but if they are unhappy I alone shall be to blame.'
These were the very arguments Dolly had put to herself, but now she listened without understanding them. 'How can one be guilty toward beings who don't exist?' thought she.
And suddenly the question came into her mind, whether it could be better in any case for her favourite Grisha if he had never existed?
This appeared to her so monstrous and strange that she shook her head, to dispel the confusion of insane thoughts that whirled in her brain.
'Well, I don't know; but it is not right,' she said with a look of disgust.
And besides,' added Anna, in spite of the abundance of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly's, apparently agreeing that it was not right,  'don't forget the chief thing: that I am not in the same position as you!
She suddenly felt that she was so far away from Anna that there were questions on which they could never meet, and about which it was best not to talk.
It tickles Alexis, and that's all; he is only a boy and entirely in my hands; you know, I manage him just as I please.
Dolly!' she said suddenly, changing her tone, 'you say I look at things too dismally; you cannot understand.
I not consider that!' she repeated, and flushed.
She rose, drew herself up, sighed deeply, and with her light steps began pacing up and down the room, pausing occasionally. 'I not consider it?
To drive one mad!' she repeated. 'When I think of it I cannot fall asleep without morphia.
For one thing, he would not agree now.
Dolly, sitting upright in her chair, with a pained expression of sympathy turned her head to follow Anna's movements.
'One must try,' she said gently.
But what would it mean?' said Anna, evidently expressing a thought she had considered a thousand times and knew by heart. 'It means that I, who hate him but yet acknowledge myself to blame toward him  and I do think him magnanimous  I must humiliate myself by writing to him... !
Well, supposing I make that effort and do it: I shall receive either an insulting answer or his consent. Supposing I get his consent...'
Anna at that instant had reached the other end of the room and stopped there, doing something to the window curtain. 'I receive his consent, and my so... son?
He will grow up despising me, in the house of his father whom I have left.
She came back to the middle of the room and, pressing her chest with her arms, paused before Dolly.
In her white dressing-gown her figure appeared peculiarly tall and broad.
She bent her head and, trembling all over with emotion, looked from under her brows with moist, glittering eyes at the thin, piteous-looking little Dolly in her patched dressing-jacket and night-cap.
She came and sat down beside Dolly, peering into her face with a guilty look, and took her by the hand.
If anyone is unhappy, it is I!' she murmured, and, turning away, she wept.
Left alone, Dolly said her prayers and got into bed.
She had pitied Anna from the bottom of her heart while they were talking; but now she could not make herself think about her.
Recollections of home and of her children rose in her imagination with a new and peculiar charm.
That world of her own now seemed so precious and dear that she did not wish on any account to spend another day away from it, and she decided certainly to go home on the morrow.
Meanwhile Anna, returning to her boudoir, took a wineglass and put into it some drops of medicine, the chief ingredient of which was morphia.
Having drunk it and sat still for a few moments, she entered her bedroom cheerfully and merrily.
When she came in Vronsky regarded her attentively.
He tried to find some trace of the conversation which he knew, by her having remained so long in Dolly's room, must have taken place.
But in her expression of restrained excitement, which concealed something, he detected nothing except that beauty which, though familiar, still captivated him, her consciousness of this, and her desire that it should act on him.
He did not wish to ask her what they had been talking about, but hoped that she would tell him of her own accord.
However, she only said:
'But I have known her a long time.
I think she is very kind, mais excessivement terre--terre. [Excessively matter-of-fact.]
But all the same I was very glad she came.'
He took Anna's hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.
Next morning, in spite of her hosts' entreaties, Dolly prepared to go home.
Levin's coachman in his by no means new coat, and a hat something like a post-boy's, with his horses that did not match and the old calche with mended mud-guards, drove up gloomily but resolutely to the covered, sand-strewn portico.
After spending a day together both she and her host felt distinctly that they did not suit one another and that it was better for them not to associate.
She knew that when Dolly was gone no one would call up in her soul the feelings which had been aroused by their meeting.
To have those feelings awakened was painful, but still she knew that they were the best part of her soul, and that that part of her was rapidly being choked by the life she was leading.
When they had driven into the fields Dolly experienced a pleasant feeling of relief, and she was about to ask the men how they had liked the Vronskys' place, when suddenly Philip the coachman himself remarked:
But it did seem so dull to me, Darya Alexandrovna! I don't know how you found it,' he added, turning his handsome, kindly face toward her.
On returning home and finding every one safe and extremely nice, Dolly gave a very animated account of her visit, of how well she had been received, of the luxury and good taste at the Vronskys', and of their amusements, and would not let anyone say a word against them.
'One must know Anna and Vronsky  I have got to know him better now  in order to understand how kind and pathetic they are,' said she with entire sincerity, forgetting the indefinite feelings of dissatisfaction and embarrassment she had experienced there.
In the absence of visitors Anna still continued to devote attention to her person, and read a great deal  both novels and such serious books as were in fashion.
She studied also from books and from technical papers all the subjects with which Vronsky was occupied, so that he often came straight to her with questions about agriculture, architecture, and sometimes even horsebreeding or sport.
He was astounded at her knowledge and memory, and at first used to doubt her information and want it confirmed. She would then find what he wanted in books and show it him.
The arrangement of the hospital also interested her.
There she not only helped, but arranged and planned many things herself.
Nevertheless, her chief preoccupation was still herself  herself in so far as Vronsky held her dear and in so far as she could compensate him for all he had given up.
Vronsky appreciated this, which had become the sole aim of her life, a desire not only to please him but also to serve him; but at the same time he was troubled by these love-meshes in which she tried to entangle him.
As time went on, the oftener he felt himself caught in these meshes the more he desired, not exactly to escape from them but to try whether they really interfered with his freedom.
Had it not been for this ever-increasing desire for freedom  not to have a scene each time he had to go to town to a meeting or to the races  Vronsky would have been quite content with his life.
The role he had chosen, that of a rich landowner  one of those who should constitute the kernel of the Russian aristocracy  was not only quite to his taste but, now that he had lived so for half a year, gave him ever-increasing pleasure.
In spite of the tremendous sums the hospital, the machinery, the cows which he imported from Switzerland, and many other things were costing him, he was sure that he was not wasting his substance but increasing it.
Where it was a question of income  the sale of forest land, of corn or wool, or the leasing of land  Vronsky was as hard as flint and could hold out for his price.
In all operations on a large scale, both on this and on his other estates, he kept to the simplest and safest methods, and was extremely economical and careful in his expenditure on small details.
Besides, he decided on a big outlay only when he had money to spare, and when spending he went into every detail and insisted on getting the very best for his money.
So that from the way he managed his business it was clear that he was not wasting but increasing his property.
The day before, Vronsky and Anna had almost quarrelled about his proposed journey.
It was autumn, the dullest and most depressing time of year in the country, and so Vronsky, bracing himself for a struggle, announced his departure in a sterner and colder way than he had ever before used to Anna.
But, to his surprise, Anna took the news very quietly and only asked when he would return.
He looked at her attentively, not understanding this calm manner.
She answered his look with a smile.
He knew her capacity for withdrawing into herself, and knew that she only did it when she had come to some resolution in her own mind without telling him of her plans.
He feared this, but he so wished to avoid a scene that he pretended to believe, and to some extent sincerely believed, in what he wished to believe, namely, in her reasonableness.
'She means to adopt this tone  well, so much the better!' thought he, 'or else it would be the usual thing again.'
And so, without challenging her to a frank explanation, he left for the elections.
It was the first time since their union that he had parted from her without a full explanation.
On the one hand this fact disturbed him, but on the other hand it seemed the best way. 'At first there will be, as now, something uncertain, something concealed; but afterwards she will get used to it.
In any case I can give her everything else, but not my independence as a man,' he reflected.
He asked his brother, who had a vote for the Seleznev district, to accompany him.
Levin had also some very important business to attend to in Kashin for his sister who lived abroad. It was in connection with a wardship and the receiving of money due to her for land transferred to the peasants.
Levin was still wavering, but Kitty, who had noticed that he was dull in Moscow and had advised him to go, without saying anything to him ordered for him the uniform necessary for the occasion, which cost eighty roubles.
So he went to Kashin.
Levin had been five days in Kashin, going daily to meetings and taking a great deal of trouble over his sister's business, which he was still unable to arrange.
The Marshals of the Nobility were all busy with the elections, and he could not get even the simple matter in connection with the wardship settled.
After long efforts to get an injunction removed the money was all ready to be paid out; but the notary  a very obliging man  could not give the warrant because it needed the President's signature, and the President was engaged at the Session and had not appointed a substitute.
This legal adviser seemed to do all that was possible and to strain every nerve to get Levin out of his difficulties.
'Look here!' he would say, 'just try this  go to so-and-so, and to so-and-so.'
And the adviser would make an elaborate plan to circumvent the fatal difficulty which was at the root of all this trouble. But he would immediately add: 'All the same you will be put off; however, have a try!'
And Levin tried, and went again and again. Everybody was kind and amiable, but still it turned out that what he wanted to circumvent started up again in another place and impeded him once more.
It was specially annoying to Levin to be quite unable to understand with whom he was contending, and whom the delay in his business could profit.
No one, not even his lawyer, seemed to know this. If Levin could have understood it, as he understood the reason. for having to stand in a queue at a booking-office, he would not have felt hurt or vexed; but no one could explain to him the reason for the obstacles he encountered in these business transactions.
However, Levin had changed considerably since his marriage; he had become patient, and if he did not understand why things were arranged thus, he told himself that, not knowing everything, he could not judge, and that probably things had to be so; and he tried not to be indignant.
And now, being present at the elections and taking part in them, he also tried not to condemn, not to dispute, but as far as possible to understand the matter  on which good and honest men, whom he respected, were engaged with so much seriousness and enthusiasm.
Since his marriage so many new and serious aspects of life had been revealed to him, which owing to his superficial acquaintance with them had formerly seemed unimportant, that he anticipated and looked for a serious meaning in this election business also.
It was necessary to put in his place a fresh, up-to-date, practical, and quite new man, and to manage matters so as to extract from the rights granted to the Nobility (not as nobles, but as an element of the Zemstvo) all the advantages of self-government which could be obtained from them.
To replace Snetkov as Marshal, Sviyazhsky was proposed, or, better still, Nevedovsky, an ex-professor, a remarkably intelligent man, and a great friend of Koznyshev's.
The Session was opened by the Governor of the Province, who in his speech to the nobles told them that in choosing occupants for posts they should show no partiality, but should choose according to merit and for the welfare of the country, and that he hoped the honourable Nobility of Kashin would strictly fulfil its duty as it had done in previous elections, and would justify their sovereign's high confidence in them.
Having finished his speech the Governor left the hall, and the noblemen, noisily, vivaciously, some of them even rapturously, followed him out with enthusiasm, and stood around him as he was putting on his fur coat and talking in a friendly way with the Marshal of the Province.
Levin, wishing to enter fully into everything and not to miss anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the Governor say: 'Please tell Mary Ivanovna that my wife is very sorry she has to go to the Orphanage.' Then the noblemen gaily scrambled for their overcoats and all drove to the cathedral.
In the cathedral Levin, with the others, raised his hand, repeating the words of the priest, and swore by the most awful oaths to fulfil all the things the Governor had hoped for.
Church services always touched Levin and when he was uttering the words, 'I kiss the cross,' and looked round at the crowd of men, young and old who were repeating the same words, he felt moved.
On the second and third days matters were dealt with concerning the funds of the Nobility and the Girls' High Schools, which, Koznyshev explained, were quite unimportant; so Levin, busy going from place to place on the business he had in hand, did not trouble about them.
The Marshal of the Nobility rose and with tears in his eyes thanked the Nobility for their confidence.
The nobles loudly applauded him and pressed his hand.
But at that moment one of the nobles of Koznyshev's party said he had heard that the Commission had not audited the funds, considering that a verification would be an insult to the Marshal of the Province.
Then a small, very young-looking, but very venomous man began saying that probably the Marshal of the Province would be pleased to account for the Funds, and that the excessive politeness of the members of the Commission was depriving him of that moral satisfaction.
Levin was surprised that they disputed about it so long, especially as, when he asked Koznyshev whether he thought that money had been misappropriated, he received the reply:
For some of the districts the election was stormy enough; but for the Selezensk district Sviyazhsky was elected without opposition, and he gave a dinner party at his house that evening.
Levin stood with his own group in the Small Hall, which was used as a refreshment and smoking room, listening to what was being said and vainly straining his mental powers to understand it all.
Hlyustov was unwilling to go with the members for his district to invite Snetkov to stand again for election. Sviyazhsky was persuading him to do so and Koznyshev approved of this.
Levin did not see why his party should ask the Marshal to stand, when they wished to defeat him.
Oblonsky, who had just had something to eat and drink, came toward them in his Chamberlain's uniform, wiping his mouth with his scented and bordered lawn handkerchief.
'We are holding the position, Sergius Ivanich!' said he, smoothing back his whiskers.
And after listening to the conversation he backed Sviyazhsky's opinion.
'One district is sufficient, and Sviyazhsky evidently belongs to the Opposition,' he said, and every one but Levin understood him.
'Well, Kostya! You too seem to have got a taste for it?' he said, turning to Levin and taking him by the arm.
Levin would have been glad to get a taste for it but could not understand what the point was, and, stepping aside from the group, he told Oblonsky of his perplexity as to why the Marshal of the Province should be asked to stand again.
'If, as in former elections, all the districts nominated the Provincial Marshal, he would be elected, receiving white balls from every one.
What if he is being prosecuted? In that way they can exclude anybody!
Levin heard shouted from various sides, and he went toward the Large Hall with all the others, who were hastening on apparently afraid of missing something or other. Hemmed in by a crowd of noblemen, he approached the Provincial table, at which the Provincial Marshal, Sviyazhsky, and the other leaders were having a heated dispute.
They were disputing, as far as he could make out, about a paragraph of the law and the meaning of the words: 'against whom legal proceedings were taken.'
He waited for the venomous nobleman to conclude, and then said he considered the proper course would be to consult the wording of the Act and requested the Secretary to look it up.
Koznyshev read the Act aloud, and began to explain its meaning, but a tall, thick-set, round-shouldered landowner with a dyed moustache, wearing a tight uniform the high collar of which squeezed up his neck at the back, interrupted him.
Advancing to the table he struck his ring against it, shouting in a loud voice:
At this several voices were heard, and the tall landowner with the ring, growing more and more spiteful, shouted louder and louder; but it was impossible to make out what he was saying.
He was demanding the very thing Koznyshev was proposing; but he evidently hated Koznyshev and his party, and this hatred communicated itself to all those on his side, and in turn evoked a similar, though more decently expressed, feeling of conflicting anger from the opposing party.
Don't audit the Marshal; he's not a shop assistant!... But that's not the point!...
But Levin had forgotten that, and it pained him to see these good men, whom he respected, in such an unpleasant, malevolent state of excitement.
To free himself from this feeling he went, without waiting to hear the end of the discussion, into the refreshment room, where there was no one except the waiters at the buffet.
When he saw the waiters busily wiping crockery and arranging plates and wine-glasses, and saw their calm yet animated faces, he experienced an unexpected feeling of relief, as if he had come out of a close room into fresh air.
He was particularly pleased by one old man with grey whiskers, who while evincing contempt for the young men who were making fun of him was teaching them how to fold napkins.
Levin was just preparing to start a conversation with the old waiter when the Secretary of the Court of Nobility, an old man whose speciality it was to know all the nobles of the Province by name and patronymic, diverted his attention.
'Please come, Constantine Dmitrich!' said he. 'Your brother is looking for you.
Levin entered the Hall, was given a white ball, and, following his brother, Sergius Ivanich, approached the table at which Sviyazhsky stood with an ironical and impressive look on his face, gathering his beard into his fist and smelling at it.
Koznyshev inserted his hand in the ballot-box and placed his ball somewhere, and making way for Levin paused beside him.
Levin came up, but having entirely forgotten how the matter stood and being confused he turned to Koznyshev with the inquiry, 'Where am I to put it?' He spoke in a low voice at a time when people near by were talking, so he hoped his question would not be heard.
But the talk stopped and his improper question was heard.
'That depends on each man's convictions,' he said severely.
Levin blushed, hastily thrust his hand under the cloth that covered the box, and, as the ball was in his right hand, dropped it on the right side.
When he had done so he recollected that he ought to have put in his left hand also, and thrust it in, but it was too late; and feeling still more confused he hurried away to the very back of the room.
Ninety-eight against!' came the Secretary's voice, dropping his r's.
Levin heard Snetkov being asked to stand; and he saw that a crowd of nobles surrounded the Marshal, who was speaking.
Replying to the nobles, Snetkov spoke of the confidence and affection of the Nobility, of which he was not worthy, his merit consisting only in his loyalty to the Nobility, to whom he had devoted twenty years of service.
Several times he repeated the words: 'have served to the extent of my power  faithfully and truly  I appreciate and thank...' Then suddenly choked by tears, he stopped, and left the room.
Whether those tears resulted from a consciousness of injustice done him, or from love for the Nobility, or from the strained situation in which he found himself, surrounded by enemies, at any rate his emotion communicated itself. The majority of the nobles were touched and Levin felt a tenderness for Snetkov.
'Sorry! Please excuse me!' he said, speaking as to a stranger; but, recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly.
The expression of his face and his whole figure, in uniform with crosses and white trousers trimmed with gold lace, as he went hurriedly along, reminded Levin of a hunted animal conscious that things are going badly with him.
This expression on the Marshal's face touched Levin, particularly because, just the day before, he had been to his house about the wardship and had there seen him in all the dignity of a kind-hearted family man.
Now the old man seemed touching and pathetic to Levin and he wished to say something pleasant to him.
'So you are to be our Marshal again,' said he.
The debate about Flerov had given the new party not merely his vote but also a gain in time, so that they had had a chance to bring up three more nobles who, by the machinations of the old party, were to be prevented from taking part in the election.
'He's not very drunk  he won't fall down?' asked Sviyazhsky, swaying his head.
'No, he's fine.
I told the man at the bar on no account to let him have anything!'
Levin did not want to eat and did not smoke; he did not wish to join his own set  Koznyshev, Oblonsky, Sviyazhsky and the others  because among them, in animated conversation, stood Vronsky, wearing his uniform as an equerry.
He felt sad, chiefly because he saw that every one else was animated, preoccupied, and busy while only he and a mumbling, toothless, quite old man in naval uniform who had sat down beside him were uninterested and inactive.
In three years he could not collect it,'  a short, round-shouldered landowner with pomaded hair that hung down on the embroidered collar of his uniform was saying energetically, stamping loudly with the heels of the new boots he had evidently put on specially for this occasion.
And casting a discontented glance at Levin, he suddenly turned away.
'Yes, it's a dirty business, say what you will,' remarked an undersized man with a feeble voice.
'How dare he say I gave orders to steal his trousers?
I expect he drank them.
I snap my fingers at him and his princely title!
Another group followed close on the heels of a nobleman who was shouting loudly. He was one of those who had been made drunk.
'I always advised Mary Semenovna to let her estate, because she will never make it pay,' said a pleasant-voiced landowner with a grey moustache, wearing the uniform of Colonel of the former General Staff.
'Oh, still the same  with a loss,' replied the landowner as he stopped beside Levin, with a resigned smile and a look of calm conviction that it must be so.
'And how do you come to be in our Province?' he asked. 'Have you come to take part in our coup d'tat?' he went on, pronouncing the French words firmly but badly.
'All Russia has assembled here: Chamberlains and almost Ministers.' He pointed to the portly figure of Oblonsky in his Chamberlain's uniform with white trousers, walking beside a General.
My son-in-law wishes to stand for a permanent membership: they are not well off and I want him to get it.
But why do such gentlemen come?' he went on, indicating the venomous gentleman who had spoken at the Provincial table.
It can't be grown in a year,' he remarked cautiously, immediately changing the subject. 'Well, and how is your husbandry getting on?'
I will tell you, moreover,' and leaning his elbow on the window and having started talking, the landowner went on: 'My son has no taste at all for husbandry.
It is clear he will be a scholar, so that there will be no one to continue my work, and yet I go on!
'Yes, and with that money he would buy cattle, or a piece of land for a mere song, and would lease it to the peasants,' added Levin with a smile, having evidently more than once come across such calculations.
'And he will make a fortune, while you and I must be thankful if we can keep what we have and leave it to our children.'
'Yes, it is curious,' he continued. 'We live without gaining anything, as if we were appointed, like the vestals of old, to guard some fire or other.'
The landowner smiled under his grey moustache.
However bad the land, still he ploughs it.
'Just like us,' said Levin. 'Very, very glad to have met you,' he added, seeing Sviyazhsky approaching.
SVIYAZHSKY TOOK Levin's arm and led him back to his own group.
He was standing with Oblonsky and Koznyshev, and looked straight at Levin as he came up.
I think I had the pleasure of meeting you... at the Princess Shcherbatsky's?' said he, holding out his hand to Levin.
'Yes, I well remember our meeting,' said Levin, and blushing scarlet immediately turned and spoke to his brother.
Smiling slightly, Vronsky continued his conversation with Sviyazhsky, evidently having no desire to start a conversation with Levin; but Levin, while talking to his brother, kept looking round at Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him, in order to mitigate his rudeness.
'Well, and has he agreed or not?'
'And if he should refuse, who will stand?' asked Levin, looking at Vronsky.
Nevedovsky?' said Levin, feeling that he had put his foot in it somehow.
It's a struggle!' he said frowning, and closed his powerful jaw.
'What a capable man Sviyazhsky is! How clearly he puts everything!'
There was a pause, during which Vronsky, since he had to look at something, looked at Levin: at his feet, his uniform; and then his face, and noticing the sombre eyes fixed upon him he remarked, just to say something:
'Because I consider that the Magistracy is an idiotic institution,' morosely replied Levin, who had all the time been looking for an opportunity of speaking to Vronsky, to atone for his rudeness at their first encounter.
And he related how a peasant stole some flour from a miller, and how when the miller spoke to him about it the peasant sued him for libel.
All this was untimely and foolish, and Levin himself was conscious of it even while he spoke.
'Oh, he is such a crank!' said Oblonsky with his smoothest and most almondy smile. 'But come!
'I don't understand,' said Koznyshev, who had observed his brother's awkward sally, 'I don't understand how one can be so entirely devoid of political tact!
But Count Vronsky... I do not make a friend of him; he invited me to dinner and I shan't go; but he is one of our party, so why make an enemy of him?
Then you ask Nevedovsky whether he will stand.
The Marshal of the Province, though he felt in the air that there was a plot prepared against him, and though he had not been unanimously asked to stand, had still decided to do so.
'Put it on the right,' whispered Oblonsky to Levin as the latter, with his brother, followed the Marshal to the table.
But Levin had forgotten the plan which had been explained to him, and was afraid that Oblonsky was making a mistake when he said 'right.'
While approaching the box he had the ball in his right hand, but, thinking it was a mistake, he shifted it to his left hand just as he reached the box, and evidently placed it to the left.
There was nothing for him to exercise his penetration upon this time.
'Well, is it over now?' Levin asked his brother.
He only now remembered that there was some subtlety in it, but he was too bored to recollect what it was.
As no one was paying any attention to him, and he apparently was not wanted by anybody, he went quietly to the small refreshment-room and again felt great relief when he saw the waiters.
Having eaten a cutlet and beans, and talked with the old man about his former masters, Levin, not wishing to return to the hall where he had felt so out of his element, went up into the gallery.
Every one was talking about the elections and how tired out the Marshal was and how interesting the debates had been. In one group Levin heard them praising his brother.
There now, no one speaks like that in your Court  except perhaps Maydel, and even he is far less eloquent!'
In the centre of the room stood a man in uniform, who announced in a loud shrill voice:
'Court Councillor Peter Petrovich Bol will now be balloted for,' cried the voice of the man in uniform.
At first he was surprised and wanted to understand what it meant; then, coming to the conclusion that he could not understand it, he grew bored.
Then, remembering the agitation and anger he had witnessed on all faces, he felt sad, and with the intention of leaving the place went downstairs.
As he was passing through the corridor behind the gallery he came across a dispirited High School pupil with bloodshot eyes pacing up and down.
On the stairs he met a couple: a lady running up swiftly in her high-heeled shoes, and the Assistant Public Prosecutor.
Levin was already descending the stairs to the exit and getting out his cloakroom ticket when the Secretary caught him. 'Please come, Constantine Dmitrich!
'I told you to let no one out!' he shouted to the doorkeeper. 'I was letting people in, Your Excellency!'
'Oh, Lord!' said the Marshal of the Province with a deep sigh; and with his weary legs in the white trousers dragging, and hanging his head, he went down the middle of the hall to the chief table.
Nevedovsky had a majority as they had expected and he was now Marshal of the Province.
When Nevedovsky left the hall the crowd surrounded him and followed him enthusiastically as it had followed the Governor of the Province on the first day, when he opened the meeting, and as it had followed Snetkov when he was successful.
Vronsky had come to the elections because he felt dull in the country, in order to proclaim to Anna his right to freedom, to repay Sviyazhsky by supporting him at these elections for all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky at the Zemstvo elections, and most of all to perform strictly all the duties of the position he had taken up as nobleman and landowner.
But he had not at all expected that the election business would interest him so much and so touch him to the quick, or that he could do it so well.
He was quite a new man in this circle of noble landowners, but he evidently was a success; and he was not mistaken in thinking that he had already gained influence among them.
This influence was promoted by his wealth, by his title, by the splendid house in the town which had been lent him by his old acquaintance Shirkov, a financier who had founded a flourishing bank in Kashin; by the excellent chef whom he had brought from his estate; by his friendship with the Governor, who had been a former comrade and one whom Vronsky had even protected; but above all by his simple behaviour in treating every one alike which had quickly induced most of the noblemen to change their opinion as to his supposed pride.
He himself felt that, except that crazy fellow married to Kitty Shcherbatsky, who,  propos de bottes [Quite irrelevantly.] had with rabid virulence told him a lot of pointless nonsense, every nobleman whose acquaintance he had made had become his partisan.
He saw clearly, and others acknowledged, that he had contributed very much to Nevedovsky's success.
Now, at his own table, celebrating Nevedovsky's election, Vronsky experienced a pleasant feeling of triumph.
The elections themselves interested him so much that he began to think that if he were married by the next triennial election he would himself put up, just as, when a jockey had won him a prize, he had wished to ride a race himself.
Vronsky sat at the head of the table; on his right was the young Governor, a General of the Emperor's suite.
For everybody else the General was the master of the Province, who had solemnly opened the sessions and made a speech, and, as Vronsky saw, aroused both respect and servility in many present, but for Vronsky he was 'Maslov Katka'  the nickname he had had in the Corps des Pages  who felt embarrassed in his presence and whom Vronsky tried to mettre  son aise.
[To put at his ease.] On Vronsky's left sat Nevedovsky with his youthful, dogged, and venomous look.
Sviyazhsky bore his failure cheerfully.
It was not even a failure for him; as he himself said to Nevedovsky, champagne glass in hand, no better representative of the new course which the Nobility ought to follow could have been found. And therefore all that was honest, as he remarked, was on the side of to-day's success and triumphed in it.
Oblonsky too was pleased that he had spent his time merrily and that every one was satisfied.
Sviyazhsky comically mimicked the old Marshal's tearful speech and, turning to Nevedovsky, remarked that His Excellency would have to adopt a different and more complex method of auditing the funds than tears!
This was uttered with the same pleasure with which a newly-married woman is addressed as Madame and called by her husband's name.
Nevedovsky pretended not merely to be indifferent to but to despise this title; but it was evident that he felt happy and exercised self-control to avoid betraying a delight ill-suited to the new Liberal circle in which they found themselves.
The Governor asked Vronsky to accompany him to a concert in aid of a 'Brotherhood,' which was being arranged by his wife, who wished to make Vronsky's acquaintance.
'There will be a ball afterwards and you will see our Society beauty! Really, she is quite remarkable.'
'Not in my line,' answered Vronsky, who was fond of that English expression, but he smiled and promised to come.
'From Vozdvizhensk, by express messenger,' he said with a significant glance.
'It is extraordinary how much he resembles the Public Prosecutor Sventitsky,' remarked one of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, read his letter.
Even before he read it he knew its contents.
Expecting the elections to end in five days, he had promised to return on the Friday.
It was now Saturday, and he knew that the letter contained reproaches for his not having returned punctually.
The letter he had sent off the evening before had probably not yet reached her.
The contents of the letter were just what he expected, but its form was unexpected and particularly unpleasant to him. 'Annie is very ill.
Baby was ill, and she wished to come herself?
The innocent mirth of the elections and this dismal burdensome love to which he must return struck Vronsky by their contrast.
But he had to go, and he took the first train that night for his home.
BEFORE VRONSKY WENT TO THE ELECTIONS Anna, having considered that the scenes which took place between them every time he went away could only tend to estrange them instead of binding them closer, resolved to make every possible effort to bear the separation calmly.
But the cold, stern look on his face when he came to tell her he was going offended her, and even before he had gone her composure was upset.
Later on, meditating in solitude on that look  which expressed his right to freedom  she, as usual, came only to a consciousness of her own humiliation. 'He has the right to go when and where he pleases.
But, knowing this, he ought not to do it!
But really what has he done...
Of course it is indefinable, intangible, but it was not so formerly, and that look means much,' she thought. 'That look shows that he is beginning to grow cold.'
Though she was convinced that this was the case, she could not do anything, could not in any way change her relation to him.
Just as heretofore, she could hold him only by means of her love and attractiveness; and just as heretofore, only by occupations by day and morphia by night could she stifle the terrible thought of what would happen if he ceased to love her.
True, there was one means, not of holding him  for that purpose she wished for nothing except his love  but of putting herself in such a position that he could not abandon her.
She began to wish for this, and decided to agree the first time he or Steve should mention it to her.
With these thoughts in her mind she spent five days, the days she expected him to be away.
Walks, talks with the Princess Barbara, visits to the hospital, and above all reading, reading one book after another, filled her time.
But on the sixth day, when the coachman returned from the station without him, she felt that she was no longer able to stifle the thought of him and of what he was doing.
Just then her little girl fell ill.
Anna nursed her, but this did not divert her thoughts especially as the illness was not dangerous.
Try as she might she could not love that child and she could not make a pretence of love.
Toward the evening of that day, being alone, Anna felt such terror on Vronsky's account that she decided to go to town, but after careful consideration she wrote that contradictory letter which Vronsky received, and without reading it over she sent it by express messenger.
Next morning she received his letter and regretted her own.
She anticipated with horror a repetition of that stern look he had thrown at her when leaving, especially when he should learn that the little girl was not dangerously ill.
But still she was glad she had written.
Anna now acknowledged to herself that he was weary of her and would regret giving up his freedom to return to her; yet in spite of this she was glad that he would come.
Let him feel weary, but let him be here with her so that she might see him and know his every movement.
Several times she had thought she heard the sound of wheels but had been mistaken; at last she heard not only the wheels but also the coachman's voice and a dull rumbling in the portico.
Even the Princess Barbara, who was playing patience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing, rose, but instead of going downstairs, as she had already done twice, she stood still.
She suddenly felt ashamed of having deceived him and still more afraid of how he might treat her.
The feeling of injury had already passed, and she only feared the expression of his displeasure.
She remembered that the child had been quite well since yesterday. She was even vexed with her for having recovered as soon as the letter had been sent.
Then she recollected that he was here, all of him, his hands, his eyes.
She heard his voice, and forgetting everything else ran joyfully to meet him.
'Well, how is Annie?' he asked timidly, looking up at Anna as she ran down to him.
He was sitting on a chair, and the footman was pulling off his warm boots.
'And you?' he asked, giving himself a shake.
She took his hand in both hers and drew it to her waist, not taking her eyes off him.
'Well, I'm very glad,' he said, coldly surveying her coiffure and the dress which, he knew, she had put on for him.
And the stern and stony look, which she so dreaded, settled on his face.
And you are well?' said he, wiping his wet beard with his handkerchief, and kissing her hand.
'No matter,' she thought, 'if only he is here. When he is here he can't and daren't fail to love me!'
The evening passed happily and cheerfully in the company of the Princess Barbara, who complained to him that in his absence Anna had been taking morphia.
When he is here I never take it, or hardly ever.'
He told her about the elections, and Anna knew how by questions to lead him on to just what pleased him  his success.
She told him about everything that interested him at home, and all her news was most cheerful.
But late at night, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she had regained full mastery of him, wanted to efface the depressing impression of the look he gave her apropos of the letter, and said:
As soon as she had said this she knew that, however lovingly disposed he might be to her, he had not forgiven her for that letter.
'Don't let us talk about it,' he said.
'Why should we not talk about it?' she replied.
But she did not listen to him.
But not a cold look only but the angry look of a hunted and exasperated man flashed in his eyes as he spoke those tender words.
It was a momentary impression, but she never forgot it.
Anna wrote to her husband asking him for a divorce and at the end of November, having parted from the Princess Barbara, who had to go to Petersburg, she moved to Moscow with Vronsky.
The date on which, according to the most exact calculations of persons experienced in such matters, Kitty should have been confined had long passed; but she had not yet been delivered, nor were there any signs that the time was nearer now than it had been two months previously.
The doctor, the midwife, Dolly, her mother, and especially Levin (who could not think without horror of what was coming), began to experience impatience and anxiety; Kitty alone was perfectly calm and happy.
She now distinctly realized the awakening of a new sense of tenderness for the coming (and for her to some extent already existing) child, and she yielded with pleasure to that feeling.
Sometimes this occasioned her pain, but at the same time she wanted to laugh because of this strange new joy.
All whom she loved were with her, and all were so kind to her and so attentive, and everything was presented to her in so pleasant an aspect, that had she not known it must soon come to an end she could not have desired a better or pleasanter life.
The only thing that marred the charm of this life was that her husband was not as she loved him best, not as he used to be in the country.
She loved his quiet, kindly and hospitable manner on his estate.
In town he always seemed restless and on his guard, as if afraid lest some one should insult him or, worse still, her.
There, on his estate, feeling that he was in his right place, he was never in a hurry to go anywhere and was always occupied.
Here in town he was always in a hurry, as if fearing to miss something, and yet he had nothing to do.
She knew that to others he did not appear to need pity. On the contrary, when Kitty watched him in company  as one sometimes watches a person one loves, trying to see him from a stranger's point of view, so as to realize the impression he makes on others  she saw, even with some jealous fear, that far from needing pity he was very attractive, by his good breeding, his rather old-fashioned and timid politeness to women, his powerful figure, and, as she thought, his uncommonly expressive face.
But she understood him not from without but from within and saw that in town he was not himself; she could not otherwise define his condition.
Sometimes in her heart she reproached him for not knowing how to live in town; at other times she confessed that it was really hard for him to arrange his life here satisfactorily.
Indeed, what could he do?
But she knew that to do so he would have to find pleasure in being with young women and she could not wish that.
Stay at home with her and her mother and sisters?
But, agreeable and amusing as the same oft-repeated conversations might be to her  talks about 'Alines and Nadines,' as the old Prince called those talks between the sisters  she knew they must bore him.
Continue to write his book?
He did try to do it, and began by going to a public library to take notes and look up references he required; but, as he explained to her, the less he did the less time he seemed to have.
And he also complained that he had talked too much about his book here, so that all his ideas had become confused and he had lost interest in them.
The old Princess, Mary Borisovna, Kitty's godmother, who had always been very fond of her, particularly wished to see her.
Though Kitty was not going out anywhere because of her condition, yet she went with her father to see the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.
The only thing Kitty could reproach herself with when that visit was over was that for an instant, on recognizing Vronsky's once so familiar figure in his civilian clothes, she grew breathless, the blood rushed to her heart, and she felt a deep flush suffusing her face.
Her father, purposely addressing Vronsky in a loud voice, had not finished what he was saying before she was quite ready to face Vronsky, and if need be to converse with him just as she conversed with the Princess Mary Borisovna; especially so that everything down to the lightest intonation and smile might be approved by her husband, whose unseen presence she seemed to feel above her at that moment.
She exchanged a few words with Vronsky, and even smiled at a joke he made about the elections, to which he alluded as 'our parliament.'
(She had to smile to show that she understood the joke.)
But she at once turned to the Princess Mary Borisovna and did not once look round at Vronsky till he rose to go. Then she looked at him, but evidently only because it is impolite not to look at a man when he is bowing to you.
She was grateful to her father for not saying anything to her about this encounter with Vronsky; but, by his peculiar tenderness to her during their daily walk after the visit, she saw that he was pleased with her.
She had not at all expected to find strength to shut down somewhere deep in her heart all memories of her former feelings for this man, and not merely to appear but really to be quite tranquil and calm in his presence.
Levin blushed much more than she had done when she told him she had met Vronsky at the Princess Mary Borisovna's.
It was very difficult for her to tell him this, and still more difficult to go on giving him details of the meeting, as he did not ask anything, but only frowned and looked at her.
'I am very sorry you were not there,' she said; 'I don't mean present in the room... I should not have behaved so naturally with you there...
I am now blushing much more  much, much more,' she added, blushing to tears, 'but I am sorry you could not look through a crack.'
Her truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and in spite of her blushes he grew calm at once and began questioning her, which was just what she wanted.
When he had heard all, down to the fact that just for the first second she could not help blushing, but that afterwards she had felt as natural and easy as with anyone she might happen to meet, he became quite happy and said he was very glad it had happened and in future he would not behave as stupidly as he had done at the election, but would try to be as friendly as possible with Vronsky next time he met him.
'It is so painful to think that there is a man who is almost my enemy,  whom I dislike to meet,' said Levin. 'I am very, very glad!'
'WELL THEN, PLEASE CALL ON THE BOLS,' said Kitty to her husband when, at about eleven o'clock in the morning he came to her room before going out. 'I know you are dining at the club.
'Oh yes! It was his article you praised so?
'Well, in any case I will come back before dinner,' he said, glancing at his watch.
'But as a bachelor you used to pay calls?' she said.
I will vouch for that!' said Kitty, looking laughingly into his face.
She took his hand. 'Well, good-bye!...
He was about to go after kissing her hand, when she stopped him.
How much?' he asked, with a dissatisfied look familiar to her.
'Not at all,' he said, coughing and looking at her from under his brows.
With him it was a sign of great displeasure, not with her but with himself.
He was really dissatisfied, not because they had spent so much but because he had been reminded of a matter which, well knowing that something was wrong, he wished to forget.
'Not at all, not at all!' he repeated. 'Well, good-bye, darling!'
'Is that true?' she said, looking into his eyes.
He had said it without thinking, to comfort her. But when he looked and saw those dear, truthful eyes questioningly fixed on him, he repeated the words from the bottom of his heart.
'Decidedly I am forgetting her,' he thought, remembering what was so soon awaiting them.
How do you feel?' he whispered, taking both her hands in his.
'Not an atom!' she answered.
Mama and I were talking about it with Arseny' (so she called her sister's, the Princess Lvova's, husband), 'and we decided to set you and him at Steve.
But if you and he...'
'Well, anyhow, you will see Arseny. Have a talk with him, and he will tell you what we decided.'
At the porch Kuzma, an old servant of his bachelor days, who was now managing the household in town, stopped Levin.
'Krasavchik' (one of the pair of carriage horses brought from the country) 'has been re-shod but still goes lame,' said he. 'What are your orders?'
Levin no longer thought it strange, as he had done when he first came to Moscow, that to go from the Vozdvizhenka Street to Sivtsev-Vrazhek it was necessary to harness a pair of strong horses to a heavy carriage to drive through the snowy slush a quarter of a verst, to keep the carriage waiting there for four hours, and to pay five roubles for it.
On his way he thought no more about money, but considered how he could make the acquaintance of the Petersburg scholar, who was studying sociology, and how he would talk to him about his book.
Now he was used to it.
When he had changed the first hundred-rouble note to buy liveries for the footman and hall porter, he had involuntarily calculated that those useless liveries  which, however, were absolutely necessary, judging by the surprise of the old Princess and Kitty at his hint that one could do without liveries  would cost as much as the hire of two labourers for the summer months, that is, of one for about three hundred working days between Easter and Advent  and each a day of heavy labour from early morning till late in the evening.
He parted with that hundred-rouble note not without a struggle. The next such note he changed to buy provisions for a family dinner, costing twenty-eight roubles; and though he remembered that twenty-eight roubles was the price of nine chetverts of oats mown, bound into sheaves, threshed, winnowed, sifted, and shovelled with sweat and groans, nevertheless it went more easily than the first.
The notes he now changed no longer evoked such calculations, but flew away like wee birds.
The rye  after he had so long held out for a certain price  was sold fifty kopeks a chetvert cheaper than had been offered him a month ago.
Till now he had always observed that rule; he had always had money in the bank.
But now he had no money remaining there, and did not quite know where to get any.
It was this that had upset him for a moment when Kitty reminded him about money; however, he had no time to think about it.
While driving he thought of Katavasov and of making Metrov's acquaintance.
DURING HIS STAY IN Moscow Levin had renewed his intimacy with his fellow-student of university days, now Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his marriage.
He liked Katavasov because of his clear and simple outlook on life.
Levin thought Katavasov's clear outlook resulted from the poverty of his nature and Katavasov thought Levin's inconsequential opinions resulted from a lack of mental discipline; but Katavasov's clarity pleased Levin, and the abundance of Levin's undisciplined thoughts pleased Katavasov, so they liked to meet and argue.
Levin had read some parts of his book to Katavasov, who liked it.
Happening to meet Levin at a public lecture the previous day, Katavasov had told him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article had so pleased Levin, was in Moscow and was much interested in what Katavasov had told him of Levin's work, that he would be at his house next day about eleven in the morning and would be very pleased to make Levin's acquaintance.
'Decidedly you are improving  quite a pleasure to see it,' said Katavasov as he welcomed Levin in the little drawing-room. 'I heard the bell and thought "It's impossible he can have come punctually."...
Katavasov in a few words told him the latest news, and, taking him into the study, introduced Levin to a tall, sturdy, and very agreeable-looking man.
Metrov quoted words an the subject attributed to the Emperor and one of the Ministers, which he had from a reliable source.
'He has written almost a book on the natural condition of the labourer in relation to the land,' said Katavasov. 'I am not a specialist, but as a naturalist I liked his not taking humanity as something outside zoological laws but on the contrary regarding it as dependent on its surroundings, and searching in this dependence for the laws of its development.'
'I really began to write a book on agriculture, but being occupied with the chief instrument in agriculture, the labourer,' said Levin with a blush, 'I involuntarily arrived at quite unexpected results.' And Levin began carefully, as if feeling his way, to expound his views.
but how far he could hope for his sympathy with his own novel views Levin did not know, and could not gather from the expression of the Professor's quiet and intelligent face.
'But in what do you perceive the peculiar quality of the Russian worker?' asked Metrov. 'In his zoological qualities, so to say, or in the conditions in which he is placed?'
Levin detected in this very question a thought with which he did not agree; but he continued to expound his view, which was that the Russian labourer's view of the land is quite different from that of other nations.
To illustrate this theory he hastened to add that, in his opinion, the Russian people view results from their consciousness of a vocation to populate the vast unoccupied tracts in the East.
'It is easy to be led astray when drawing conclusions as to the general vocation of a people,' said Metrov, interrupting Levin. 'The condition of the labourer will always depend on his relation to land and capital.'
And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began expounding to him the peculiarity of his own teaching.
What that peculiarity consisted in Levin did not understand, because he did not even try to do so.
He saw that Metrov, like the others, despite the article in which he refused the teachings of the economists, still regarded the position of the Russian labourer merely from the standpoint of capital, wages, and rent.
Though he had to admit that in the Eastern and greater part of Russia rents were still nil, that wages  for nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian population  represented only sustenance for themselves, and that capital did not yet exist except in the form of most primitive tools yet he regarded every labourer merely from that one point of view, though on many points he disagreed with the economists and had his own theory of wages, which he explained to Levin.
He wanted to interrupt Metrov and to state his own idea, which he considered would render a further statement of Metrov's view superfluous.
But afterwards, having convinced himself that they looked at the question so differently that they would never understand one another, he ceased making objections and merely listened.
Though what Metrov was saying now no longer interested him at all, he felt some pleasure all the same in hearing him.
His vanity was flattered by the fact that so learned a man should explain his opinions to him so willingly, so carefully, and with such faith in Levin's knowledge of the subject that he sometimes by a mere hint indicated a whole aspect of the matter.
Levin attributed this to his own worth, not knowing that Metrov, who had exhausted the matter with all his intimates, was particularly pleased to speak about it to any fresh person, and, in general, willingly spoke to everybody about the subject with which he was occupied and which was not yet clear to himself.
'I'm afraid we shall be late,' said Katavasov, glancing at the clock as soon as Metrov had finished his disquisition.
I have promised to read a paper on his work on Zoology.
I gave in a separate report,' Katavasov called out from the next room, where he was changing his coat.
Levin, though he did not belong to the university, had since his arrival in Moscow more than once heard and conversed about this affair, and had formed his own opinion on the subject; and he took part in the conversation which was continued in the street until they all three arrived at the old university buildings.
At the table covered with a cloth at which Katavasov and Metrov took their seats six men were sitting, and one of them, with his head bent close over a manuscript, was reading something.
Though the biography of the scientist did not interest Levin, he listened involuntarily and learned a few interesting facts about the celebrated man's life.
Then Katavasov, in his loud strident voice, read his paper on the scientific work of the man whose jubilee it was.
When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw that it was getting on for two, and thought that there would be no time to read his manuscript to Metrov before the concert, and besides, he no longer felt inclined to do so.
During the readings he had also been thinking about the talk they had had.
It was now clear to him that though Metrov's views might perhaps be of importance, his own ideas were of importance too, and these views could be formulated and lead to results only if each of them worked separately along the lines he had selected, but communicating them to one another could not lead to any result.
Making up his mind to decline Metrov's invitation, therefore, Levin approached him as soon as the meeting ended.
Metrov introduced him to the chairman, with whom he was discussing the political news.
In this connection Metrov told the chairman the same thing that he had already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks as he had made in the morning, but for the sake of diversity expressed also a new view of his own  which had but just entered his head.
As Levin had already heard all that, he hastened to tell Metrov that he regretted he was unable to accept his invitation, shook hands, and drove off to the Lvovs'.
LVOV, WHO WAS MARRIED to Kitty's sister Nataly, had passed all his life in the capitals and abroad, where he had been educated and where he had been in the diplomatic service.
The year before, he had quitted the diplomatic service, not because of any unpleasantness (he never had unpleasantness with anyone), but had exchanged into the Moscow Court Ministry in order to be able to give his boys the best education.
Wearing an indoor jacket with a belt, morocco leather shoes, and with a pince-nez of blue glass on his nose, Lvov sat in an easy-chair reading a book lying on a lectern before him, and carefully held at a distance in his shapely hand a cigar half turned to ashes.
His handsome, refined, and still young-looking face, to which the curly, glossy, silver hair gave a still more well-bred appearance, lit up with a smile when he saw Levin.
I think it splendid,' said he with a slightly French accent.
Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov of what was said in Petersburg, and, after some talk on politics, Levin recounted how he had made Metrov's acquaintance and had gone to the meeting.
'There now! I envy you for having the entrance to that interesting scientific world,' he said, and having started talking he changed, as he usually did, into French, which he spoke more easily.
I was just reading,' and he showed Levin Buslaev's Grammar which lay on the lectern. 'They expect Misha to know this, and it is so difficult...
Lvov evidently tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but a radiant smile lit up his face.
That is all I desire. You do not yet know all the difficulties one has with boys who, like mine, have been neglected through our life abroad,' said he.
One must have the support of religion  you remember our talk about that?... No father relying on his own strength, without that support, could educate a child.'
'Oh, I didn't know you were here,' she said, evidently not at all sorry but rather pleased at having interrupted a conversation which she had heard long ago, and of which she was weary. 'And how is Kitty?
Look here, Arseny,' she said, turning to her husband, 'you will take the carriage...'
It was settled that Levin would drive with Nataly to the concert and to the public meeting, and from there they would send the carriage to the office to fetch Arseny, who would call for his wife and take her on to Kitty's, or if he was detained by business he would send the carriage back, and Levin would accompany her.
'He spoils me, you know,' said Lvov to his wife, indicating Levin. 'He assures me that our children are splendid, though I see so much that is bad in them.'
'Arseny goes to extremes, as I always tell him,' said his wife. 'If you look for perfection, you will never be satisfied.
'Why not, if that is pleasanter?' said Lvov with his handsome smile, touching her hand. 'Those who don't know you would think you were not a mother but a stepmother!'
'No, extremes are not right in any case,' said Nataly quietly, putting his paper-knife in its right place on the table.
'Ah! Come here, you perfect children!' said Lvov to two little boys, who, after bowing to Levin, approached their father, evidently wishing to ask him something.
Levin wanted to talk to them and hear what they would say to their father, but Nataly spoke to him, and then Makhotin, a fellow official of Lvov's, came in Court uniform to fetch Lvov to meet some one; and an unending conversation began about Herzegovina, the Princess Korzinskaya, the Duma, and the Countess Apraxina's sudden death.
Levin had forgotten the commission he had been charged with and only remembered it when on his way to the ante-room.
'Oh, Kitty wished me to have a talk with you about Oblonsky,' he said, when Lvov paused on the stairs as he was seeing his wife and Levin down.
'Well then, I will be down on him!' said his wife smiling, as she stood in her white fur-lined cloak waiting for them to finish their talk. 'Come, let us go!'
When he had conducted his sister-in-law to her seat, he took his station behind a pillar, resolved to listen as attentively and as conscientiously as possible.
He tried not to let his mind wander nor to let his impression of the music be marred by looking at the white-tied conductor's arm-waving, which always so unpleasantly distracts one's attention from the music; nor by the ladies with their bonnets, the ribbons of which were so carefully tied over their ears for the concert, nor by all those other persons who were either not interested in anything or were interested in all sorts of things other than music.
But the longer he listened to the King Lear fantasia, the further he felt from the possibility of forming any definite opinion.
Wishing to clear up his own perplexity by hearing other people's impressions, Levin went to look for the experts, and was pleased to find a celebrated one chatting with his own acquaintance, Pestsov.
'Wonderful!' Pestsov was saying in his deep bass.
'How do you do, Constantine Dmitrich?... Especially shapely, plastic, and rich in colour, if one may say so, is the passage where you feel the approach of Cordelia, the woman, das ewige Weibliche, [The eternal feminine.] and she enters upon a struggle with fate.'
'Cordelia appears... here!' said Pestsov, tapping with his fingers the glossy programme he was holding, and handing it to Levin.
'You can't follow without it,' said Pestsov turning to Levin, as the man he had been talking to had gone away and he had no one else to talk to.
Levin maintained that the mistake of Wagner and of all his followers lay in trying to make music enter the domain of another art, and that poetry commits the same error when it depicts the features of a face, which should be done by painting, and, as an example of this kind of error, he mentioned a sculptor who tried to chisel the shadows of poetic images arising round the pedestal of his statue of a poet. 'The sculptor's shadows so little resembled shadows that they even clung to a ladder,' said Levin.
He liked this phrase, but could not remember whether he had not used it before, and to Pestsov himself, and after saying it he grew embarrassed.
On going out Levin met several other acquaintances with whom he talked about politics, music, and mutual friends; among others he met Count Bol. He had quite forgotten his intended visit to him.
'Well then, go at once,' said the Princess Lvova, to whom he mentioned the matter.
'PERHAPS THEY DON'T RECEIVE TO-DAY?' said Levin as he entered the hall of Countess Bol's house.
'They do; please walk in,' said the hall-porter, determinedly helping him off with his overcoat.
'What a nuisance!' thought Levin with a sigh, as he pulled off one glove and smoothed his hat. 'What is the good of my going in?
As he entered the first drawing-room he met in the doorway the Countess Bol, who with an anxious and stern expression was giving orders to a servant.
When she saw Levin she smiled and asked him into the next room, a smaller drawing-room, whence came the sound of voices.
Levin went up to them, said 'How-do-you-do,' and sat down on a chair beside the sofa, holding his hat in his hand.
The Countess came in and sat down on the sofa, and she too inquired about his wife and about the concert.
Levin answered, and repeated his remark about the suddenness of the Countess Apraxina's death.
'But she always was delicate.'
'Yes, splendid,' he replied, and as he was quite indifferent to what they might think of him, he repeated what they had heard hundreds of times about the peculiarities of that singer's talent.
When he had said enough and paused, the Colonel, who till then had kept silent, began also to talk about the opera and about the lighting of the opera-house.
At length, having mentioned the folle journe [Mad fte.] that was being got up at Tyurin's, he laughed, rose noisily, and went away.
He had to endure another minute or two, so he sat down again.
As, however, he kept on thinking how silly it was he found nothing to speak about and remained silent.
'No, but I promised my sister-in-law to call for her there,' said Levin.
There was a pause, and the mother exchanged glances with her daughter.
The ladies shook hands with him and asked him to tell his wife mille choses [To give his wife their love.] from them.
The hall-porter as he helped him on with his overcoat asked where he was staying, and at once entered his address in a large well-bound book.
'Of course it's all the same to me, but still it makes one ashamed, and it's awfully stupid,' thought Levin, comforting himself with the reflection that everybody does it; and he went on to the meeting of the committee where he had to meet his sister-in-law in order to accompany her to his own home.
But probably as a result of the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made a slip when talking of the trial, and he afterwards remembered that slip with vexation several times.
Speaking of the punishment awaiting a foreigner, who was being tried in Russia, and of how unjust it would be to banish him from the country, Levin repeated what he had heard said the day before by a man he knew.
'It seems to me that to send him abroad would be like punishing a pike by throwing it into the water,' said Levin; and only afterwards remembered that that thought, apparently given out as his own, and which he had heard from his acquaintance, was taken from one of Krylov's fables, and that his acquaintance had repeated it from a feuilleton.
Having conducted his sister-in-law to his house, where he found Kitty cheerful and quite all right, Levin went off to the club.
Members and visitors were driving up as he got there.
He had long not been there  not since the days when after leaving the university he had lived in Moscow and gone out into Society.
But as soon as he entered the semi-circular courtyard, got out of his sledge and entered the porch, where he was met by a hall-porter with a shoulder-belt who noiselessly opened the door and bowed to him; as soon as he saw in the hall the coats and goloshes of those of the members who realized that it was easier to take off their goloshes downstairs than to go up in them; and as soon as he heard the mysterious ring of the bell that announced his ascent; and while mounting the shallow steps of the carpeted stairs perceived the statue on the landing, and saw upstairs the third hall-porter in club livery  whom he recognized, though the man had aged  who opened the door for him without haste or delay, gazing at the new arrival directly he saw all this, Levin was enveloped in the old familiar atmosphere of the place, an atmosphere of repose, ease, and propriety.
This hall-porter not only knew Levin but knew all his connections and relatives as well, and at once mentioned some of his intimate friends.
Passing first through a room in which were several screens, and then a room on the right in which was a partition and a fruit-stall, Levin, having overtaken and passed an old man who was walking slowly, entered the noisy and crowded dining-room.
Here and there he came across all sorts of people he knew: old and young, some whom he only just knew and some with whom he was intimate.
'Why are you so late?' asked the old Prince with a smile, holding out his hand over his shoulder. 'How is Kitty?' he added, smoothing the table-napkin, which he had tucked in behind a button of his waistcoat.
Go to that table, and be quick and secure a seat,' said the old Prince, and turning away he carefully took a plate of fish soup that was handed to him.
He sat beside a young military man, and two chairs were tilted against their table.
He always liked that good-natured spendthrift Turovtsin; with him was associated the memory of his proposal to Kitty; but to-day, after all those strained intellectual conversations, Turovtsin's good-natured face was particularly welcome.
The military man, with merry, ever-laughing eyes, who held himself very erect, was Gagin, from Petersburg.
'Ah, here he is!'
He was hungry, and ate and drank with great pleasure, and with still greater pleasure took part in the simple merry talk of his companions.
Gagin, lowering his voice, related a new Petersburg anecdote which, though it was indecent and stupid, was so funny that Levin burst into loud laughter and people turned to look at him.
Bring another bottle!...' he called to the waiter, and immediately began telling the story.
Oblonsky took a glass, and exchanging a look with a bald, red-haired man with a moustache who sat at the other end of their table, smilingly nodded to him.
'Ah, here they are!' said Oblonsky, just as they were finishing, leaning back in his chair and stretching out his hand to Vronsky, who was approaching with a tall Colonel of the Guards.
Gaily leaning his arm on Oblonsky's shoulder, he whispered something to him, and with the same merry smile held out a hand to Levin.
'Very glad to meet you,' he said. 'I looked for you that day at the elections, but was told you had already left.'
'No; my father did, and I remember them and know something about them.'
'He has been congratulated!' remarked the Colonel. 'It's the second time he's won the Imperial prize.
If only I had the luck at cards that he has with horses!...
I'm off to the "infernal regions," added he, and walked away.
'That's Yashvin,' said Vronsky in reply to Turovtsin's question, as he took a vacant chair beside them.
Whether influenced by the club or by the wine he had drunk, Levin chatted with Vronsky about the best breeds of cattle, and was very pleased to find that he had not the least animosity toward the man.
He even told Vronsky among other things that he had heard from his wife that she had met him at the Princess Mary Borisovna's.
'Oh, the Princess Mary Borisovna! Isn't she charming?' cried Oblonsky, and related an anecdote about her which made them all laugh.
ON LEAVING THE TABLE Levin, feeling that as he went his arms swung with unusual regularity and ease, passed with Gagin through the lofty apartments to the billiard-room.
When they had traversed the Large Hall he met his father-in-law.
'Well, and how do you like our Temple of Idleness?' said the Prince, giving him his arm. 'Come, let's walk about a little.'
You look at those old men,' said the Prince, indicating a round-shouldered member with a hanging nether lip, hardly able to shuffle along in his soft boots, who met and passed them, 'and you imagine they were born shlyupiks?'
You know Prince Chechensky?' asked the Prince, and Levin saw by his face that he was going to say something droll.
Three years ago he was not yet among the shlyupiks and he showed a bold front, calling others shlyupiks.
Well, one day he arrives, and our hall-porter... You know Vasily?...
Oh yes, that fat one; he is a great wit. Well, Prince Chechensky asks him: "I say, Vasily, who is here?
Taking care not to make a noise they entered the dim reading-room, where, under shaded lamps, a young man with an angry countenance sat turning over one newspaper after another, and a bald General was engrossed in what he was reading.
'Will you come, Prince? Everything is ready,' said one of his habitual partners, finding him there, and the Prince went away.
Levin sat down for a while and listened, but remembering all the conversations he had that day heard, he suddenly felt terribly bored.
He rose hastily and went to look for Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom he had felt merry.
'Levin!' said he; and Levin noticed that though in Oblonsky's eyes there were not actually tears, they were moist, as they always were when he had been drinking or when he felt touched.
To-day it was both. 'Levin, don't go,' he said, holding him tightly by the elbow, evidently not wishing to let him go on any account.
'This is my true, almost my best friend,' he said to Vronsky. 'You too are even more near and dear to me; and I want you to be friends, and I know that you will be friendly and intimate because you are both good fellows.'
'Well, then there's nothing for it but to kiss and be friends!' said Vronsky, good-naturedly jesting and holding out his hand.
'You know, he is not acquainted with Anna,' said Oblonsky to Vronsky. 'And I particularly wish to take him to see her.
I would go home at once, but I am anxious about Yashvin and want to stay here till he has finished.'
'Oh, is he in a bad way?'
'Place the balls for pyramids,' he added, turning to the billiard-marker.
After the game Vronsky and Levin joined Gagin at his table, and at Oblonsky's invitation Levin began betting on aces.
I promised her long ago to bring you.
Levin went to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost betting on the aces, paid the club bill to an old footman who stood by the door and who seemed in some miraculous way to know what it came to, and, swinging his arms in a peculiar way, passed through the whole suite of rooms to the exit.
Only for the first few moments, while they were leaving the courtyard of the club, did Levin retain that sense of club calm, pleasure, and undoubted decorum in his surroundings; but as soon as the carriage had passed out into the street and he felt it jolting on the uneven road, heard the angry shouts of an izvoshchik they met, saw in the ill-lit street the red signboards of a vodka dealer and of a small shop, that sense was dissipated, and he began to consider his actions and to ask himself whether he was doing right in going to see Anna.
But Oblonsky would not let him reflect, and as if guessing his doubts tried to dispel them.
'How glad I am that you will make her acquaintance,' said he.
'Do you know, Dolly has long wished it: and Lvov called on her and goes to see her.
Though she is my sister,' Oblonsky continued, 'I may safely say that she is a remarkable woman.
'We are negotiating with her husband about a divorce.
He agrees; but there are difficulties about their son, and the affair, which should have been ended long ago, has already been dragging on for three months.
As soon as she gets the divorce she will marry Vronsky.
But the point is that she has been living for several weeks in Moscow, where everybody knows her and him, awaiting the divorce, without going out anywhere or seeing any women except Dolly, because, you understand, she does not want people to come and see her as a charity. Even that fool Princess Barbara has left her, considering it improper!
Well, you see, any other woman in her position might fail to find resources in herself.
But she... you'll see how she has arranged her life, how quiet and dignified she is!...
'Faugh! How hot!' he said, throwing his already unfastened overcoat still wider open in spite of 12 degrees of frost.
'But she has a child; I suppose she is occupied with her?' said Levin..
'I think you see in every woman only a female, une couveuse! [A broody hen.] necessarily occupied with children if at all!' said Oblonsky.
'No! I believe Anna is bringing her up splendidly, but one does not hear about her.
She is writing a children's book and does not speak of it to anyone, but she read it to me and I showed the manuscript to Vorkuyev... You know, the publisher... he writes himself, I think.
But you think she is a woman author?
She is first of all a woman with a heart, you'll see!
She now has a little English girl, and a whole family she is interested in.'
They had  I mean, Vronsky had  an English trainer, a master in his own line, but a drunkard.
He took completely to drink, got delirium tremens, and has deserted his family.
She saw them, helped them, and became interested in them, and now the whole family is on her hands  and she doesn't do it patronizingly, just with money, but she herself coaches the boys in Russian for the High School, and she has taken the girl into the house.
But you'll see her.'
Levin followed, more and more in doubt as to whether he was acting well or badly.
Glancing in the mirror, Levin saw that he was red in the face, but he was sure he was not tipsy, and he followed Oblonsky up the carpeted stairs.
On the top landing a footman bowed to Oblonsky as to some one he knew well, and Oblonsky, asking who was with Anna Arkadyevna, received the answer that it was Mr. Vorkuyev.
Another reflector-lamp fixed to the wall illuminated a large full-length portrait of a woman which attracted Levin's involuntary attention.
While Oblonsky passed behind a screen of trellis-work  and the man's voice that had been speaking became silent  Levin looked at the portrait, which in the bright illumination seemed to step out of its frame, and he could not tear himself away from it.
He forgot where he was, and without listening to what was being said gazed fixedly at the wonderful portrait.
It was not a picture, but a living and charming woman with curly black hair, bare shoulders and arms, and a dreamy half-smile on lips covered with elegant down, looking at him victoriously and tenderly with eyes that troubled him.
The only thing that showed she was not alive was that she was more beautiful than a living woman could be.
'I am so glad,' he heard a voice saying near by, evidently addressing him, the voice of the very woman whom he had admired in the portrait.
Anna had come out from behind the screen to meet him, and Levin saw in the dim light of the study the woman of the portrait, in a dark dress of different shades of blue, not in the same attitude, not with the same expression, but on the same height of beauty as that on which the artist had caught her in the portrait.
In reality she was less brilliant, but there was something about her new and attractive which was not in the portrait.
SHE HAD RISEN TO GREET HIM, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him.
The tranquillity with which she extended to him her energetic little hand, introduced him to Vorkuyev and, indicating a pretty red-haired child who sat in the same room doing needlework, spoke of her as her ward, showed the manners (familiar and pleasant to Levin) of a woman of good society, always self-possessed and natural.
'I am very, very pleased,' she repeated, and from her lips these simple words seemed to Levin to possess a peculiar meaning. 'I have long known and liked you, both for your friendship to Steve and for your wife's sake...
I only knew her for a very short time, but she left on me the impression of a lovely flower... just a flower! And she will soon be a mother!'
She spoke easily and without haste, occasionally turning her eyes from Levin to her brother.
Levin felt that the impression he was creating was a good one and immediately became at ease and as natural and comfortable with her as if he had known her from childhood.
'We came into Alexis's room to have a smoke,' she said in reply to Oblonsky's question whether he might smoke; and glancing at Levin, instead of asking him whether he smoked, she drew a tortoise-shell cigar-case nearer and took from it a straw cigarette.
'How are you to-day?' asked her brother.
A special brightness lit up Anna's face when she felt his eyes on her.
Levin flushed, and to hide his confusion was about to ask her if it was long since she had seen Dolly, but at that instant Anna herself began to speak.
Levin asked whether she had seen Dolly lately.
'Yes, I have seen the pictures and did not like them very much,' Levin said, returning to the subject she had started.
Levin did not now speak at all in the matter-of-fact way in which he had talked that morning.
Every word of his conversation with her assumed a special importance.
It was pleasant to speak to her and yet more pleasant to listen to her,
Anna not only talked naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and carelessly, not attributing any value to her own ideas, but attributing great value to those of her interlocutor.
Anna's face brightened all over when she suddenly appreciated the remark. She laughed.
'So you have been to the club?' she said, addressing her brother.
'What a woman!' thought Levin, and, quite forgetting himself, he gazed fixedly at her beautiful mobile face, which had now suddenly quite changed.
Levin did not hear what she was speaking about while she leaned toward her brother but was struck by the change in her expression.
After being so lovely in its tranquillity, her face suddenly expressed a strange curiosity, anger, and pride.
But this lasted only a moment. She screwed up her eyes, as if she were remembering something.
'However, that won't interest anyone,' she said; and turning to the little English girl, she added in English, 'Please order tea in the drawing-room.'
'Well, has she passed her examination?' inquired Oblonsky.
She is a very capable girl, and has a sweet nature.'
'You'll finish by being fonder of her than of your own.'
'How like a man!
I love my child with one kind of love and her with another.'
'I was just saying to Anna Arkadyevna,' remarked Vorkuyev, 'that if she were to devote to the general business of educating Russian children a hundredth part of the energy she bestows on this English child she would be doing a great and useful work.'
As she spoke the words 'Count Alexis' she turned a timidly petitioning glance toward Levin and he involuntarily replied with a respectful and confirmatory glance. 'He urged me to take an interest in the village school.
I've become fond of this girl, you see, without knowing why.'
Again she glanced at Levin.
And her smile and glance told him that she was speaking for him alone, valuing his opinion and knowing in advance that they would understand one another.
After a pause she smiled and said, 'Yes, yes, I never could do it. Je n'ai pas le coeur assez large [My heart is not big enough] to love a whole orphanage-full of unpleasant little girls.
And now especially,' she went on with a sad, confiding expression, as though addressing her brother but evidently speaking to Levin, 'now when I so need some occupation, I can't do it!'
And with a sudden frown (Levin understood that she was frowning at herself for having spoken about herself) she changed the subject. 'I have heard it said of you,' said she to Levin, 'that you are a bad citizen, and I have defended you as best I could.'
'I have told him about it,' remarked Oblonsky to his sister, indicating Levin.
She used to preside over the prison department of a Society,' she added, turning to Levin. 'And those unfortunate people achieved miracles of patience.'
And Levin perceived yet another feature in this woman whom he already liked so much.
In addition to her intelligence, grace, and beauty, she also possessed sincerity.
She did not wish to hide from him the hardships of her position.
When she had finished speaking she sighed, and all at once her face assumed a stern expression and became rigid.
With that expression her face seemed even more beautiful than before; but it was a novel look; it was outside the circle of expressions, radiating happiness and creating happiness, which the artist had caught when painting her portrait.
Levin again looked at the portrait and at her figure as, arm-in-arm with her brother, she passed through the lofty doorway, and he felt a tenderness and pity for her which surprised him.
She asked Levin and Vorkuyev to pass on into the drawing-room, and herself remained behind to speak to her brother. 'About the divorce?
About Vronsky? About what he was doing at the club?
About me?' Levin wondered; and he was so excited about what she might be saying to Oblonsky that he hardly listened to what Vorkuyev was telling him about the merits of Anna's story for children.
There was not a single moment when it was necessary to seek for a subject of conversation; on the contrary one felt that there was not time enough to say what one wanted to say, but willingly refrained in order to hear what she was saying.
It seemed to Levin that all that was said, not only by her, but also by Vorkuyev and Oblonsky, assumed a special importance owing to her attention and remarks.
While following this interesting conversation Levin all the time continued to admire her: her beauty, her cleverness; her good education, together with her simplicity and sincerity.
He listened and talked, and all the time thought of her, of her inner life, trying to guess her feelings.
And he, who had formerly judged her so severely, now by some strange process of reasoning justified her and at the same time pitied her and feared that Vronsky did not fully understand her.
Toward eleven, when Oblonsky rose to leave (Vorkuyev had already gone), Levin felt as if he had only just arrived.
'Good-bye!' she said, retaining his hand and gazing at him with a look that drew him to her. 'I am very pleased que la glace est rompue.'
She let go his hand and screwed up her eyes.
'Tell your wife that I am just as fond of her as ever and that if she cannot forgive me my situation, I wish her never to forgive me.
To forgive, she would have to live through what I have lived through, and may God preserve her from that!'
'Certainly, yes, I will tell her...' said Levin, blushing.
'WHAT A WONDERFUL, SWEET, PATHETIC WOMAN!' he thought as he and Oblonsky went out into the frosty air.
'Yes,' responded Levin pensively, 'an extraordinary woman!
Not on account of her intellect, but her wonderful sincerity...
I am dreadfully sorry for her.'
Well, another time, don't judge in advance,' said Oblonsky, opening the door of his carriage.
Without ceasing to think of Anna and of all the words  simple in the extreme  which they had interchanged, recalling every detail of the expressions of her face, entering more and more into her situation and feeling more and more sorry for her, Levin reached home.
At home he heard from Kuzma that Kitty was well and that her sisters had not long been gone, and he was given two letters.
These he read in the ante-room, so as not to let them divert his attention later on.
One was from his steward, Sokolov, who wrote that the wheat could not be sold, because only five-and-a-half roubles a chetvert was bid, and added that there was no other source from which to get money.
The other letter was from his sister, who reproached him for not having settled her business yet.
'It's surprising how all one's time gets taken up here,' he thought with reference to the second letter. He felt himself to blame because he had not yet done what his sister asked of him.
And resolving that he would attend to it next day without fail, he went to his wife. On his way he ran over in his mind the whole of the past day.
All the events had consisted of conversations: conversations to which he had listened or in which he had taken part. All these conversations were about matters he would never have occupied himself with had he been in the country, but here they were very interesting.
All of them had been good, and only two things were not quite pleasant. One was what he had said about the pike, and the other was that there was something not quite right about his tender pity for Anna.
Levin found his wife sad and depressed.
The three sisters' dinner-party would have gone off very well, except that he did not come in as they expected and they all became dull. Then the sisters left, and she remained alone.
'Well, and what have you been doing?' she asked, looking him in the eyes, which had a suspicious glitter in them.
But, not to hinder his relating everything, she masked her observation and listened with an appreciative smile while he told her how he had spent the evening.
You see, I shall now try to avoid meeting him again, but the constraint will no longer exist...' said he, and remembering that whilst 'trying to avoid meeting him again' he had gone straight to Anna's, he blushed. 'There now!
But Kitty was not interested in the question of how the people drink; she had seen his blush and wanted to know the reason.
On saying this Levin blushed still more, and his doubts as to whether he had done right or wrong in going to see Anna were finally solved.
He now knew that he should not have gone there.
Kitty's eyes opened in a peculiar manner and flashed at the mention of Anna's name, but making an effort she hid her agitation and so deceived him.
'Ah!' was all she said..
'Oh no!' she said, but he saw by her eyes the effort she made to control herself, and it boded him no good.
'She is very charming, very, very much to be pitied, and a good woman,' he said, telling her about Anna and her occupations and the message she had sent.
'Yes, of course she is much to be pitied,' said Kitty when he had finished. 'From whom were your letters?'
He told her, and misled by her quiet manner went to undress.
When he returned he found Kitty still sitting in the chair where he had left her.
When he drew near she looked at him and burst into sobs.
What is it?' he asked, well aware what it was.
'You have fallen in love with that horrid woman! She has bewitched you!
It was long before Levin could pacify his wife.
At last he managed it, but only by acknowledging that a sense of pity, after the wine he had drunk, had misled him, that he had yielded to Anna's artful influence, and that he would avoid her in future.
One thing that he sincerely confessed was that, living so long in Moscow with nothing but talk and food and drink, he was going silly.
Though she had involuntarily done all in her power to awaken love in Levin (as at that time she always did to all the young men she met), and though she knew she had succeeded in as far as was possible with an honourable married man in one evening, and though she had liked him very much (despite the marked difference between Vronsky and Levin from a man's point of view, she, as a woman, saw in them that common trait which had caused Kitty to fall in love with them both), yet as soon as he had left the room she ceased to think about him.
One thought, and one only, pursued her remorselessly in different forms. 'If I produce such an effect on others, on this married man who loves his wife, why is he so cold toward me...
And it's not coldness, for I know he loves me, but something fresh now divides us.
Why has he been away all the evening?
He sent word by Steve that he could not leave Yashvin, but must keep an eye on his play.
But admitting that it's true  he never tells lies  then behind that truth there is something else.
He is glad of a chance to show me that he has other obligations.
I know he has, I agree to that.
He wishes to give me proofs that his love of me must not interfere with his freedom.
And Steve says he can't go to see Alexis Alexandrovich; and I can't write again.
He ought to pity me,' said she, feeling tears of self-compassion rising to her eyes.
She heard Vronsky's vehement ring at the front door and quickly dried her eyes. She even sat down near the lamp and opened a book, pretending to be tranquil.
She must let him see that she was displeased that he had not returned when he had promised  displeased, that should be all; she would on no account show him her grief, and still less her self-compassion.
She might pity herself, but he must not pity her.
She did not want strife and blamed him for wanting to fight, but yet she involuntarily took up a fighting attitude.
'Well, you've not been dull?' he asked cheerfully and with animation, coming up to her. 'What a terrible passion gambling is!'
And how did you like Levin?' he asked, taking a seat beside her.
But he went back and now has lost more than he had won.'
'Then what was the good of your staying with him?' she said, suddenly raising her eyes to his face.
A similar cold expression of readiness for strife appeared on his face.
'For one thing, I did not give him any message for you; and for another I never say what is not true. But chiefly, I wanted to stay, so I stayed,' he replied with a frown.
Why? Why?...' he asked after a short pause, bending toward her and opening his hand, hoping that she would place hers in it.
But some strange evil power prevented her from yielding to her impulse, as if the conditions of the struggle did not allow her to submit.
Why?' she said, becoming more and more agitated. 'Does anyone dispute your right?
His hand closed, he leaned back, and his face assumed a still more stubborn look.
'For you it's a matter of obstinacy,' she said, after gazing intently at him and suddenly finding a name for that look that irritated her so. 'Just obstinacy!
For you it is a question whether you will conquer me, and for me...' Again she felt sorry for herself and nearly burst into tears.
'But what is it all about?' he said, horrified at her expression of despair, and again leaning toward her he took her hand and kissed it. 'What have I done?
'I should hope so!' she said.
I am ready to do anything to make you happy,' he went on, touched by her despair. 'What would I not do to spare you such grief as this, about I know not What!
'Nothing, nothing!' she replied. 'I don't know myself whether it is this lonely life, or nerves...
You haven't told me about them,' and she tried to hide her triumph at her victory, for the victory was hers after all.
He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but by his tone and by his looks, which grew colder and colder, she saw that he had not forgiven her her victory, and that the obstinacy, against which she had fought, had again taken possession of him.
He was colder to her than before, as if he repented of having submitted; and remembering the words which had given her the victory  'I am near a catastrophe and afraid of myself'  she realized that they were a dangerous weapon and must not be used a second time.
She felt that side by side with the love that united them there had grown up some evil spirit of strife, which she could not cast out of his heart and still less out of her own.
THERE ARE NO CONDITIONS OF LIFE to which a man cannot accustom himself, especially if he sees that every one around him lives in the same way.
Three months previously Levin would not have believed that he could quietly fall asleep under the circumstances in which he now found himself: that while leading an aimless, senseless life, one moreover that was above his means, after tippling (he could call what had happened in the club by no other name), after showing unsuitable friendship to the man with whom his wife had once been in love, and after a still more unsuitable visit to a woman who could only be called a fallen woman, and after being allured by her and having grieved his wife  that in such circumstances he could quietly fall asleep.
But under the influence of weariness, a sleepless night, and the wine he had drunk, he slept soundly and peacefully.
But on the other side of the partition a light was moving, and he heard her step.
What is it?...' he muttered, not yet quite awake.
'Nothing,' said she, coming candle in hand from beyond the partition. 'I only felt a little unwell,' she added with a peculiarly sweet and significant smile.
Has it?' he asked in a frightened voice.
'We must send...' And he began to dress hurriedly.
'No, no,' she said smiling, holding him back with her hand.
She came back to her bed, put out the candle, lay down, and remained quiet.
Though that quietness, as if she were holding her breath, and especially the peculiar tenderness and animation with which, returning from the other side of the partition, she had said: 'It's nothing!' seemed to him suspicious, yet he was so sleepy that he fell asleep at once.
Only afterwards he remembered that bated breath, and realized all that had passed in her dear sweet soul while she lay motionless by his side, awaiting the greatest event of a woman's life.
At seven o'clock he was awakened by her touch on his shoulder and a soft whisper.
She was sitting on the bed holding in her hands some knitting she had lately been doing.
I'm not a bit afraid,' she said on seeing his alarmed face, and she pressed his hand to her breast and then to her lips.
He jumped up hastily, hardly aware of himself and without taking his eyes off her, put on his dressing-gown and stood still, gazing at her.
It was necessary for him to go, but he could not tear himself away from the sight of her: He had loved that face and known all its expressions and looks, but he had never seen her as she was now.
How vile and despicable he appeared to himself before her as she now was, when he recollected the grief he had caused her yesterday!
Her flushed face surrounded with soft hair that had escaped from beneath her night-cap shone with joy and resolution.
Little as there was of affectation and conventionality in Kitty's general character, yet Levin was astonished at what was revealed to him now that every veil had fallen and the very kernel of her soul shone through her eyes.
And in this simplicity, this nakedness of soul, she whom he loved was more apparent than ever.
She looked at him smilingly, but suddenly her eyebrows twitched, she raised her head, and coming quickly to him she took hold of his hand and clinging close she enveloped him in her hot breath.
She was suffering and seemed to be complaining to him of her pain.
And for a moment from force of habit he felt as if he were in fault.
But her look expressed a tenderness which told him that she not only did not blame him, but loved him because of those sufferings. 'If I am not to blame for it, who is?' he thought, involuntarily seeking a culprit to punish for these sufferings; but there was no culprit.
She suffered, complained, triumphed in her sufferings, rejoiced in them and loved them.
He saw that something beautiful was taking place in her soul but what it was he could not understand.
It was above his comprehension.
And Levin saw with amazement that she again took up the knitting which she had fetched in the night, and recommenced work.
As Levin went out at one door he heard the maid enter at the other.
He stopped at the door and heard Kitty give detailed instructions to the maid, and with her help herself move the bed.
He dressed, and while the horse was being harnessed  for it was early, and no izvoshchiks were about yet  he ran back to the bedroom not on tiptoe but, as it seemed to him, on wings.
She looked at him, evidently not listening to what he was saying.
'Yes, yes! Go,' she said rapidly, frowning and motioning him away with her hand.
He was already on his way through the drawing-room when suddenly a piteous moan, that lasted only a moment, reached him from the bedroom.
'Yes, it was she,' he said and, clasping his head with his hands, he ran downstairs.
Pardon and help us!' he repeated the words. that suddenly and unexpectedly sprang to his lips.
And he, an unbeliever, repeated those words not with his lips only.
At that instant he knew that neither his doubts nor the impossibility of believing with his reason  of which he was conscious  all prevented his appealing to God.
To whom should he appeal, if not to Him in whose hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love, to be?
The horse was not yet ready, but feeling particularly energetic, physically strong and alert to meet what lay before him, so as not to lose a moment he did not wait for it but started off on foot, telling Kuzma to catch him up.
At the corner he encountered a night izvoshchik hurrying along.
In the little sledge sat Mary Vlasevna in a velvet cloak with a shawl over her head. 'Thank God!' he muttered, recognizing with delight her little blonde face, which now wore a particularly serious and even severe expression.
Without stopping the izvoshchik he ran back beside her.
'So it began about two hours ago, not more?' she asked. 'You will find the doctor, but don't hurry him.
God have mercy and help us!' said Levin as he saw his horse coming out of the gateway.
Jumping into the sledge beside Kuzma, he ordered him to drive to the doctor's.
THE DOCTOR WAS NOT YET UP, and his footman said he had gone to bed late and given orders that he was not to be called, but the footman added that he would be up soon.
The man was cleaning lamp-glasses and seemed quite absorbed in his task.
This attention to his glasses and indifference to what was taking place at the Levins' astonished Levin at first, but he immediately recollected himself and realized that no one knew or was bound to know his feelings, and that it was therefore all the more necessary to act calmly, deliberately, and firmly in order to break through this wall of indifference and to attain his aim. 'Do not hurry and do not omit anything,' he said to himself, conscious of an increasing uplift of his physical powers and of his attention to all that lay before him.
Having learnt that the doctor was not up yet, Levin, out of the many plans that occurred to him, decided on the following: Kuzma should go with a note to another doctor, while he himself would go to the chemist for the opium; and if the doctor was not up when he returned he would bribe the footman  or if that was impossible, he would enter by force and wake the doctor at all costs.
At the chemist's a skinny dispenser, with the same indifference with which the footman had cleaned his lamp-glasses, closed with a wafer a packet of powders for which a coachman was waiting, and refused to let Levin have any opium.
The dispenser asked in German whether he might sell it and receiving permission from some one behind a screen took out a bottle and a funnel, slowly poured it from a large bottle into a small one, stuck on a label, and in spite of Levin's request that he should not do so sealed up the bottle, and was about to wrap it up.
This was more than Levin could stand; he resolutely snatched the bottle out of the man's hands and rushed out at the big glass door.
Peter Dmitrich!' he called out in a tone of entreaty through the open door. 'For heaven's sake forgive me!...
'Immediately! Immediately!' answered a voice, and Levin was astounded to detect that the doctor was smiling as he said it.
Two minutes more passed while the doctor put on his boots and two more while he put on his clothes and brushed his hair.
Levin again began in a piteous voice, but at that instant the doctor came out, dressed and with his hair brushed. 'These people have no conscience,' thought Levin.
'Good morning!' said the doctor, holding out his hand and, as it seemed to Levin, teasing him by his calm manner.
Trying to be as exact as possible, Levin began recounting every unnecessary detail of his wife's position, continually interrupting himself to beg the doctor to accompany him at once.
Levin gave the doctor a look which asked whether he was not laughing at him.
'I know, I know,' he said with a smile. 'I am a family man myself.
The doctor began on his coffee.
There were tears in the Princess's eyes and her hands shook.
When she saw Levin she embraced him and began to cry.
'Well, Mary Vlasevna, darling?' she asked, seizing the hand of the midwife who came toward them with a beaming but preoccupied expression.
'It's going all right,' she said.
'Persuade her to lie down; it will be easier for her.'
From the moment when he woke up and understood what was the matter Levin had braced himself to endure what might await him, without reasoning and without anticipating anything  firmly suppressing all his thoughts and feelings, determined not to upset his wife but on the contrary to calm and support her.
Not allowing himself even to think of what was about to happen and how it would end, judging by inquiries he had made as to the time such affairs usually lasted, Levin mentally prepared himself to endure and to keep his heart under restraint for something like five hours, which seemed to him within his power.
But when he returned from the doctor's and again saw her sufferings, he began repeating more and more often: 'God, pardon and help us!' sighing and lifting his head, afraid lest he should not be able to bear the strain and should either burst into tears or run away, so tormenting was it for him.
But after that hour another passed, a second, a third, and all the five hours that he had set himself as the longest term of possible endurance, and still the situation was unchanged; and he went on enduring, for there was nothing else to do but to endure  thinking every moment that he had reached the utmost limit of endurance and that in a moment his heart would burst with pity.
But the minutes went by, and the hours, and other hours, and his suffering and terror and strain grew tenser.
Sometimes minutes  those minutes when she called him to her and he held her moist hand, now pressing his with extraordinary strength and now pushing him away  seemed to him like hours; and then again hours seemed but minutes.
He was surprised when Mary Vlasevna asked him to light a candle behind the partition, and he learnt that it was already five o'clock in the evening.
Had he been told it was ten in the morning he would not have been more astonished.
He had just as little idea of where he was at that time as he had of when it all took place.
He saw her burning face, now bewildered and full of suffering, and now smiling and soothing him.
He saw the Princess red, overwrought, her grey hair out of curl, and with tears which she energetically swallowed, biting her lips.
He saw Dolly, he saw the doctor smoking thick cigarettes, and Mary Vlasevna with a firm, resolute, and tranquillizing look on her face, and the old Prince pacing up and down the ballroom and frowning.
But he did not know how they came and went, nor where they were.
Once he was told to fetch a table and a sofa.
He did it with zeal, believing that it was necessary for her sake, and only later discovered that he had been preparing a sleeping-place for himself.
Then he was sent to the study to ask the doctor about something.
Then he was sent to fetch an icon with silver-gilt mounts from the Princess's bedroom, and he and the Princess's old lady's maid climbed on a cupboard to get down the icon, and he broke the little lamp that burned before it, and the old servant tried to comfort him about his wife and about the lamp. He brought the icon back with him, and put it at the head of Kitty's bed, carefully pushing it in behind the pillows.
But where, when, and why all this was done he did not know.
Nor did he understand why the Princess took his hand, and looking pitifully at him, entreated him to be calm; nor why Dolly tried to persuade him to eat something and led him out of the room; nor why even the doctor looked seriously and sympathizingly at him, offering him some drops.
He only knew and felt that what was happening was similar to what had happened the year before in the hotel of the provincial town on the deathbed of his brother Nicholas.
'Lord, pardon and help us!' he kept repeating incessantly to himself, appealing to God, in spite of a long period of apparently complete estrangement, just as trustingly and simply as in the days of childhood and early youth.
During the whole of that time he was alternately in two different moods.
One mood when not in her presence: when with the doctor, who smoked one thick cigarette after another and extinguished them against the rim of the overflowing ashpan; when with Dolly and the Prince, where they talked about dinner, politics, or Mary Petrovna's illness, and when Levin suddenly quite forgot for an instant what was happening and felt just as if he was waking up; and the other was in her presence, by her pillow, where his heart was ready to burst with pity and yet did not burst, and there he prayed unceasingly to God.
And every time when the screams that came from the bedroom roused him from momentary forgetfulness he succumbed to the same strange error that had possessed him in the first moments: every time, on hearing the scream, he jumped up and ran to justify himself, but recollected on the way that he was not to blame and that he longed to protect and help her.
But when, looking at her, he again saw that to help was impossible; he was seized with horror and said, 'Lord, pardon and help us!' And the longer it lasted the stronger grew both his moods: out of her presence he became calmer, quite forgetting her, and at the same time both her sufferings and his feeling of the impossibility of helping her became more and more poignant.
He would jump up, wishing to run away somewhere, but ran to her instead.
Sometimes when she had called him again and again, he was half-inclined to blame her.
But seeing her meek smiling face and hearing her say, 'I have worn you out,' he blamed God; but the thought of God made him at once pray for forgiveness and mercy.
Suddenly there was a scream unlike anything he had ever heard.
The scream was so terrible that Levin did not even jump up, but looked breathlessly with a frightened and inquiring glance at the doctor, who bent his head on one side to listen and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so out of the ordinary that nothing any longer surprised Levin. 'Probably it had to be so,' thought he and remained sitting still.
'But who was it screaming?' He jumped up and rushed into the bedroom on tiptoe, past Mary Vlasevna and the Princess, and stopped at his place at the head of the bed.
The screaming had ceased, but there was a change; what it was he could not make out or understand, nor did he want to understand it but he read it in Mary Vlasevna's face.
She looked pale and stern, and as resolute as before though her jaw trembled a little and her eyes were fixed intently on Kitty.
Kitty's burning face, worn with suffering, with a lock of hair clinging to her clammy forehead, was turned toward him trying to catch his eye.
Her raised hands asked for his.
Seizing his cold hands in her perspiring ones she pressed them to her face.
I am not afraid, I am not afraid!' she said rapidly. 'Mama!
She spoke very rapidly and tried to smile, but all at once her face became distorted and she pushed him away.
Go! Go!' she cried, and again he heard that scream unlike any other cry.
Levin clasped his head in his hands and ran out of the room.
But say what they might, he knew that now all was lost.
Leaning his head against the door-post he stood in the next room, and heard some one shrieking and moaning in a way he had never heard till then, and he knew that these sounds were produced by what once was Kitty.
He had long ceased wishing for a child, and now he hated that child.
He did not now even wish her to live, but only longed that these terrible sufferings should end.
Oh, my God!' he cried, grasping the hand of the doctor who had just entered.
Quite beside himself, he rushed into her room.
The first thing he saw was Mary Vlasevna's face.
He let his head drop upon the wood of the bedstead, feeling that his heart was breaking.
Levin could scarcely believe his ears, but there was no room for doubt. The screaming had ceased, and he heard a sound of movement, of rustling, of accelerated breathing, and her voice, faltering, living, tender, and happy, as it said, 'It's over.'
He raised his head.
With her arms helplessly outstretched upon the quilt, unusually beautiful and calm she lay, gazing silently at him, trying unsuccessfully to smile.
And suddenly, out of the mysterious, terrible, and unearthly world in which he had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself instantaneously transported back to the old everyday world, but now radiant with the light of such new joy that it was insupportable.
The taut strings snapped, and sobs and tears of joy that he had not in the least anticipated arose within him, with such force that they shook his whole body and long prevented his speaking.
Falling on his knees by her bedside he held his wife's hand to his lips, kissing it, and that hand, by a feeble movement of the fingers, replied to the kisses.
And a boy!
Don't be anxious,' Levin heard Mary Vlasevna say, as she slapped the baby's back with a shaking hand.
And amid the silence, as a positive answer to the mother's question, a voice quite unlike all the restrained voices that had been speaking in the room made itself heard.
Before that, if Levin had been told that Kitty was dead, and that he had died with her, that they had angel children, and that God was there present with them  he would not have been astonished. But now, having returned to the world of actuality, he had to make great efforts to understand that she was alive and well, and that the creature that was yelling so desperately was his son.
Kitty was alive, her sufferings were over; and he was full of unspeakable bliss.
This he comprehended, and it rendered him entirely happy.
Whence and why had he come?
Who was he?...
It seemed something superfluous, something overflowing, and for a long time he was unable to get used to it.
TOWARD TEN O'CLOCK the old Prince, Koznyshev, and Oblonsky were with Levin, and having talked about the young mother they had begun discussing other matters.
Levin listened to them and at the same time involuntarily thought of the past and of what had been going on before that morning, remembering himself as he had been yesterday before this event.
He felt as if he were on some unattainable height, from which he painstakingly descended in order not to hurt the feelings of those with whom he was conversing.
He talked but never ceased thinking of his wife, of the details of her present condition, and of his son  to the idea of whose existence he painstakingly tried to accustom himself.
That feminine world which since his marriage had received a new and unsuspected significance for him now rose so high in his estimation that his imagination could not grasp it.
He heard a conversation about yesterday's dinner at the club and thought, 'What is happening to her now?
Is she asleep? How is she?
What is she thinking about?
Is our son, Dmitry, crying?'
And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle of a phrase, he suddenly jumped up and left the room.
'Send and let me know whether I may see her,' said the old Prince.
'All right, directly!' answered Levin, and, without pausing, went to her room.
She was not asleep, but was talking quietly with her mother, making plans for the christening.
Made neat, her hair brushed, a smart cap trimmed with something blue on her head, she lay on her back with her arms outside the quilt, and met his look with a look which drew him toward her.
That look, already bright, grew still brighter as he approached.
On her face was the same change from the earthly to that which was beyond earth, as is seen on the faces of the dead; but in their case it is a farewell, in hers it was a welcome.
Again an agitation, similar to that which he had felt at the moment of the birth, gripped his heart.
She took his hand and asked whether he had slept.
He could not answer and, conscious of his weakness, turned away.
'And I have been dozing, Kostya!' she said. 'And now I feel so comfortable.'
She was gazing at him, but suddenly her face changed.
'Let me have him,' said she, hearing the baby's cry. 'Let me have him, Mary Vlasevna, and he will see him too!'
Levin, gazing at this tiny piteous being, vainly searched his soul for some indications of paternal feeling.
But when it was stripped and he caught a glimpse of thin, thin little arms and legs saffron-coloured, but with fingers and toes, and even with thumbs distinguishable from the rest; and when he saw how, as though they were soft springs, Mary Vlasevna bent those little arms which stuck up, and encased them in linen garments, he was so filled with pity for that being, and so alarmed lest she should hurt it, that he tried to restrain her hand.
When the baby had been swaddled and made into a firm doll, Mary Vlasevna turned it over as if proud of her work, and stepped aside that Levin might see his son in all his beauty.
Kitty turned her eyes and gazed fixedly in the same direction. 'Let me have him, let me have him!' she said, and was even going to raise herself.
These were not at all the feelings he had expected.
Suddenly a laugh made him lift his head.
He fell asleep in her arms.
Smiling, and hardly able to keep back tears of tenderness, Levin kissed his wife and quitted the darkened room.
What he felt toward this little creature was not at all what he had anticipated.
And this consciousness was at first so painful, the fear lest that helpless being should suffer was so strong, that it quite hid the strange feeling of unreasoning joy and even pride which he experienced when the baby sneezed.
Two-thirds of the money for the forest had already been spent, and by allowing a discount of ten per cent he had obtained from the merchant almost the whole of the last third.
But the latter would not advance any more of the money, especially as Dolly, who had that winter for the first time plainly claimed a right to her own property, had refused to endorse the contract with a receipt for the last third of the payment. Oblonsky's whole salary went for household expenses and the liquidation of small pressing bills.
The cause, as he understood it, was that he received too small a salary.
'Evidently I have been asleep and have been forgotten!' thought Oblonsky. And he began pricking up his ears and looking around, and by the end of the winter he had discovered a very good post and begun an attack on it, first from Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends; and then in spring, when the matter had ripened, he himself went to Petersburg.
Like all such posts it required such immense knowledge and activity as could hardly be united in one man.
And as there was no one found who united those qualities, it was at any rate better for the post to be filled by an honest rather than a dishonest man.
Oblonsky was not only an honest man  placing no special emphasis on the word  but he was an honest man with an emphasis, in the special sense attaching to the word in Moscow, where they say: 'An honest worker, an honest writer, an honest journalist, an honest institution, an honest tendency,' meaning not only that the man or the institution are not dishonest, but also that they are capable, on occasion, of being objectionable to the Government.
Oblonsky moved in those Moscow circles where that word was used, and was there considered an honest man, so that he had a better claim to the post than other people.
The post carried a salary of from seven to ten thousand roubles a year, and Oblonsky could hold it without resigning his official position.
Moreover, he had promised his sister Anna to obtain a decisive answer about the divorce from Karenin.
So, having got fifty roubles from Dolly, he went to Petersburg.
Sitting in Karenin's study and listening to his article on 'The Causes of the Bad State of Russian Finance,' Oblonsky only waited for him to conclude to speak about his own affairs and about Anna.
'Yes, it is very true,' Oblonsky agreed when Karenin, taking off the pince-nez without which he could no longer read, looked up inquiringly at his former brother-in-law. 'It is very true in detail, but all the same the principle of to-day is Freedom.'
'Yes, but I bring forward another principle which embraces the principle of freedom,' said Karenin, accentuating the word 'embraces,' and putting his pince-nez on again to re-read the part where this was said.
'I do not want protection for the benefit of private individuals, but for the common good  for the lowest and for the highest classes equally,' he said, looking at Oblonsky over his pince-nez. 'But they cannot understand this, they are concerned only with their private interests and are carried away by phrases.'
Oblonsky knew that when Karenin began talking about what they did and thought  they being those who did not wish to accept his projects, and were the cause of all the evil in Russia  the end of the subject was near at hand, and he therefore willingly abandoned the principle of Freedom and agreed entirely.
Karenin was silent, thoughtfully turning over the leaves of his manuscript.
He was considering whether in the activity of this Committee there was not something at variance with his own projects.
But as the work of the new institution was very complicated and his project covered a very extensive domain, he could not decide this immediately, and taking off his pince-nez said:
The large figure of the salary reminded him that, in that respect, the post Oblonsky was aspiring to was opposed to the main idea of his projects, which always tended toward economy.
'Yes, but what would you have?' said Oblonsky. 'Let's say a bank director gets ten thousand,  he's worth it, you know!
Oblonsky hastened to interrupt his brother-in-law.
'Yes,' said he, 'but you will agree that a new and unquestionably useful institution is being started.
'Honesty is only a negative quality,' said he.
'Bolgarinov quite agrees, as far as he is concerned,' returned Oblonsky with a blush. He blushed at the mention of Bolgarinov, because he had that morning been to see the Jew and the visit had left an unpleasant impression on his mind.
Oblonsky was firmly convinced that the business he wished to serve was new, alive, and honest; but that morning when Bolgarinov, with obvious intention, made him wait two hours in his waiting-room with other petitioners, he had suddenly felt uncomfortable.
Whether it was that he, Prince Oblonsky, a descendant of Rurik, was waiting two hours in a Jew's waiting-room, or that, for the first time in his life, he was departing from the example set by his ancestors of serving the State only and was entering on a new field, at any rate he felt uncomfortable.
During those two hours in Bolgarinov's waiting-room he had walked about boldly, smoothing his whiskers, entering into conversation with other applicants, inventing a joke to tell, of how he had waited at the Jew's, carefully concealing his feelings from others and even from himself.
But all the time he felt uncomfortable and vexed without knowing why. Was it that nothing would come of his pun: 'I had business with a Jew, but could not get at him even to say ajew (adieu),' or was it something else?
And when Bolgarinov at length received him with extreme politeness, evidently triumphing in his humiliation, and very nearly refused his request, Oblonsky hastened to forget it as quickly as he could; and only now on recollecting it blushed.
'NOW THERE'S ANOTHER MATTER; you know what it is... about Anna,' said Oblonsky after a short pause, when he had shaken off the unpleasant recollection.
'What is it you wish of me?' Karenin said, turning round in his chair and folding his pince-nez.
I address myself to you not as...' He was going to say, 'as an offended husband,' but, afraid of injuring his case thereby, he changed the expression to 'not as a statesman' (this sounded inappropriate) 'but simply as a man, a kind man and a Christian!
You should have pity on her.'
'Why, pity her!
If you had seen her as I have who have spent the whole winter with her, you would pity her.
'It seems to me,' returned Karenin in a more high-pitched, almost squeaky voice, 'that Anna Arkadyevna has everything she herself desired.'
What is past is past! You know what she wants and is waiting for: the divorce.'
'But I understood that Anna Arkadyevna declined a divorce if I insisted on keeping my son.
'For heaven's sake don't excite yourself,' said Oblonsky, touching his brother-in-law's knee. 'The matter is not closed.
If you will let me recapitulate, this is how matters stood: When you parted, you were great, as magnanimous as a man can possibly be; you consented to everything: her freedom and even a divorce.
She appreciated it to such a degree that, at the moment, feeling herself to blame toward you, she did not consider and could not consider everything.
She renounced everything. But facts and time have shown that her situation is tormenting and impossible.'
'Anna Arkadyevna's life cannot interest me,' interposed Karenin, lifting his brows.
'Allow me not to believe that,' Oblonsky rejoined gently. 'Her situation is tormenting to her and does not benefit anyone.
She knows that and does not ask you for anything. She says plainly that she dare not ask anything.
But I, and all her relatives, who all love her, beg and implore you!
Why should she be so tormented?
Understand me!' said Oblonsky, now touching Karenin's hand, as if he were sure that the contact would soften his brother-in-law. 'All I say is that her position is tormenting, and could be made easier by you, without any detriment to yourself.
'The promise was given before, and I thought the question about my son had settled the matter...
Besides, I hoped that Anna Arkadyevna would have generosity enough...' uttered Karenin with difficulty, his lips trembling and his face turning pale.
She asks, she pleads for one thing only: help her out of the intolerable position she is in!
She no longer asks for her son...
Alexis Alexandrovich! You are a good man.
Enter for a moment into her situation.
The question of a divorce is for her  in her position  one of life and death.
If you had not promised before, she would have grown reconciled to her position and have gone on living in the country.
But as you had promised, she wrote to you and moved to Moscow.
And now in Moscow where every time she meets anyone it is like a knife in her heart, she has been living for six months every day expecting your decision.
Why, it's like keeping a man condemned to death with the halter round his neck for months, promising him either death or a reprieve!
Have pity on her, and I undertake to arrange...
'No, Alexis Alexandrovich!' said Oblonsky, jumping to his feet.
'I will not believe that! She is as wretched as a woman can be, and you cannot refuse such a...'
'I beg,' began Karenin in a shrill voice, suddenly rising to his feet, pale and with trembling jaw, 'I beg you to stop... stop... this conversation!'
Well then, forgive me! forgive me if I have pained you,' said Oblonsky with an embarrassed smile, holding out his hand. 'I only delivered my message as an envoy.'
Karenin gave him his hand, reflected, and then said:
The day after to-morrow I will give you a final answer,' he added, after consideration.
'Oh, Serezha!' he said.
Why, I thought it was the Director of the Department!' and he remembered that Anna had asked him to see the boy.
He recalled the timid pathetic look with which Anna at parting from him had said: 'Anyhow, you will see him. Find out everything: where he is, who is with him.
He had understood what 'If it is possible' meant. It meant, if it is possible to arrange the divorce so that she should have her son...
But now Oblonsky saw that it was useless even to think of that; he was, however, glad to see his nephew.
Karenin reminded his brother-in-law that they never mentioned his mother to the boy, and asked him not to say a word about her.
'He was very ill after that unexpected interview with his mother,' remarked Karenin. 'We even feared for his life.
But sensible treatment and sea-bathing in the summer have restored his health, and now, on the doctor's advice, I send him to school.
The influence of his schoolfellows has really had a good effect on him, and he is quite well and learns well.'
True enough, it's not little Serezha now, but a complete Sergey Alexeyich!' said Oblonsky, smiling as he looked at a handsome boy in a blue jacket and long trousers who entered the room boldly and confidently.
He bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him he blushed and turned away from him quickly as if offended and angry about something.
The boy came up to his father and handed him his school report.
'Well, that's pretty good,' said his father. 'You may go now.'
'He has grown thin and tall, and is no longer a child but a regular boy,' said Oblonsky. 'I like it.
The boy glanced swiftly at his father.
'I do, mon oncle,' he answered, looking at his uncle and then again lowering his eyes.
His uncle called him nearer and took his hand.
'Well, how are things?' said he, wishing to start a conversation, but not knowing what to say.
The boy, blushing and not answering, gently withdrew his hand from his uncle's grasp.
As soon as Oblonsky released it, after a questioning glance at his father, he hastily left the room like a bird let out of its cage.
A year had passed since Serezha last saw his mother.
Since then he had not heard any more of her.
During this year he had been sent to school, and had learned to know his schoolmates and to like them.
The dreams and memories of his mother which, after their interview, had made him ill, no longer occupied him. When they rose in his memory he took pains to drive them away, considering them shameful and fit only for girls, but not for a boy and a chum.
He knew that his father and mother had had a quarrel which separated them; knew that it was his fate to remain with his father, and he tried to accustom himself to that thought.
He felt uncomfortable at meeting his uncle, who resembled his mother, because it awakened those very memories which he considered shameful.
It was the more disagreeable because from some words he had overheard while waiting outside the study door, and especially from his father's and uncle's faces, he guessed that they had been talking about his mother.
And in order not to blame the father with whom he lived and upon whom he depended, and above all not to give way to the sensibility which he considered so degrading, Serezha tried not to look at that uncle, who had come to upset his peace of mind, and not to think of what was called to mind by the sight of him.
But when Oblonsky, who had come out after him, saw him on the stairs, and called him and asked how he spent his time between lessons at school, Serezha, in his father's absence, got into conversation with him.
'We play at railways now,' he said, answering the question. 'You see, it's this way: two sit down on a form; they are passengers.
'Yes, that's no joke,' said Oblonsky, looking sadly into those animated eyes so like the mother's  an infant's eyes no longer, and no longer altogether innocent.
And, in spite of his promise to Karenin, he could not refrain from speaking of Anna.
'Do you remember your mother?' he suddenly asked.
'No, I don't!' hurriedly replied Serezha, and blushing scarlet he hung down his head.
Half an hour later the Slav tutor found his pupil on the stairs, and for a long while could not make out whether he was in a temper or was simply crying.
If I do remember, or if I don't... what business is it of his?
Leave me alone!' he said, now addressing not his tutor but the world in general.
AS WAS HIS WONT, Oblonsky did not spend his time idly while in Petersburg.
Besides business  his sister's divorce and his post  it was as usual necessary for him, as he said, to refresh himself in Petersburg after the mustiness of Moscow.
After living in Moscow, especially in the bosom of his family, Oblonsky always felt his spirits flag. When he had spent a long time in Moscow without a break, he reached a state in which he began to be upset by his wife's ill-humour and reproaches, by the health and education of the children, and the petty details of his work; even the fact that he was in debt worried him then.
But he only needed to spend some time in Petersburg among the set in which he moved, where people lived, really lived, instead of vegetating as in Moscow, and at once all these cares vanished and melted away like wax before a fire.
Only that day he had been talking to Prince Chechensky.
He took his eldest son to visit the second family, and told Oblonsky that he considered it developed his son and was good for him.
Here people understood that a man must live his own life like a civilized being.
Meeting the right person, a service rendered, a felicitous remark, the ability to perform certain tricks, made a man's career in a moment, as was the case with Bryantsov, whom Oblonsky had met the day before, and who was now a great dignitary.
Bartnyansky, who spent at least fifty thousand roubles a year at the rate he was living, had the day before made a notable remark to him on the point.
Zhivakhov, whose debts amounted to three hundred thousand roubles, didn't possess a penny and yet he lived, and how he lived!
In Moscow he sometimes noticed some grey hairs; fell asleep after dinner; stretched himself; walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily; felt dull among young women, and did not dance at balls.
In Petersburg he always felt that he had shaken off ten years.
In Petersburg he felt what the sixty-year-old Prince Peter Oblonsky, who had just returned from abroad, had described to him only the day before.
'Would you believe it? I spent the summer in Baden and really felt quite like a young man.
I see a young woman, and my fancy...
Why, I had turned into quite an old man! There was nothing left for me but to think of saving my soul...
In Moscow he let himself go to such an extent that, had he continued to live there long, he might even have come to the soul-saving stage; but in Petersburg he again felt quite a smart fellow.
Oblonsky in fun always paid court to her, and told her the most indecent things also in fun, knowing that she liked that more than anything.
The day after his interview with Karenin, Oblonsky, calling on her, felt so youthful that he went accidentally to such lengths in this bantering courtship and humbug that he did not know how to get out of it, for unfortunately she was not merely unattractive but actually repulsive to him.
This tone had sprung up between them because he was very attractive to her.
So he had been very pleased when the Princess Myagkaya turned up, and put an end to their tte--tte.
'Ah, so you are here!' she said on seeing him. 'Well, how is your poor sister?
Don't look at me like that,' she added. 'Since every one has been attacking her  all those who are a hundred thousand times worse than she  I have thought she has acted splendidly.
I can't forgive Vronsky for not letting me know when she was in Petersburg.
I would have gone to her and with her everywhere.
Please give her my love...
Well, tell me about her.'
'Yes, her situation is a hard one... ' Oblonsky began, in the simplicity of his heart taking the Princess Myagkaya's words for genuine coin when she said 'Tell me about her.'
But the Princess Myagkaya immediately interrupted him, as was her habit, and commenced telling her own tale.
'She has done what everybody, except myself, does secretly, and she would not deceive, and has acted splendidly.
And the best thing she did was to leave that half-witted brother-in-law of yours!
Every one used to say, "He is so clever, so clever." I alone said that he was stupid.
Now that he has got so chummy with Lydia Ivanovna and Landau, every one says he is half-witted; and I should be glad not to agree with everybody, but this time I can't help it.'
He did not give me an answer, but said he must think it over; and this morning instead of an answer I have received an invitation for this evening to go to the Countess Lydia Ivanovna's.'
Princess Myagkaya began joyfully. 'They will ask Landau and see what he says.'
Afterwards, Yury Meledinsky's wife (the invalid's wife, you know) heard of that Landau, and took him to see her husband.
He is treating her husband.
No good has been done in my opinion, for he is still just as weak, but they believe in him and take him about with them.
Here every one rushed at him, and he began treating everybody.
He cured the Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adopted him.'
However, that's not to the point; but Lydia  I am very fond of her, but her head is not screwed on right  naturally has rushed at this Landau, and now nothing is settled either by her or by Karenin without him, so your sister's fate is now in the hands of this Landau, alias Count Bezzubov.'
The Frenchman?' Oblonsky asked the hall-porter, noticing on the hall-stand Karenin's overcoat, which he recognized, and a strange, absurd-looking paletot with clasps.
'The Princess Myagkaya guessed correctly,' thought Oblonsky as he ascended the stairs.
'Strange! But it would be just as well to make friends with her.
If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the job is done.'
A short lean man, with hips like a woman's, knock-kneed, very pale, handsome, with beautiful shining eyes and long hair that hung over the collar of his frock-coat, stood at the opposite end of the room, looking at the portraits on the wall.
And she introduced them.
Landau hurriedly looked round, approached smilingly, laid upon Oblonsky's outstretched hand his own moist and motionless one, went back, and continued looking at the portraits.
'I introduced him to you as Landau,' she said softly, glancing at the Frenchman and then back at Oblonsky, 'but really he is Count Bezzubov, as you probably know.
But he does not like that title.'
'Yes, I have heard,' replied Oblonsky. 'They say he has completely cured the Countess Bezzubov.'
'She called on me to-day, and was so pathetic,' said the Countess, turning to Karenin. 'This separation is dreadful for her.
It is such a blow to her!'
'Is he going definitely?' inquired Karenin.
'Yes, he is going to Paris.
'Ah, a voice!' Oblonsky remarked, feeling that he must be as careful as possible in this company, where something peculiar occurred, or was supposed to occur, to which he as yet lacked a clue.
You understand what I am speaking about?' she said, lifting her beautiful dreamy eyes.
'The change is not in his external position,' Lydia Ivanovna said severely as her enamoured eyes followed Karenin, who had risen and joined Landau. 'His heart is changed; he has been given a new heart, and I fear that you may not have realized fully that change which has been accomplished within him.'
We have always been friendly, and now...' Oblonsky said, answering her look with a tender gaze, while he considered with which of two Ministers she was the more closely connected  so as to judge which of them he should ask her to influence on his behalf.
'The change that has taken place in him cannot weaken his love for his neighbour; on the contrary, that change must strengthen his love.
Won't you have some tea?' she said, indicating with her eyes the footman who was handing tea round on a tray.
Of course his misfortune...'
'Yes, a misfortune which has turned into a great blessing, because his heart became new and is filled with Him,' she said, glancing at Oblonsky with lovesick eyes.
'I think I might ask her to mention me to both,' thought he.
'Oh, certainly, Countess!' he said. 'But I think such changes are so very intimate that nobody, not even the closest friend, cares to speak about them.'
'It seems to me he will fall asleep directly,' said Karenin in a significant whisper, approaching Lydia Ivanovna.
Landau was sitting by the window leaning against the arm and back of an easy-chair, with his head hanging down.
Noticing the looks directed toward him, he smiled a childishly naive smile.
'Take no notice of him,' said Lydia Ivanovna, and with an agile movement she pushed forward a chair for Karenin. 'I have noticed...' she began, when a footman entered with a note.
Lydia Ivanovna rapidly read the note and, excusing herself, with extreme rapidity wrote and despatched the answer and returned to the table. 'I have noticed,' she continued her interrupted sentence, 'that Muscovites, men especially, are most indifferent to religion.'
'I am in this respect not precisely indifferent, but rather expectant,' said Oblonsky with his most mollifying smile. 'I do not think that for me the time for those questions has yet come.'
'You will allow me to listen?' he asked.
'But one may sometimes feel incapable of ascending to such heights,' remarked Oblonsky, conscious that he was not quite honest in acknowledging the existence of religious heights, yet not venturing to confess his scepticism in the presence of one who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might secure him the desired post.
'You mean to say, he is prevented by sin?' said Lydia Ivanovna. 'But that is a false view.
Excuse me!' she added, glancing at the footman who entered with another note.
She read it, and answered by word of mouth: 'Tell him, "To-morrow at the Grand Duchess's"... For those who believe, there is no sin,' she went on.
'Yes, but faith without works is dead,' said Oblonsky, recalling that sentence from the catechism, and only by a smile maintaining his independence.
It is much simpler and easier,' she added, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which at Court she encouraged young Maids of Honour who were confused by their new surroundings.
We are saved by faith,' Karenin chimed in, showing his approval of her remark by a look.
'Vous comprenez l'anglais?' [You understand English?] asked Lydia Ivanovna and having received an affirmative answer she rose and began looking among the books on a shelf.
'I want to read Safe and Happy, or, Under the Wing,' she said with a questioning look at Karenin. And having found the book and sat down again, she opened it.
A believer cannot be unhappy because he is not alone.
But you will see...' she was about to begin reading when the footman came in again. 'Borozdina?
Say "To-morrow at two"... Yes,' she went on, keeping her finger in the book to mark the place, and sighed, looking with her beautiful dreamy eyes straight before her.
You have heard of her misfortune?
She lost her only child.
Well, and what happened? She found this Friend, and now she thanks God for her child's death.
'Oh yes, it is very...' began Oblonsky, glad that she was going to read and give him time to get his ideas together. 'No, evidently it will be better not to ask for anything to-night,' he reflected; 'only let me get away from here without making a mess of things!'
'Oh, I shall understand,' replied Landau with the same smile, and closed his eyes.
OBLONSKY FELT COMPLETELY PUZZLED by the strange and novel language he was listening to.
Generally the complications of Petersburg life had an exhilarating effect on him, lifting him out of the Moscow stagnation. But he liked and understood complications in spheres congenial and familiar to him; in these strange surroundings he felt puzzled and dazed and could not take it all in.
Listening to the Countess Lydia Ivanovna and feeling the fine eyes, naive or roguish  he did not know which  of Landau fixed upon him, Oblonsky began to be conscious of a peculiar sort of heaviness in his head.
The most varied ideas were mixed up in his mind. 'Mary Sanina is glad that her child is dead...
But still, it won't do to ask her help now.
And what nonsense she is reading, but her enunciation is good... Landau Bezzubov...
Why is he Bezzubov?' Suddenly Oblonsky felt his nether jaw dropping irresistibly for a yawn.
He smoothed his whiskers to hide the yawn, and gave himself a shake.
But then he felt himself falling asleep, and nearly snored.
But he was immediately comforted by noticing that the words 'He is asleep' did not apply to him but to Landau.
But whereas Oblonsky's sleep would, he imagined, have offended them  he did not really even think this, for everything seemed so strange  Landau's sleep delighted them extremely, especially Lydia Ivanovna.
'Mon ami,' said she, carefully holding the folds of her silk dress to prevent its rustling, and in her excitement calling Karenin not 'Alexis Alexandrovich' but 'mon ami,' 'donnez-lui la main. Vour voyez?'...
Hush!' she said to the footman, who came in again. 'I am not receiving.'
The Frenchman slept or pretended to sleep, leaning his head against the back of the chair, and his moist hand lying on his knee moved feebly, as if catching something.
Karenin rose, and though he tried to be cautious he caught against the table.
He went up to the Frenchman and placed his hand in his. Oblonsky also rose and, opening his eyes wide to wake himself up in case he was asleep, looked first at one and then at the other.
It was all quite real, and Oblonsky felt his head getting worse and worse.
[Let the person who arrived last, the one who questions, go out! Let him go out!] the Frenchman said, without opening his eyes.
And having received an answer in the affirmative, Oblonsky  forgetting the request he had wanted to make to Lydia Ivanovna, forgetting his sister's affairs, and with the one desire to get away from there as quickly as possible  went out on tiptoe, and ran out into the street as from an infected house. After which he talked and joked for a long time with an izvoshchik, trying to regain his senses as soon as possible.
At the French Theatre, where he arrived in time for the last act, and afterwards at the Tartar Restaurant, where he had some champagne, Oblonsky was able to some extent to breathe again in an atmosphere congenial to him, but nevertheless he was not at all himself that evening.
When he returned to Peter Oblonsky's house, where he was staying, he found a note from Betsy.
She wrote that she greatly wished to finish the conversation they had begun, and asked him to call next day.
Scarcely had he finished reading the note and made a wry face over it, when he heard downstairs the heavy steps of men carrying something heavy.
He was so drunk that he could not get up the stairs, but on seeing Oblonsky he ordered the men to put him on his feet and, clinging to Stephen, he went with him to his room, began relating how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep there.
Everything he recalled was nauseous, but most repulsive of all, like something shameful, was the memory of the evening at Lydia Ivanovna's.
Next day he received from Karenin a definite refusal to divorce Anna, and understood that this decision was based on what the Frenchman had said the evening before, in his real or pretended sleep.
It was an inner irritation, caused on her side by a diminution of his love for her, and on his by regret that for her sake he had placed himself in a distressing situation, which she, instead of trying to alleviate, made still harder.
For her he, with all his habits, thoughts, wishes, mental and physical faculties  the whole of his nature  consisted of one thing only: love for women, and this love she felt ought to be wholly concentrated on her alone.
This love was diminishing; therefore, in her judgment, part of his love must have been transferred to other women, or to one other woman.
She was jealous, not of any one woman, but of the diminution of his love.
Not having as yet an object for her jealousy, she sought one.
At the slightest hint she transferred her jealousy from one object to another.
Now she was jealous of the coarse women with whom, through his bachelor connections, he might so easily have intercourse; now of the Society women whom he might meet; now of some imaginary girl whom he might marry after repudiating her.
This last jealousy tormented her more than anything else, especially since in an expansive moment he had carelessly told her that his mother understood him so little that she had tried to persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.
And being jealous, Anna was indignant with him and constantly sought reasons to justify her indignation.
She blamed him for everything that was hard in her situation.
The torture of expectation, living betwixt heaven and earth, which she endured there in Moscow, Karenin's dilatoriness and indecision, her loneliness  she attributed all to him.
If he loved her he would fully understand the difficulty of her situation, and would deliver her from it.
That they were living in Moscow, instead of in the country, was also his fault.
He could not live buried in the country as she desired.
He needed society, and so he had placed her in this terrible position, the misery of which he would not understand.
And it was likewise his fault that she was for ever parted from her son.
Even the rare moments of tenderness which occurred between them did not pacify her; in his tenderness she now saw a tinge of calm assurance which had not been there before and irritated her.
Anna, all alone, awaiting his return from a bachelor dinner-party, paced up and down his study (which was the room in which the street noises were least audible), recalling in detail every word of their yesterday's quarrel.
Passing ever backwards from the memorably offensive words of the quarrel to their cause, she at last got back to the beginning of their conversation.
For a long time she could not believe that the dispute had begun from a perfectly inoffensive conversation about a matter that did not touch the heart of either.
It had all begun by his laughing at High Schools for girls, which he considered unnecessary and she defended.
He spoke disrespectfully of the education of women in general, and said that Hannah, her little English protege, did not at all need to know physics.
She saw in it a contemptuous allusion to her own knowledge; and she invented and uttered a phrase in retaliation which should revenge the pain he had caused her.
'I don't expect you to understand me and my feelings, as an affectionate man would; but I did expect ordinary delicacy,' she said.
And he really had flushed with vexation and had said something disagreeable.
She did not remember her reply to it, but remembered that in answer he had said with obvious intent to hurt her too:
'I can take no interest in your partiality for that little girl, because I can see that it is unnatural.'
The cruelty with which he annihilated the world which she had so painfully constructed for herself to be able to endure her hard life, the injustice of his accusation that she was dissembling and unnatural, roused her indignation.
'I am very sorry that only what is coarse and material is comprehensible and natural to you,' she retorted and left the room.
When he came to her in the evening they did not refer to the quarrel, but both felt that it was only smoothed over, not settled.
To-day he had been away from home all day, and she had felt so lonely, and it was so painful to feel herself at discord with him, that she wished to forget it all, to forgive and make it up with him. Wishing even to blame herself and to justify him, she said to herself:
She suddenly remembered the word that had hurt her most, though it was not so much the word as his intention to pain her. 'I know what he wanted to say: he wanted to say that it is unnatural not to love one's own daughter and yet to love another's child.
What does he know of love for children,  of my love for Serezha whom I have given up for his sake?
No, he must be in love with some other woman; it can't be anything else.'
Then, realizing that in her attempt to quiet herself she had again completed the circle she had already gone round so often, and had returned to her former cause of irritation, she was horror-struck at herself.
'Is it possible that I can't... ? Is it possible that I can't take it on myself?' she wondered, and began again from the beginning.
'He is truthful, he is honest.
I need calm and confidence; and I will take the blame on myself. Yes, now, as soon as he comes back, I will tell him I was to blame, though in fact I was not, and we will go away!'
And not to continue thinking, and not to yield to irritation, she rang and ordered her trunks to be brought, to pack their things for the country.
'WELL, HAVE YOU HAD A GOOD TIME?' she asked, coming out to meet him with a meek and repentant look on her face.
'Just as usual,' he answered, perceiving at a glance that she was in one of her pleasant moods.
He was already accustomed to these transitions, and to-day was specially glad, because he himself was in the best of spirits.
Ah, that's right!' he said, pointing to the trunks in the ante-room.
And he went to his room.
There was something offensive in his saying: 'Ah, that's right!'  as one speaks to a child when it stops being capricious  and still more offensive was the contrast between her guilty tone and his self-confident one.
For a moment she felt a desire to fight rising within her, but with an effort she mastered it and met him with her former cheerfulness.
When he returned she told him, partly repeating words she had prepared, how she had spent the day and her plans for the move to the country.
'Do you know, it came to me almost like an inspiration?' said she.
'Oh yes!' he answered, looking uneasily at her excited face.
Who was there?' she asked after a pause.
Some sort of a lady turned up  the Queen of Sweden's swimming instructress  and displayed her art.'
And did she swim in some particular way?' asked Anna, without answering his question.
Anna shook her head, as though driving away an unpleasant thought.
Wait a bit! The day after to-morrow is Sunday, and I must go and see maman,' said Vronsky, and became confused, because as soon as he had mentioned his mother he felt an intent and suspicious gaze fixed upon him.
His embarrassment confirmed her suspicions.
'You could go there to-morrow!' she said.
The things about which I have to go  to fetch a power of attorney and some money  will not have arrived by to-morrow,' he replied.
You said yesterday that I don't love my daughter but pretend to love that English girl, and that it is unnatural!
For a moment she recollected herself and was horrified at having broken her resolution.
Yet though she knew she was ruining her cause, she could not restrain herself, could not forbear pointing out to him how wrong he was, and could not submit to him.
'I never boast and never tell untruths,' he said softly, restraining his rising anger. 'It is a great pity if you don't respect...'
'Dear me! This is becoming unbearable!' exclaimed Vronsky, rising from his chair.
And standing before her he slowly brought out: 'Why are you testing my patience?' He looked as if he could have said much more, but restrained himself.
'What do you mean by that?' she cried, glancing with terror at the definite expression of hatred on his whole face, and especially in the cruel, menacing eyes.
'I mean to say...' he began, but stopped. 'I must ask what you want of me!'
I can only want you not to abandon me, as you are thinking of doing,' she said, having understood all that he had left unsaid. 'But I don't want that, that is secondary.
'Stop! St-o-op!' said Vronsky, his brow still knit, but holding her back by the hand.
'What is the matter? I said we must put off our departure for three days, and you replied that I lie and am not an honourable man.'
And I repeat that a man who reproaches me because he has given up everything for my sake,' said she, recalling the words of a still earlier quarrel, 'is worse than a dishonourable man! He is a heartless man!'
'No! There are limits to one's endurance,' he exclaimed, and quickly let go her hand.
'He hates me, that is clear,' thought she, and silently, without looking round and with faltering steps, she left the room. 'He loves another woman, that is clearer still,' she said to herself as she entered her own room.
'I want love, and it is lacking. So everything is finished!' she repeated her own words, 'and it must be finished.'
'But how?' she asked herself, and sat down in the arm-chair before the looking-glass.
Thoughts of where she would now go: to the aunt who had brought her up, to Dolly, or simply abroad by herself; of what he was now doing, alone in the study; of whether this quarrel was final or whether a reconciliation was still possible; of what all her former Petersburg acquaintances would say of her now; how Karenin would regard it; and many other thoughts about what would happen now after the rupture, passed through her mind, but she did not give herself up entirely to these thoughts.
In her soul there was another vague idea, which alone interested her, but of which she could not get hold.
Again remembering Karenin, she also remembered her illness after her confinement, and the feeling that never left her at that time.
She remembered. her words, 'Why did I not die?' and her feelings then. And suddenly she understood what was in her soul.
If I die he too will repent, will pity me, will love me and will suffer on my account!' With a fixed smile of self-pity on her lips she sat in the chair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand, and vividly picturing to herself from various points of view his feelings after she was dead.
Sounds of approaching steps, his steps, distracted her thoughts.
Pretending to be putting away her rings, she did not even turn round.
He came up to her, and taking her hand said softly:
'What is it?' he asked.
'You know yourself?' said she, and at the same moment, unable to restrain herself any longer, she burst into tears.
Abandon me!' she murmured between her sobs. 'I will go away to-morrow.
A depraved woman.
Vronsky implored her to be calm, and assured her that there was not an atom of foundation for her jealousy, that he never had ceased, and never would cease, to love her, that he loved her more than ever.
'Anna, why torture yourself and me like this?' he said, kissing her hands.
His face now wore a tender expression, and she thought she detected in his voice the sound of tears, and their moisture on her hand.
And instantly her despairing jealousy changed into desperate, passionate tenderness. She embraced him, and covered his head, his neck, and his hands with kisses.
She stood in her room before an open trunk, sorting clothes, when he came in earlier than usual and ready dressed.
'I will go to maman at once. She can send me the money through Egorov and I shall be ready to go to-morrow,' said he.
Good as the mood she was in might be, the reference to the move to the country pricked her.
'Oh no, I shall not be ready myself,' she said, and immediately thought: 'So it was possible to arrange things as I wished!'  'No, do as you wished to. Go to the dining-room, I will come directly.
I will only sort out these things that are not wanted,' she said, placing some more articles on the heap of old clothes already piled up on Annushka's arms.
Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she entered the dining-room.
'You would hardly believe how disgusting these rooms have become to me!' she said, sitting down to her coffee beside him. 'There is nothing worse than these furnished apartments!
'I wanted to go to the Wilsons, to take her a dress.
So it is decided that we go to-morrow?' she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her face changed.
There was nothing odd in his receiving a telegram, but, as if wishing to hide something from her, he told the man that the receipt was in his study and hastily turned to her, saying:
'From whom was the telegram?' she asked, not listening to him.
'From Steve,' he replied reluctantly.
'Yes, but he wires: "Could get no answer.
'I said yesterday that it is all the same to me when I get the divorce, or even whether I get it at all,' she said, flushing. 'There was no need at all to conceal it from me.'
'Oh, Yashvin wanted to come this morning with Voytov,' said Vronsky. 'It seems he has won from Pevtsov all and even more than Pevtsov can pay  about sixty thousand roubles.'
'But why do you imagine,' said she, irritated at his intimating to her so obviously, by this change of subject, that he saw she was losing her temper, 'that this news interests me so much that it is necessary to conceal it?
'It interests me because I like definiteness,' he replied.
'Definiteness depends not on forms, but on love,' she said, growing more and more irritated not at his words but at the tone of cool tranquillity with which he spoke. 'Why do you want it?'
Again about love!' he thought with a wry face.
'Don't you know why? For your own sake and for that of the children we may have!' said he.
'That's a great pity,' he said.
'You want it for the children, but you don't think of me,' she pursued, quite forgetting or not hearing that he said: 'for your own sake and for the children.'
The possibility of having children had long been a subject of dispute, and it irritated her.
She explained his desire to have children as showing that he did not value her beauty.
Most of all for your sake,' he repeated, his face contorted as with pain, 'because I am convinced that a great deal of your irritability is due to our indefinite position.'
'Yes, there it is! Now he has stopped pretending, and all his cold hatred for me is apparent,' she thought, not listening to his words, but gazing with horror at the cold and cruel judge who looked out of his eyes provokingly.
'That is not the reason,' she said, 'and I can't even understand how what you call my "irritability" can be caused by that; I am entirely in your power.
'I am very sorry you don't wish to understand me,' he interrupted, stubbornly intent on expressing his thought. 'The indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free.'
'You may be perfectly at rest on that matter!' she rejoined, and turning away she began to drink her coffee.
She took her cup, sticking out her little finger, and raised it to her mouth.
After a few sips she glanced at him, and from the expression of his face clearly realized that her hand, her movement, and the sound made by her lips were repulsive to him.
'It is perfectly indifferent to me what your mother thinks and whom she wishes to marry you to,' she went on, putting down her cup with a trembling hand.
And believe me, a heartless woman, be she old or young, your mother or a stranger, does not interest me, and I don't want to have anything to do with her.'
'Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother.'
'A woman whose heart has not divined wherein her son's happiness and honour lies has no heart!'
'I repeat my request that you should not speak disrespectfully of my mother, whom I respect!' said he, raising his voice and looking sternly at her.
Looking intently at his face and hands, she remembered their reconciliation the day before and his passionate caresses in all their details. 'Just such caresses he has lavished, and wants to lavish, on other women,' she thought.
'You don't love your mother!
It's all words, words, words!' she said, looking at him with hatred.
'Decide... and I have decided,' she said and was about to go away, but just then Yashvin entered.
Why, when a storm was raging within her and she felt that she was at a turning-point which might lead to terrible consequences  why she need, at that moment, dissemble before a stranger who sooner or later would know all about it, she did not know: but immediately calming the storm within her, she sat down again and began talking to the visitor.
Has the money been paid?' she asked Yashvin.
'Yes, but now it's decided,' said Anna, looking straight into Vronsky's eyes with an expression that told him he must not think of the possibility of a reconciliation.
'Is it possible you are not sorry for that unfortunate Pevtsov?' she said, continuing her conversation with Yashvin.
You see, my whole fortune is here,' and he pointed to a side pocket, 'and now I am a rich man; but I shall go to the club to-night and shall perhaps leave it a beggar.
You see, he who sits down to play against me, wishes to leave me without a shirt, and I treat him the same!
'How about Helsingfors?' said Vronsky, joining in the conversation, and he glanced at Anna who had smiled.
Meeting his look, her face suddenly assumed a coldly severe expression, as if to say: 'It is not forgotten.
'Is it possible you were ever in love?' she asked Yashvin.
Before leaving the house Vronsky came to her room.
She wished to pretend to be looking for something on the table, but feeling ashamed of the pretence, looked straight into his face with a cold expression.
'What do you want?' she asked in French.
'Gambetta's certificate; I have sold him,' he replied in a tone which said more clearly than words: 'I have no time for explanations, and they would lead to nothing.'
[So much the worse for her.] But, as he was going out, he thought she said something, and suddenly his heart ached with pity for her.
'Nothing,' she answered, in the same cold quiet manner.
'If it's nothing, then tant pis!' he thought, again chilled. Turning away, he went out.
As he was going out he caught sight in a looking-glass of her pale face and trembling lips.
He even wished to stop and say a comforting word to her, but his legs carried him out of the room before he had thought of anything to say.
All that day he spent away from home, and when he returned late at night the maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and asked him not to go to her room.
How could he look at her as he had looked when he came into the room for the certificate?
Look at her, see that her heart was torn by despair, and go out in silence with that calmly indifferent look?
Not only had he cooled toward her, but he hated her because he loved another woman  that was clear.
And recalling all the cruel words he had uttered, Anna invented other words which he evidently had wished to say and could have said to her, and she grew more and more exasperated.
'I do not hold you,' he might have said. 'You may go where you please.
All the cruellest words that a coarse man could say he, in her imagination, said to her, and she did not forgive him for them any more than if he had really said them.
'And was it not last night that he, an honourable and truthful man, swore he loved me?
Have I not often before despaired needlessly?' she said to herself immediately after.
All that day, except when she went to the Wilsons  which took her about two hours  Anna passed in doubting whether all was over or whether there was still hope of a reconciliation, and whether she ought to leave at once or to see him again.
She waited for him all day, and in the evening when she went to her room, having left word for him that she had a headache, she thought: 'If he comes in spite of the maid's message, it means that he still loves me.
At night she heard his carriage stop, heard him ring, heard his steps, and his voice talking to the maid.
He believed what he was told, did not want to learn more and went to his room!
And death, as the sole means of reviving love for herself in his heart, of punishing him, and of gaining the victory in that contest which an evil spirit in her heart was waging against him, presented itself clearly and vividly to her.
Now it was all the same whether they went to Vozdvizhensk or not, whether she got a divorce or not  it was all useless.
All she wanted was to punish him.
When she poured out her usual dose of opium and thought that she need only drink the whole phial in order to die, it seemed to her so easy and simple that she again began thinking with pleasure of how he would suffer, repent, and love her memory when it was too late.
She lay in bed with open eyes, looking at the stucco cornice under the ceiling by the light of a single burnt-down candle, and at the shadow of the screen which fell on it, and she vividly imagined what he would feel when she was no more, when she was for him nothing but a memory. 'How could I say those cruel words to her?' he would say.
'How could I leave the room without saying anything? But now she is no more!
'Death!' she thought. And such terror came upon her that it was long before she could realize where she was and with trembling hand could find the matches to light another candle in the place of the one that had burnt down and gone out.
And he loves me; All this has been, but will pass,' she said, feeling that tears of joy at this return to life were running down her cheeks.
And, to escape from her fears, she hastily went to him in his study.
Now, when he was asleep, she loved him so that she could not restrain tears of tenderness while looking at him; but she knew that if he were to wake he would look at her with a cold expression, conscious of his own integrity, and that before telling him of her love she must prove to him that he was to blame toward her.
Without waking him she returned to her room, and after a second dose of opium toward morning she fell into a heavy but troubled sleep, without ever ceasing to be conscious of herself.
In the morning a terrible nightmare, which had come to her several times even before her union with Vronsky, repeated itself and woke her. An old man with a tangled beard was leaning over some iron and doing something, while muttering senseless words in French; and as always in that nightmare (this was what made it terrible) she felt this peasant was paying no attention to her but was doing something dreadful to her with the iron.
And she awoke in a cold perspiration.
When she got up, the previous day appeared in her memory as in a fog.
'I said I had a headache, and he did not come to see me.
To-morrow we shall leave. I must see him and get ready for the move,' she thought.
And hearing that he was in the study she went to him.
As she passed through the drawing-room she heard a vehicle stop at the front door, and, looking out of the window, she saw a young girl in a lilac hat leaning out of the carriage window and giving an order to the footman who was ringing at the front door.
After some talking in the hall, some one came upstairs and she heard Vronsky's step outside the drawing-room.
There he was on the steps, without a hat, going down to the carriage.
The young girl in the lilac hat handed him a parcel.
Vronsky said something to her and smiled.
The carriage rolled away; he ran rapidly upstairs again.
The fog that had obscured everything within her was suddenly dissipated.
Yesterday's feelings wrung her aching heart with fresh pain.
She could not now understand how she could have humiliated herself so as to remain a whole day with him in his house.
She went to his study to announce to him her decision.
'It was the Princess Sorokina with her daughter who came to bring me the money and documents from maman.
How is your head  better?' he said quietly, not wishing to see or understand the gloomy and solemn look on her face.
He glanced at her, frowned for an instant, and continued to read a letter.
He could still call her back, but she reached the door and he remained silent, and only the rustle of the paper as he turned a page was heard.
'Oh, by the way ' he said when she was already in the doorway  'we are definitely going to-morrow, aren't we?'
'You, but not I,' she said, turning round toward him.
'You, but not I,' she repeated.
'You... you will repent of this!' she said, and left him.
Alarmed by the despairing look with which she had said these words, he jumped up, intending to run after her, but, recollecting himself, he sat down again, tightly clenching his teeth and frowning.
This  as it seemed to him  unbecoming and indefinite threat irritated him. 'I have tried everything,' he thought, 'the only thing left is to pay no attention,' and he began getting ready to drive to town, and to go again to his mother's to obtain her signature to a power of attorney.
She heard the sound of his steps in the study and dining-room.
But he did not return to her; he only gave an order that they should let Voytov have the horse in his absence.
Then she heard the carriage drive up and the door open, and he went out again.
But now he re-entered the hall, and some one ran upstairs.
It was his valet, who had come for the gloves his master had forgotten.
She went back to the window and saw him take the gloves without looking, and, having touched the coachman's back with his hand, say something to him.
Then, without turning to look up at the window, he sat down in the carriage in his usual posture, crossing one leg over the other, and, putting on a glove, disappeared round the comer.
IS IT FINISHED?' said Anna to herself as she stood by the window; and in answer to that question, the impressions left by the darkness when her candle went out and by the terrible dream, merging into one, filled her heart with icy horror.
'No, it is impossible!' she exclaimed and, crossing the room, she rang loudly.
She was so terrified at being alone that she did not wait for the servant but went out to meet him.
'Find out where the Count has gone,' she said.
The man replied that the Count had gone to the stables.
She stuck it down and gave it to the man. Then, afraid to remain alone now, she followed him out of the room and went to the nursery.
'How is this? That's not it  this is not he!
Where are his blue eyes and his sweet timid smile?' was her first thought on seeing her plump, rosy little girl with curly black hair, instead of Serezha, whom, in the disorder of her mind, she had expected to find in the nursery.
The little girl, sitting at the table, persistently and firmly hammered on it with the stopper of a bottle, gazing blankly at her mother with her two black-currants of eyes.
Having, in answer to the questions of the English nurse, said that she was quite well and that they were going to the country next day, Anna sat down beside the child and began twirling the stopper round in front of her.
But the child's loud ringing laughter and a movement of her eyebrows reminded Anna so vividly of Vronsky, that, repressing her sobs, she rose hurriedly and left the room.
'Is it really all over? No, it cannot be,' she thought.
'He will come back. But how will he explain to me that smile, and his animation after he had spoken to her?
But even if he does not explain it, I will believe him all the same.
Twelve minutes had passed. 'Now he has received my note and is on his way back.
But supposing he does not come?
Oh! And did I brush my hair or not?' she asked herself; but could not remember.
She felt her head with her hand. 'Yes, my hair was done, but I don't in the least remember when.'
She did not even trust her hand, and went up to the mirror to see whether her hair really was done or not. It was, but she could not remember doing it.
'Who is that?' she thought, gazing in the mirror at the feverish, frightened face with the strangely brilliant eyes looking at her. 'Yes that is I!' she suddenly realized, and looking at her whole figure she suddenly felt his kisses, shuddered, and moved her shoulders.
Then she raised her hand to her lips and kissed it.
Am I going mad?' and she went to her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying up.
'Annushka!' she said, stopping before the maid and looking at her, without knowing what she would say to her.
'You wished to go to see the Princess Oblonskaya,' said the maid, apparently understanding her.
'A quarter of an hour there, a quarter of an hour back; he is already on the way, he will be here in a minute.' She looked at her watch.
'But how could he go away leaving me in this condition? How can he go on living, without having made it up with me?'
He might have got back by this time; but her calculations might be incorrect, and again she began trying to remember when he had left and reckoning the minutes.
Just as she was going to compare her watch with the large clock some one drove up.
Glancing out of the window she saw his calche.
But no one came upstairs and she heard voices below.
He had gone to the Nizhny railway station,' he said.
What is this?' she asked the rosy, jolly-looking Michael, as he handed her back her note.
'Oh, of course! He did not receive it,' she remembered.
And bring back an answer at once,' she told the man..
'But what shall I do myself?' she thought. 'Yes I will go to Dolly's, of course, or else I shall go out of my mind!
And I can telegraph as well!' And she wrote out a telegram.
Having sent off the telegram, she went to dress.
Ready dressed and with her bonnet on, she again looked at Annushka's placid and now still rounder face.
'Annushka, my dear! What am I to do?' muttered Anna sobbing, as she sank helplessly into an arm-chair.
'But I must not think, I must do something, go away, get out of this house at any rate,' she said to herself, listening with horror to the terrible beating of her heart, and she hurriedly went out and got into the calche.
She reproached herself now with the humiliation to which she had descended. 'I entreated him to forgive me.
She is not fond of Vronsky. It will be humiliating and painful, but I will tell her everything.
She is fond of me and I will follow her advice.
And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was only seventeen, she visited the Troitsa Monastery with her aunt. 'We drove with horses, for there was then no railway.
Can it really have been I, that girl with the red hands?
How proud and satisfied he will be to get my note!
"Dressmaking and Millinery,"-' she read.
A man bowed to her.
It was Annushka's husband. 'Our parasite,' she remembered how Vronsky had said the words.
At this point she recollected her past with Karenin and how she had effaced the memory of him. 'Dolly will think I am leaving a second husband and that I am therefore certainly unjustifiable.
I can't!' she said to herself, and wished to cry.
But she immediately began to wonder what those two young girls could be smiling at. 'Love, probably!
Yes, I shall lose everything if he does not return.
He may have missed the train and be back already. Wanting to humiliate yourself again!' she said to herself.
'No! I shall go to Dolly's, and will tell her frankly: "I am unhappy, I deserve it; I am guilty, but all the same I am unhappy.
Help me!"... These horses, this carriage, how horrid it is of me to be in this carriage  they are all his, but I shall not see them any more.'
'Is anyone here?' she asked in the ante-room.
That same Kitty with whom Vronsky was in love,' thought Anna. 'She whom he remembered affectionately.
He regrets not having married her.
And of me he thinks with hate and regrets having joined himself to me!'
'He writes that he cannot understand what Alexis Alexandrovich really wants , but that he won't leave without getting an answer.'
But he has not refused; on the contrary, Steve is hopeful,' added Dolly, pausing at the door.
'What does it mean? Kitty considers it humiliating to meet me!' thought Anna when she was left alone.
'Maybe she is right.
But it is not for her, who was in love with Vronsky  it is not for her to let me feel it, even if it is true!
I know that no respectable woman can receive me in my position.
'And what am I going to tell Dolly now? Console Kitty by letting her see that I am unhappy and letting her patronize me?
No, and even Dolly would not understand. It is no use appealing to her.
But it would be interesting to see Kitty and show her how I despise everybody and everything: how indifferent everything is to me.'
'I knew it all,' she said, 'and it does not interest me in the least.'
She had never seen her in such a strange and irritable mood. 'When are you leaving?' she asked.
Anna, screwing up her eyes, gazed straight before her without answering.
'Is Kitty hiding from me then?' she asked, looking toward the door and blushing.
She is nursing her baby and has difficulty with it, and I was advising her...
She will come directly,' Dolly said awkwardly, not knowing how to tell an untruth. 'Oh, here she is!'
When she heard that Anna had come Kitty did not wish to appear; but Dolly persuaded her.
Having mustered up her courage, Kitty came in and, blushing, went up to Anna and held out her hand.
'I am very pleased ' she began in a trembling voice.
Kitty was confused by the struggle within her between hostility toward this bad woman and a desire to be tolerant to her; but as soon as she saw Anna's lovely and attractive face, all the hostility vanished at once.
Kitty felt that Anna looked at her with animosity.
She attributed that animosity to the awkward position Anna, who had formerly patronized her, now felt herself to be in, and she was sorry for her.
'I came to say good-bye to you,' she said, rising.
'Yes, I am very glad to have seen you,' she said with a smile. 'I have heard so much about you from everybody, and even from your husband.
He called on me and I liked him very much,' she added, with obvious ill intent. 'Where is he?'
'I will be sure to,' repeated Kitty naively, looking compassionately into her eyes.
Charming!' said Kitty when she was once more alone with her sister. 'But there is something pathetic about her, terribly pathetic!'
'Yes, but to-day there is something peculiar about her,' said Dolly. 'When I was seeing her out, there in the ante-room, I thought she was going to cry.'
ANNA RESEATED HERSELF IN THE CALCHE in a state of mind even worse than when she left home.
To her former torments was now added a feeling of being affronted and repudiated, of which she had been clearly sensible during the meeting with Kitty.
'Yes, home,' she said, now not even thinking of where she was going.
What can he be telling that other man so warmly?' she thought, glancing at two pedestrians. 'How is it possible to tell another what one feels?
How glad she would have been at my misfortune!
She would have concealed it; but her chief feeling would have been joy that I am punished for the pleasures she has envied me.
How well I can read her!
She knows I was more than usually amiable to her husband.
She is jealous of me and hates me, and she also despises me.
In her eyes I am an immoral woman.
If I were immoral I could make her husband fall in love with me... if I wanted to.
There is some one satisfied with himself?' she thought, seeing a fat ruddy man who was driving past in the opposite direction, and who, taking her for an acquaintance, lifted his shiny hat above his bald and shiny head, but then discovered that he was mistaken: 'He thought he knew me.
But he knows me as little as does anyone else in the world.
Those boys want some of that dirty ice-cream; they know that for a certainty,' she thought, as she saw two boys stopping an ice-cream vendor, who lifted down a tub from his head and wiped his perspiring face with the end of the cloth. 'We all want something sweet and tasty; if we can get no bon-bons, then dirty ice-creams!
And Kitty is just the same: if not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies and hates me.
I shall tell him that when he comes back,' she thought and smiled.
But just then she recollected that now she had no one to tell anything funny to. 'Besides, there is nothing amusing or merry.
They are ringing for vespers, and how carefully that tradesman is crossing himself, as if he were afraid of dropping something!
With these thoughts, which occupied her so that she even forgot to think of her troubles, she arrived at the porch of their house.
Only when she saw the hall-porter coming out to meet her did she remember that she had sent the note and the telegram.
'Is there an answer?' she asked.
'I will look,' he replied, and glancing at his desk he took up and handed her the thin square envelope of a telegram. 'I cannot return before ten  Vronsky,' she read.
'And the man has not yet returned?'
'Well, in that case I know what I must do,' said she to herself, and conscious of a vague sense of wrath and a desire for vengeance rising within her, she ran upstairs. 'I shall go to him myself.
I never hated anyone as I hate that man!' thought she.
Seeing his hat on the hat-rail, she shuddered with aversion.
She did not realize that his telegram was in answer to hers and that he had not yet received her note.
She imagined him now calmly conversing with his mother and the Princess Sorokina, and rejoicing at her sufferings. 'Yes, I must go at once,' she thought, not yet sure where to go to.
She wished to get away as soon as possible from the feelings she experienced in that terrible house.
The servants, the walls, the things in the house, all repelled and angered her, and oppressed her like a weight.
'I shall have time.' She gave the order to harness another pair of horses, and busied herself packing her handbag with things necessary for a few days.
She knew she would not return.
She vaguely resolved on one of the plans that passed through her mind. After what would occur at the railway station or at the Countess's estate she would go on by the Nizhny railway to the first town and remain there.
Dinner was served. She went to the table, smelt the bread and cheese and as the smell of everything eatable revolted her, she sent for the carriage and went out.
Annushka, who came out with Anna's things, and Peter, who put them into the carriage, and the coachman, who was evidently dissatisfied, were all objectionable to her and irritated her by their words and movements.
'Well, as you like, I don't care,' she replied with annoyance.
Peter jumped up on the box, and with his arm akimbo told the coachman to drive to the station.
Again I understand it all,' Anna said to herself as soon as the carriage started and, rocking slightly, rattled over the stones; and again different impressions succeeded one another in her brain.
What Yashvin said: the struggle for existence and hatred are the only things that unite people. No, you are going in vain,' she mentally addressed a company of people in a calche with four horses, who were evidently going out of town on a spree.
Glancing in the direction in which Peter was looking she saw a workman, nearly dead-drunk, with his head swaying about, who was being led off somewhere by a policeman. 'That one is more likely to,' she thought.
'Count Vronsky and I have also been unable to find that pleasure from which we expected so much.' And now for the first time Anna turned the bright light in which she saw everything upon her relations with him, about which she had always avoided thinking.
'What did he look for in me? Not so much love as the satisfaction of his vanity.'
She remembered his words, the expression of his face, suggestive of a faithful setter's, in the early days of their union.
Everything now confirmed her view.
Of course there was love too; but the greater part was pride in his success. He boasted of me.
Not to be proud but to be ashamed! He has taken from me all he could, and now he does not need me.
He is weary of me and is trying not to act dishonourably toward me. Yesterday he betrayed himself  he wants the divorce and a marriage in order to burn his boats.
The zest is gone!' she said to herself in English. 'That man wants to astonish everybody and is very well satisfied with himself,' she thought, glancing at a rosy-faced shop-assistant who was riding a hired horse.
'No, I have no longer the right flavour for him. If I go away he will, at the bottom of his heart, be pleased.'
That was not a surmise. She saw it clearly in the piercing light which now revealed to her the meaning of life and of human relations.
'My love grows more and more passionate and egotistic, and his dwindles and dwindles, and that is why we are separating,' she went on thinking. 'And there is no remedy.
For me everything centres in him, and I demand that he should give himself up to me more and more completely.
But he wants more and more to get away from me.
She opened her mouth and changed her place in the carriage from agitation produced by a sudden thought. 'If I could be anything but his mistress, passionately loving nothing but his caresses  but I cannot and do not want to be anything else.
Don't I know that he would not deceive me, that he has no designs on that Sorokina, that he is not in love with Kitty, and will not be unfaithful to me?
If, without loving me, he is kind and tender to me from a sense of duty, but what I desire is lacking  that would be a thousand times worse than anger! It would be hell!
Remembering Karenin, she pictured him to herself with extraordinary vividness, as if he stood before her, with his mild, dull, lifeless eyes, the blue veins of his white hands, his intonations, his cracking fingers, and remembering the feeling that had once existed between them and which had also been called love, she shuddered with revulsion. 'Well, I get divorced and become Vronsky's wife!
What then? Will Kitty cease looking at me as she did this afternoon?
No!' she now answered herself without the least hesitation. 'It is impossible!
Life is sundering us, and I am the cause of his unhappiness and he of mine, and neither he nor I can be made different.
A beggar woman with a baby. She thinks I pity her.
Serezha?' she remembered. 'I thought I loved him, too, and was touched at my own tenderness for him.
Yet I lived without him and exchanged his love for another's, and did not complain of the change as long as the other love satisfied me.' And she thought with disgust of what she called 'the other love.'
The clearness with which she now saw her own and every one else's life pleased her. 'It's the same with me, and Peter and Theodore the coachman, and with that tradesman, and with all the people that live away there by the Volga where those advertisements invite one to go, and everywhere and always,' she thought as she drove up to the low building of the Nizhny station, where the porters ran out to meet her.
She had quite forgotten where and why she was going, and only understood the question by a great effort.
'Yes,' she said, giving him her purse; and hanging her little red handbag on her arm, she descended from the carriage.
As she moved among the crowd toward the first-class waiting-room she gradually recalled all the details of her position and the resolutions between which she vacillated.
And again hope and despair, alternately chafing the old sores, lacerated the wounds of her tortured and violently fluttering heart. Sitting on the star-shaped couch, waiting for her train, she looked with repulsion at those who passed in and out.
They were all objectionable to her. She thought now of how she would reach the station and would write him a note, and of what she would write, and of how he was now (without understanding her sufferings) complaining of his position to his mother, and of how she would enter the room and what she would say to him.
And then she thought how happy life might still be, and how tormentingly she loved and hated him and how dreadfully her heart was beating.
Peter, in his livery and gaiters, with his dull animal face, also crossed the room, and came to her to see her into the train.
Two noisy men became quiet as she passed them on the platform, and one of them whispered to the other something about her: something nasty, of course.
Peter with a stupid smile raised his gold-braided hat to take leave of her; an insolent guard slammed the door to and drew the latch.
A misshapen lady with a bustle (Anna mentally stripped that woman and was horrified at her deformity) and a girl, laughing affectedly, ran past outside.
'Catherine Andreevna has everything, ma tante!' cried the little girl.
In order not to see anyone, she rose quickly and sat down by the opposite window of the empty compartment.
A grimy, misshaped peasant in a cap from under which his tousled hair stuck out, passed that window, stooping over the carriage wheels. 'There is something familiar about that misshaped peasant,' she thought.
And remembering her dream she went to the opposite door, trembling with fright.
Neither the guard nor those entering noticed the horror on her face beneath the veil.
She went back to her corner and sat down.
The couple sat down opposite her, attentively but stealthily examining her dress.
The husband asked if she would allow him to smoke; evidently not because he wanted to, but to enter into conversation with her.
Having received her permission, he began speaking to his wife in French, about things he wanted to speak about still less than he wanted to smoke.
They talked nonsense insincerely, only in order that she should hear them.
It was so clear to Anna that no one had any cause for joy that this laughter jarred on her painfully, and she wished to stop her ears, not to hear it.
At last the third bell rang, the engine whistled and creaked, the coupling chains gave a jerk, and the husband crossed himself. 'It would be interesting to ask him what he means by it,' thought Anna, regarding him spitefully.
Anna forgot her fellow-travellers; softly rocked by the motion of the carriage and inhaling the fresh air, she again began to think:
'Reason has been given to man to enable him to escape from his troubles,' said the lady, in French, evidently pleased with her phrase and mincing with her tongue.
'To escape from his troubles,' Anna mentally repeated.
And glancing at the red-cheeked husband and his thin wife, she saw that the sickly wife considered herself misunderstood, and that the husband deceived her and encouraged her in her opinion of herself.
Directing her searchlight upon them, Anna thought she saw their story and all the hidden recesses of their souls.
But there was nothing of interest there, and she continued her reflections.
When the train stopped at the station, Anna got out with the crowd of passengers, and shunning them as if they were lepers, stopped on the platform trying to remember why she had come there and what she had intended to do.
Everything that had appeared possible before was now so difficult to grasp, especially in this noisy crowd of odious people who would not leave her in peace.
Porters rushed up, offering their services. Young men passed along the platform, clattering their heels on the planks, talking loudly and gazing at her; and people she met tried to get out of her way on the wrong side.
Recollecting that she meant to go on if there was no reply, she stopped a porter and asked him whether there was not a coachman bringing a note from Count Vronsky there.
Some one from there was here just now, to meet the Princess Sorokina and her daughter.
While she was talking to the porter, Michael the coachman, rosy and cheerful, came up in his smart blue coat with a watch-chain, evidently proud of having carried out his errand so well, and handed her a note.
She opened it, and her heart sank even before she read it.
'Yes, I expected it!' she said to herself with a malicious smile.
'All right, you may go home,' she said softly to Michael.
She spoke softly, because the rapid beating of her heart impeded her breathing. 'No, I will not let you torture me,' she thought, addressing her threat not to him nor to herself but to that which forced her to suffer, and she walked along the platform, past the station buildings.
Two maid-servants, strolling about on the platform, turned their heads to look at her, and made some audible remarks about her dress. 'It's real,' they said of the lace she was wearing.
The young men did not leave her in peace. Gazing into her face and laughing and shouting unnaturally they again passed by.
The stationmaster asked her in passing whether she was going on.
A boy selling kvas fixed his eyes on her. 'O God! where am I to go?' she thought, walking further and further along the platform.
Some ladies and children, who had come to meet a spectacled gentleman and were laughing and talking noisily, became silent and gazed at her as she passed them.
The platform shook, and it seemed to her as if she were again in the tram.
Suddenly remembering the man who had been run over the day she first met Vronsky, she realized what she had to do.
Quickly and lightly descending the steps that led from the water-tank to the rails, she stopped close to the passing tram.
She looked at the bottom of the trucks, at the bolts and chains and large iron wheels of the slowly-moving front truck, and tried to estimate the middle point between the front and back wheels, and the moment when that point would be opposite her.
'There!' she said to herself, looking at the shadow of the truck on the mingled sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers. 'There, into the very middle, and I shall punish him and escape from everybody and from myself!'
She wanted to fall half-way between the wheels of the front truck, which was drawing level with her, but the little red handbag which she began to take off her arm delayed her, and then it was too late. The middle had passed her.
A feeling seized her like that she had experienced when preparing to enter the water in bathing, and she crossed herself.
The familiar gesture of making the sign of the cross called up a whole series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness, that obscured everything from her, broke, and life showed itself to her for an instant with all its bright past joys.
But she did not take her eyes off the wheels of the approaching second truck, and at the very moment when the midway point between the wheels drew level, she threw away her red bag, and drawing her head down between her shoulders threw herself forward on her hands under the truck, and with a light movement as if preparing to rise again immediately dropped on her knees.
And at the same moment she was horror-struck at what she was doing. 'Where am I?
She wished to rise, to throw herself back, but something huge and relentless struck her on the head and dragged her down. 'God forgive me everything!' she said, feeling the impossibility of struggling...
The candle, by the light of which she had been reading that book filled with anxieties, deceptions, grief, and evil, flared up with a brighter light, lit up for her all that had before been dark, crackled, began to flicker, and went out for ever.
Some parts of it and the introduction had appeared in periodicals, and other parts had been read by Koznyshev to people of his set, so that the ideas of the work could not be very novel to the public; but all the same Koznyshev expected that the publication of the book would create a serious impression on Society, and if not a revolution in science, at any rate a strong agitation in the scientific world.
Not asking anyone about it, reluctantly and with feigned indifference replying to his friends' inquiries as to how it was going, and not even asking the booksellers how it was selling, Koznyshev watched keenly and with strained attention for the first impression his book would produce in Society and in literature.
His friends, the specialists and the scholars, sometimes  from politeness  mentioned it; his other acquaintances, not interested in learned works, did not mention it to him at all. In Society, now particularly occupied with something else, absolute indifference reigned.
Only in the Northern Beetle, in a facetious feuilleton about the singer Drabanti who had lost his voice, were a few contemptuous remarks interpolated about Koznyshev's book, indicating that it had long ago been condemned by everybody and consigned to general ridicule.
Despite his entire contempt for this man, Koznyshev began reading the review most respectfully.
But he had so adroitly selected his quotations that to those who had not read the book (and evidently hardly anyone had read it) it would appear quite clear that the whole book was nothing but a collection of high-sounding words, not even used appropriately (as was indicated by notes of interrogation), and that its author was a totally ignorant man.
Notwithstanding the thorough conscientiousness with which Koznyshev verified the correctness of the critic's arguments, he did not dwell for a moment on the deficiencies and mistakes which were ridiculed, but at once involuntarily began to recall his meeting and conversation with the author of the review, down to the minutest details.
'Did not I offend him in some way?' he asked himself.
And remembering how when he met him he had corrected the young man's use of a word that betrayed ignorance Koznyshev found an explanation of the article.
That review was followed by dead silence both in print and in conversation concerning the book, and Koznyshev saw that his six years' work, carried out with so much devotion and labour, was entirely thrown away.
His position was the more painful because, having finished his book, he no longer had any literary work such as had previously occupied the greater part of his time.
He was intelligent, well-educated, healthy and active, but did not know how to employ his energy.
Discussions in drawing-rooms, at meetings, at assemblies, in committees, and everywhere where one could speak, took up part of his time; but, as an habitual town-dweller, he did not allow himself to be entirely absorbed by discussions, as his inexperienced brother did when he was in Moscow; so he had much superfluous leisure and mental energy.
Fortunately for him, at this most trying time, after the failure of his book, in place of the questions of Dissent, our American friends, the Samara Famine, the Exhibitions, and Spiritualism, the Slavonic question  which had previously only smouldered in Society  came to the front, and Koznyshev, who had previously been one of the promoters of that cause, devoted himself to it entirely.
Among the people to whom he belonged, nothing was written or talked about at that time except the Serbian war.
He saw that the Slav question had become one of those fashionable diversions which, ever succeeding one another, serve to occupy Society; he saw that too many people took up the question from interested motives.
He saw there was much that was frivolous and ridiculous; but he also saw and admitted the unquestionable and ever-growing enthusiasm which was uniting all classes of society, and with which one could not help sympathizing.
The more he went into this question, the clearer it seemed to him that it was a matter which would attain enormous proportions and become epoch-making.
He devoted himself completely to the service of that great movement and forgot to think about his book.
His whole time was now so taken up that he was unable to answer all the letters and demands addressed to him.
After working all through the spring and part of the summer, it was not till July that he prepared to go to his brother's in the country.
He went, both to enjoy a fortnight's rest, and  in that holy of holies of the people, the very heart of the country  to enjoy the sight of that uplift of the national spirit, of which he and all the town-dwellers were fully convinced.
'You too have come to see them off?' she asked in French.
And do you always come to see them off?' he asked with a slight smile.
'Yes, I read it,' he answered.
'Oh, I say! There is a splendid young man who wants to go.
'Do you know that the well-known Count Vronsky is going by this train?' remarked the Princess with a triumphant and significant smile, when Koznyshev had found her again and given her the note.
'I heard he was going, but did not know when.
Only his mother is seeing him off.
After all, it is the best thing he could do.'
They too moved on, and heard the loud voice of a man who, with a glass in his hand, was making a speech to the Volunteers: 'To serve the Faith, humanity, and our brothers!' said the gentleman, raising his voice more and more. 'Mother Moscow blesses you in the great undertaking!
Zhivio!' [Hail!] he concluded in a loud and tearful voice.
Every one shouted 'Zhivio!' and a fresh crowd surged into the refreshment-room, nearly knocking the Princess off her feet.
'Ah, Princess! What do you think of that!' said Oblonsky, beaming with a joyous smile, as he suddenly appeared in the midst of the crowd.
Now, you should say something, so that... just a few words, you know, of encouragement; you do it so well,' he added with an affectionate, respectful and solicitous smile, gently pushing Koznyshev forward by the arm.
'Then you'll see my wife; I have written to her, but you'll see her sooner. Please tell her you have seen me and it's all right!
However, tell her, if you'll be so kind, that I am appointed Member of the Committee of the Joint... But she will understand!
You know, les petites misres de la vie humaine,' [The little miseries of human life.] he said to the Princess, as if to excuse himself. 'And the Princess Myagkaya, not Lisa but Bibish, is really sending a thousand rifles and twelve nurses!
Isn't he, Princess?' he added, turning to the lady.
Noticing a lady with a collecting-box he beckoned to her and put in a five-rouble note.
'I can't look calmly at those collecting-boxes while I have any money,' he remarked. 'And what a telegram that was to-day!
'You don't say so!' he exclaimed, when the Princess told him that Vronsky was going by that train.
For a moment Oblonsky's face looked sad, but a minute later when, with a slight spring in his step and smoothing his whiskers, he entered the waiting-room where Vronsky was, Oblonsky had quite forgotten how he had sobbed with despair over his sister's corpse, and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.
'With all his faults one must do him justice,' the Princess said to Koznyshev as soon as Oblonsky had left them. 'His is a thoroughly Russian, Slavonic nature!
Say what you will, that man's fate touches me.
Not only is he going himself, but he is taking a whole squadron at his own expense.'
'There he is!' said the Princess, pointing to Vronsky who, in a long overcoat and a black broad-brimmed hat, was passing with his mother on his arm.
Probably at Oblonsky's indication, he looked round to where Koznyshev and the Princess were standing and silently raised his hat.
Coming up to the train, Vronsky, letting his mother pass before him, silently disappeared into one of the compartments.
On the platform 'God save the Tsar' was struck up, followed by 'hurrah 'and 'zhivio'! One of the Volunteers, a tall, hollow-chested, very young man, was bowing in a specially noticeable way, waving over his head a felt hat and a bouquet.
From behind him two officers and an elderly man with a large beard and a greasy cap thrust their heads out, and also bowed.
Again the Volunteers bowed and thrust their heads out, but Koznyshev did not pay attention to them: he had had so much to do with Volunteers that he was already familiar with their general type and it did not interest him.
As soon as the train stopped he changed carriages and made acquaintance with the Volunteers.
The tall, hollow-chested young man talked louder than any of them.
He was evidently drunk and was speaking of something that had happened at his school.
He listened smilingly to the young man and tried to stop him.
Getting into conversation with the young man, Katavasov learnt that he had been a rich Moscow merchant but had run through a large fortune before he was twenty-two.
Katavasov did not like him because he was effeminate, spoilt, and delicate; he was evidently sure, especially now that he was tipsy, that he was performing an heroic deed, and he bragged most unpleasantly.
He was, apparently, a man who had tried everything.
He had had a post on the railway, been a steward, and had started factories, and he talked about it all quite needlessly, using inappropriate technical terms.
He was a modest, quiet man, who evidently deferred to the knowledge of the retired Guardsman and to the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant and did not talk at all about himself.
When Katavasov asked him what prompted him to go to Serbia, he modestly replied:
'Why into the infantry, when they need artillerymen most of all?' said Katavasov, concluding from the artilleryman's age that he must have risen to a considerable rank.
'I did not serve in the artillery long. I am a retired Cadet,' he said, and began to explain why he had not passed the examination for a commission.
All this put together produced on Katavasov a disagreeable impression, and when the Volunteers got out at a station to have a drink he wished to verify this unfavourable impression by a talk with somebody.
One of the passengers, an old man in a military overcoat, had been listening all the time to Katavasov's conversation with the Volunteers.
'What a variety there is in the positions of all these men who are going there!' Katavasov remarked vaguely, wishing to express his own opinion but at the same time to draw the old man.
He knew what a military man ought to be, and by the appearance and talk of those men, and by the swagger with which they applied themselves to their flasks on the way, he considered them bad soldiers.
Besides that, he lived in a provincial town and wanted to speak of a discharged soldier of his town who had volunteered, a drunkard and thief whom no one would employ any longer.
But, knowing by experience that in the present state of public feeling it was dangerous to express any opinion contrary to the prevailing one, and especially dangerous to censure the Volunteers, he also watched Katavasov.
'Well, men are wanted there,' he said, with laughing eyes.
And they began talking about the latest war news, each concealing from the other his perplexity as to whom to-morrow's battle was to be with, since the Turks, according to the latest intelligence, had been beaten at all points.
And so they parted without either of them having expressed his opinion.
Katavasov returning to his carriage involuntarily prevaricated; and in telling Koznyshev his observations of the Volunteers, let it appear that they were excellent fellows.
The first time he passed the Vronskys' compartment he noticed that the blind was down.
But the next time he passed he saw the old Countess at the window.
'You see I am going with him as far as Kursk,' said she.
'Yes, so I heard,' replied Koznyshev, stopping by her window and glancing inside. 'What a fine action this is of his!' he added, noticing that Vronsky was not there.
'Yes, but after his misfortune what could he do?'
Oh, what I have endured!' she repeated when Koznyshev had entered and taken a seat beside her. 'You cannot imagine it!
For six weeks he spoke to no one and ate only when I implored him to.
We took away everything that he could kill himself with. We lived on the ground floor, but one could not tell what he might do.
You know he had once before shot himself on her account?' she said, and the old woman's brows knit at the recollection. 'Yes, she ended as such a woman deserved to end.
Even the death she chose was mean and low.'
I was living on my estate and he was with me.
We had no idea that she was herself there at the station.
I felt as if I had received a blow!  I knew it was she!
But he had already been told.
When I ran to his room he was beside himself  it was terrible to see him.
He did not say a word, but off he galloped to the station.
Ah, one can't speak of it!' exclaimed the Countess with a gesture of her arm. 'A terrible time!
No, say what you will, she was a bad woman.
Well, she proved it! She ruined herself and two splendid men  her husband and my unfortunate son.'
'And how about her husband?' inquired Koznyshev.
'He took her little girl.
But now he is greatly distressed at having given up his daughter to a stranger.
But he can't go back on his word.
Karenin came to the funeral; but we tried to arrange so that he and Alexis should not meet.
But my poor son had given himself up to her entirely.
He had thrown up everything  his career, me; and then she did not even pity him, but deliberately dealt him a deathblow.
No, say what you will, her death itself was the death of a horrid woman, without religion.
God forgive me! I cannot help hating her memory when I see my son's ruin!'
'But how is he now?'
I am an old woman and understand nothing about it, but for him it is a godsend.
Of course I, as his mother, fear for him; and above all I hear that ce n'est pas trs bien vu a Petersburg.
Unluckily, too, his teeth have started aching.
But he will be very glad to see you.
Koznyshev said he would be very pleased, and crossed over to the other platform.
IN THE SLANTING SHADOW of a pile of sacks heaped up on the platform, Vronsky, in a long overcoat, his hat pulled down low and his hands in his pockets, was walking up and down like an animal in a cage, turning sharply every twenty paces.
To Koznyshev as he approached it seemed that Vronsky saw but pretended not to see him.
In his eyes Vronsky at that moment seemed an important worker in a great cause, and Koznyshev considered it his duty to encourage and cheer him.
Vronsky paused, looked at Koznyshev, recognized him, and advancing a few steps to meet him, pressed his hand very very hard.
Unless indeed to the Turks!...' he added, smiling with his lips only. His eyes retained their expression of angry suffering.
The Volunteers are being very much attacked and a man like yourself will raise them in public opinion.'
'As a man I have this quality, that I do not value my life at all and that I have physical energy enough to hack my way into a square and slay or fall  that I am sure of.
It will be of use to somebody,' and he moved his jaw impatiently because of the incessant gnawing pain in his tooth, which even prevented him from speaking with the expression he desired.
God grant you outward success and inward peace,' he added, holding out his hand.
'Yes, as a tool I may be of some use. But as a man I  am a ruin!' said he, pausing between the words.
The acute pain in the strong tooth, filling his mouth with saliva, hindered his speaking. He remained silent, gazing at the wheels of the approaching tender, which was slowly and smoothly gliding over the rails.
Suddenly a quite different feeling, not of pain but of tormenting inward discomfort, made him for a moment forget his toothache.
At the sight of the tender and the rails, and under the influence of conversation with some one he had not met since the catastrophe, he suddenly remembered her; that is, remembered what was left of her when; like a madman, he ran into the railway shed where on a table, stretched out shamelessly before the eyes of strangers, lay the mangled body still warm with recent life. The head, left intact, with its heavy plaits and the curls round the temples, was thrown back; and on the lovely face with its half-open red lips was frozen an expression  pitiful on the lips and horrible in the fixed open eyes  an expression which repeated, as if in words, the terrible phrase about his repenting it  which she had uttered during their quarrel.
He tried to remember her as she was when he had met her the first time  also at a railway station  mysterious, charming, loving, seeking and giving joy, and not cruelly vindictive as he remembered her at the last.
He tried to recall his best moments with her but they were for ever poisoned.
He could think of her only-as triumphant, having carried out the threat of inflicting on him totally useless but irrevocable remorse.
He ceased to feel the pain in his tooth, and sobs distorted his face.
Having twice walked past the sacks and mastered himself, he turned calmly to Koznyshev:
AS HE HAD NOT KNOWN when he would be able to leave Moscow, Koznyshev had not sent a telegram to his brother asking to be met at the station, and Levin was not at home when, toward noon, Katavasov and Koznyshev, dark as Arabs with the dust in the little tarantas they had hired at the station, drew up at the porch of the Pokrovsk house.
Kitty, who was sitting on the balcony with her father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law and ran down to meet him.
'Aren't you ashamed of yourself for not letting us know?' she said, holding out her hand to him and offering her forehead for a kiss.
And you, as usual,' said he; smiling, 'are enjoying tranquil happiness outside the currents in your peaceful shadows.
When I have had a wash I shall look like a human being!' Katavasov said in his usual jesting way, holding out his hand and smiling, his teeth looking particularly bright in contrast with his black face.
He has gone to the farm. It is time he was back.'
'Always busy with his husbandry!
'It's Sergius Ivanich and Katavasov, the Professor,' said she.
'No, Papa, he is very nice, and Kostya is very fond of him,' Kitty replied with a smile as of entreaty, having noticed a sarcastic expression on her father's face.
'You go and entertain them, dear,' Kitty said to her sister.
'They met Steve at the station, he is quite well.
He will be awake now and is certainly screaming.' And feeling the flow of milk, she went with rapid steps to the nursery.
It was not a mere guess  the bond between herself and the baby had not yet been severed  and she knew surely by the flow of milk within herself that he was wanting food.
She knew he was screaming before she reached the nursery.
And so he was. She heard his voice and increased her speed.
But the faster she went the louder he screamed.
'Has he been screaming long, Nurse? Long?' she asked hurriedly, sitting down and preparing to nurse the baby.
Oh, Nurse! How tiresome you are; come, you can tie up his cap afterwards!'
Goo! Goo!' she cooed to him, paying no attention to the mother.
The nurse brought the baby to his mother, and Agatha Mikhaylovna followed behind, her face softened with tenderness.
'He knows me, he does!
It's God's truth, Catherine Alexandrovna, dear, he knows me!' cried Agatha Mikhaylovna, raising her voice above the baby's.
At last, after desperate screaming and choking, matters went smoothly, and both mother and child felt calmed and were silent.
'Why do you think he knows you?' she added, moving her eyes so as to see the baby's. They looked roguishly at her, she thought, from beneath his cap, which had slipped forward, and she watched the rhythmical rise and fall of his cheeks and the little hand with the rosy palm making circular movements.
If he knew anyone it would be me,' Kitty replied to Agatha Mikhaylovna's statement, and smiled.
She smiled because, though she said it was impossible for him to know, she was sure in her heart that he not only knew Agatha Mikhaylovna, but that he knew and understood everything, even many things that no one else knew, and which she, his mother, had learnt to know and understand through him.
For Agatha Mikhaylovna, for the nurse, for his grandfather and even for his father, Mitya was a living being requiring only material care, but for his mother he had already long been a moral being, with whom she had already had a long series of spiritual relations.
'Well, wait till he wakes up and you will see for yourself.
When I do like that, he quite brightens up, the dear!
We shall see,' Kitty whispered. 'But now go away, he is falling asleep.'
'Oh, the heat! the heat!... If God would only, send a little rain!' she said.
'Yes, yes! Hush!...' was all Kitty answered as she sat softly rocking herself and tenderly pressing the little plump arm, which looked as if a thread had been tied round the wrist, and was still feebly waving while Mitya kept shutting and opening his eyes.
This hand disturbed Kitty; she wanted to kiss it, but was afraid to do so lest she should wake her baby.
Only now and then the baby, continuing his business, lifted his long curved lashes and looked at his mother with moist eyes that seemed black in the dim light.
I expect he has gone to the apiary again.
Though I am sorry that he goes there so often, yet I am also glad of it.
He is more cheerful now than he was in spring.
Then he was so gloomy, and suffered so much, that I was becoming alarmed about him.
And how funny he is!' she whispered with a smile.
She knew what was tormenting her husband.
It was his want of faith.
Although had she been asked whether she thought that if he did not believe in the future life he would perish, she would have had to acknowledge that he would, yet his lack of faith did not make her unhappy; and she, who accepted the doctrine that salvation was impossible for an unbeliever, while loving her husband's soul more than anything in the world, smiled when she thought of his disbelief and called him funny.
'Why has he been reading those philosophies for a whole year?' she thought. 'If it's all written in those books, he can understand it.
He says himself that he would like to believe.
Then why does he not believe?
It must be because he thinks too much. And he thinks too much because of his solitude.
I think he will be glad of these visitors, especially of Katavasov.
He likes arguing with them,' she reflected, and then turned her mind to the problem of where she had better arrange for Katavasov to sleep  in a separate room or with Koznyshev?
And here a thought suddenly struck her which made her start with excitement and even disturb Mitya, who gave her a severe look in consequence. 'I don't think the laundress has brought the things back and the spare sheets are all in use.
'Yes, I must see about it,' she decided, and returning to her former train of thought she remembered that there was something important, something spiritual, that she had not yet thought out and tried to recollect what it was. 'Oh yes!
'Well, he is an unbeliever!
No, he will never pretend.'
Then a recent proof of his kindness came vividly to her mind.
Two weeks before, Dolly had received a penitent letter from her husband.
He implored her to save his honour and to sell her estate to pay his debts.
Dolly was in despair; she hated her husband, despised him, pitied him, made up her mind to divorce him and to refuse; but ended by consenting to sell part of her estate.
With an involuntary smile of emotion, Kitty remembered her own husband's shamefacedness after that, and his repeated awkward attempts to approach the subject he had on his mind, and how at length having discovered the only way of helping Dolly without offending her, he suggested to Kitty that she should give her sister her own part of the estate, a device that had not occurred to her.
'How can he be an unbeliever with such a heart?
And his dread of hurting anybody's feelings, even a child's!
Sergius Ivanich quite regards it as Kostya's duty to act as his steward, and so does his sister.
And now Dolly and her children are his wards!
And then there are all those peasants who come to him every day as if it were his business to help them.
'Yes, only be like your father, only be like him!' she whispered, giving Mitya to the nurse, and touching his cheek with her lips.
SINCE THE MOMENT when, at the sight of his beloved and dying brother, Levin for the first time looked at the questions of life and death in the light of the new convictions, as he called them, which between the ages of twenty and thirty-four had imperceptibly replaced the beliefs of his childhood and youth, he had been less horrified by death than by life without the least knowledge of whence it came, what it is for, why, and what it is.
From that moment, without thinking about it and though he continued living as he had done heretofore, Levin never ceased to feel afraid of his ignorance.
Moreover, he was vaguely conscious that what he had called his convictions were really ignorance and, more than that, were a state of mind which rendered knowledge of what he needed impossible.
At the commencement of his married life the new joys and new duties he experienced completely stifled these thoughts; but lately, since his wife's confinement, while living in Moscow without any occupation, the problem demanding solution had presented itself more and more insistently to him.
For him the problem was this: 'If I don't accept the replies offered by Christianity to the questions my life presents, what solutions do I accept?' And he not only failed to find in the whole arsenal of his convictions any kind of answer, but he could not even find anything resembling an answer.
He was in the position of a man seeking for food in a toyshop or at a gunsmith's.
Involuntarily and unconsciously, in every book, in every conversation, and in every person he met, he now sought for their relation to those questions and for a solution to them.
What astounded and upset him most in this connection, was that the majority of those in his set and of his age, having like himself replaced their former beliefs by new convictions like his own; did not see anything to be distressed about, and were quite contented and tranquil. So that, besides the principal question, Levin was tormented by other questions: Were these people sincere?
Were they not pretending? Or did they understand possibly in some different and clearer way than he, the answers science gives to the questions he was concerned with?
And he studied painstakingly both the opinions of those people and the books which contained their answers.
One thing he had discovered since these questions had begun to occupy him, namely, that he had been mistaken in imagining from his recollections of his youthful university circle, that religion had outlived its day and no longer existed.
All those near to him who lived good lives were people who believed: the old Prince, Lvov, of whom he had grown so fond, his brother Koznyshev, and all the womenfolk. His wife believed as he had done in early childhood, and ninety-nine out of a hundred of the Russian people, the whole of the people whose lives he most respected, also believed.
Another thing was that, having read a great many books he became convinced that those who shared his outlook understood only what he had understood, explaining nothing and merely ignoring those problems  without a solution to which he felt he could not live,  but trying to solve quite other problems which could not interest him, such as, for instance, the development of organisms, a mechanical explanation of the soul, and so on.
Besides, during the time of his wife's confinement an extraordinary thing had happened to him.
But that moment had passed, and he could not allot any place in his life to the state of mind he had then experienced.
He could not admit that he had then known the truth and was now making a mistake; because, as soon as he reflected calmly about it, it all fell to pieces, nor could he acknowledge that he had then been mistaken, for he prized the state his soul had then been in, and by acknowledging it to be a result of weakness he would have defiled those moments.
He was painfully out of harmony with himself and strained all his spiritual powers to escape from this condition.
He read and thought, and the more he read and thought the further he felt from his goal.
Latterly in Moscow and in the country, having convinced himself that he could get no answer from the materialists, he read through and re-read Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, those philosophers who explained life otherwise than materialistically.
Their thoughts seemed to him fruitful when he read, or was himself devising refutations of other teachings, the materialistic in particular; but as soon as he began reading, or himself devised, solutions to life's problems, the same thing occurred every time.
Following long definitions of vague words such as spirit, will, freedom, substance, and deliberately entering the verbal trap set for him by the philosophers, or by himself, he seemed to begin to understand something.
But he had only to forget that artificial line of thought, and to return direct from real. life to what had appeared satisfactory so long as he kept to the given line of thought  and suddenly the whole artificial edifice tumbled down like a house of cards, and it was evident that the edifice had been constructed of those same words differently arranged, and without regard for something in life more important than reason.
At one time, while reading Schopenhauer, he replaced the word will by the word love, and this new philosophy comforted him for a day or two, as long as he did not stand aside from it; but it, too, collapsed when he viewed it in relation to real life, and it turned out to be a muslin garment without warmth.
Levin read the second volume of them, and in spite of its polemical, polished, and witty style, which at first repelled him, he was struck by its teaching about the Church.
He was struck by the thought that it is not given to isolated man to attain divine truth, but that it is given to a community united by love  the Church.
But afterwards on reading the history of the Church, first by a Roman Catholic and then by a Greek-Orthodox writer, and finding that each essentially infallible Church repudiated the other, he became disenchanted with Homyakov's teaching about the Church; and that edifice fell into dust just as the philosophical structures had done.
All that spring he was not himself and experienced terrible moments.
Yet I cannot know that and therefore I can't live,' he said to himself.
The means of escape were in the hands of every man.
And though he was a happy and healthy family man, Levin was several times so near to suicide that he hid a cord he had lest he should hang himself, and he feared to carry a gun lest he should shoot himself.
But he did not hang or shoot himself and went on living.
WHEN LEVIN THOUGHT about what he was and why he lived, he could find no answer and was driven to despair; but when he left off asking himself those questions he seemed to know what he was and why he lived, for he acted and lived unfalteringly and definitely  recently even more unfalteringly than before.
When he returned to the country in June, he went back to his ordinary occupations  husbandry, intercourse with the peasants and with his neighbours, management of his house and of his sister's and brother's affairs, which were entrusted to him, relations with his wife and relatives, cares about his baby, and a new hobby  beekeeping, which he took up with enthusiasm that spring  occupied all his time.
These matters interested him, not because he justified them to himself by any general theories as he had done previously; on the contrary, being now on the one hand disenchanted by the ill-success of his former occupations for the general welfare, and on the other hand too much occupied with his own thoughts and by the mass of affairs that overwhelmed him from all sides, he quite abandoned all calculation of public utility, and these matters interested him only because it seemed to him that he had to do what he was doing, and could not act otherwise.
Formerly (it had been so almost from childhood and increasingly so till his complete maturity) when he tried to do anything for the good of everybody, for humanity, for Russia, for the whole village, he had noticed that the thoughts of it were agreeable, but the activity itself was always unsatisfactory; there was no full assurance that the work was really necessary, and the activity itself, which at first seemed so great, ever lessened and lessened till it vanished.
But now since his marriage, when he began to confine himself more and more to living for himself, though he no longer felt any joy at the thought of his activity, he felt confident that his work was necessary, saw that it progressed far better than formerly, and that it was always growing more and more.
Now, as if involuntarily, he cut ever deeper and deeper into the earth, so that he, like a ploughshare, could not get out without turning the sod.
As surely as one must pay one's debts, so surely was it necessary to keep the patrimony in such a state that when his son inherited it, he would thank his father, as Levin thanked his grandfather, for all that he had built and planted.
To do this he must not lease the land, but must farm it himself, keep cattle, manure the fields, and plant woods.
It was as impossible not to look after his brother's and sister's affairs, and those of all the peasants who came for advice and were accustomed to do so, as it is impossible to abandon a baby you are already holding in your arms.
It was necessary to look after the comforts of his sister-in-law and her children, who had been invited, and of his wife and child, and it was impossible not to pass at least a small portion of each day with them.
All this, with game-shooting, and his new hobby of beekeeping, filled up the whole of that life of his which seemed to him, when he thought about it, to have no meaning.
But besides knowing definitely what he had to do, Levin also knew how to do it all, and which affair was the more important of any two.
He knew that he must hire labourers as cheaply as possible; but that he must not take them in bondage for less than they were worth by advancing them money, though this would be very profitable.
He might sell straw to the peasants in a time of shortage, though he felt sorry for them; but an inn or a public-house, although it brought in a revenue, must be done away with.
Felling trees must be punished as severely as possible, but if peasants let their cattle stray he must not extract fines from them; and though it grieved the watchmen and weakened discipline, the strayed cattle must not be detained.
He must lend money to Peter to liberate him from the usurers to whom he was paying ten per cent. a month; but he must neither reduce or postpone the payments of rent by the peasants who were in default.
He must not pardon a labourer who went home at a busy time because his father had died  sorry as he might be for the man  part of his pay had to be deducted for the precious months during which he had been absent; but he could not neglect giving a monthly allowance to old domestic serfs who were of no use at all to him.
Levin knew, too, that on returning home the first thing he must do was to go to his wife, who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three hours to see him could wait a little longer; and he knew that in spite of all the pleasure of hiving a swarm, he must forgo that pleasure, let the old beekeeper hive the swarm without him, and go to talk to the peasants who had found him at the apiary.
Whether he was acting well or ill he did not know and far from laying down the law about it, he now avoided talking or thinking about it.
Thinking about it led him into doubts and prevented him from seeing what he should and should not do.
But when he did not think, but just lived, he unceasingly felt in his soul the presence of an infallible judge deciding which of two possible actions was the better and which the worse; and as soon as he did what he should not have done, he immediately felt this.
In this way he lived, not knowing or seeing any possibility of knowing what he was or why he lived in the world, and he suffered so much from that ignorance that he was afraid he might commit suicide, while at the same time he was firmly cutting his own particular definite path through life.
Having lived most of his life in the country and in close contact with the peasants, Levin always felt, at this busy time, that this general stimulation of the peasants communicated itself to him.
Early in the morning he rode to where the first rye was being sown, then to see the oats carted and stacked, and returning home when his wife and sister-in-law were getting up he drank coffee with them, and then walked to the farm where the new threshing machine was to be started to thresh the seed corn.
All that day, when talking to the steward and the peasants and at home with his wife, Dolly, her children, and his father-in-law, Levin's thoughts were busy with the one and only subject, outside his farming, that interested him at this time, and in everything he sought its relation to his questions: 'What am I?
Standing in the cool shade of the newly-thatched barn, with its wattle walls of hazel, which had not yet shed its scented leaves, pressed against the freshly stripped aspens of the roof-tree under the thatch, he looked now through the open doorway into which the dry and bitter chaff-dust rushed and whirled, at the grass round the threshing-floor lit up by the hot sunshine and at the fresh straw that had just been brought out of the barn, now at the bright-headed and white-breasted swallows that flew in chirping beneath the roof and, flapping their wings, paused in the light of the doorway, and now at the people who bustled about in the dark and dusty barn; and he thought strange thoughts:
'Why is all this being done?' he wondered. 'Why am I standing here, obliging them to work?
Why do they all make such efforts and try to show me their zeal? Why is my old friend Matrena toiling so (I doctored her after the fire, when she was struck by a girder)?' he thought, looking at a thin peasant woman who pushed the grain along with a rake, her dark sunburnt bare feet stepping with effort on the hard uneven barn floor.
'She recovered then, but to-day or tomorrow, or in ten years' time, they will bury her and nothing will be left of her, nor of that smart girl with the red skirt, who with such dexterous and delicate movements is beating the chaff from the ears. She too will be buried, and that piebald gelding too  and that one very soon,' he reflected, looking at a horse breathing quickly with falling and rising belly and inflated nostrils, as it trod on the slanting wheel that moved under it.
'They will bury her, and so they will Theodore, who is feeding the machine, his curly beard full of chaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulder.
Yet he loosens the sheaves and gives directions, shouts at the women, and quickly puts right the strap on the fly-wheel. And, moreover, not they only but I too shall be buried and nothing will be left.
He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to calculate how much they could thresh in an hour.
'They've been nearly an hour, and have only just started on the third heap,' thought he, approached the man who was feeding the machine, and shouting above its din, told him to put in less at a time.
Theodore, black with the dust that stuck to his perspiring face, shouted something in reply, but still did not do as Levin wished.
Having worked till the peasants' dinner-hour, which soon came, he left the barn together with Theodore and began chatting, standing beside the neat yellow freshly-reaped stack of seed-rye on the threshing-floor.
'The rent is too high, Constantine Dmitrich,' answered Theodore, picking out the ears of rye from the front of his damp shirt.
'Why shouldn't Mityuka' (as he contemptuously called the innkeeper) 'make it pay, Constantine Dmitrich?
That fellow will press hard, but he'll get his own!
But as if Daddy Plato would ever skin a man!
He'll lend, and sometimes let a man off, and so run short himself.
It all depends on the sort of man.'
'But why should he let anyone off?'
One man lives only for his own needs: take Mityuka, who only stuffs his own belly, but Plato is an upright old man.
He lives for his soul and remembers God.'
'How does he remember God? How does he live for the soul?'
'Yes, yes! Good-bye!' uttered Levin, gasping with excitement, and turning away, he took his stick and walked quickly away toward home.
At the peasant's words about Plato living for his soul, rightly, in a godly way, dim but important thoughts crowded into his mind, as if breaking loose from some place where they had been locked up, and all rushing toward one goal, whirled in his head, dazzling him with their light.
LEVIN WENT ALONG THE HIGH-ROAD with long strides, attending not so much to his thoughts  he could not yet disentangle them  as to a condition of his soul he had never before experienced.
The words the peasant had spoken produced in his soul the effect of an electric spark, suddenly transforming and welding into one a whole group of disjointed impotent separate ideas which had always interested him.
These ideas, though he had been unconscious of them, had been in his mind when he was talking about letting the land.
He felt something new in his soul and probed this something with pleasure, not yet knowing what it was.
What could be more senseless than what he said?
'No, I understood him just as he understands them: understood completely and more clearly than I understand anything in life; and I have never in my life doubted it, and cannot doubt it.
'Theodore says that Kirilov, the innkeeper, lives for his belly.
Have my sufferings really come to an end?' thought Levin as he strode along the dusty road, oblivious of the heat, of his fatigue, and filled with a sense of relief from long-continued suffering.
He was breathless with excitement and, incapable of going further, he turned from the road into the wood and sat down on the uncut grass in the shade of the aspens.
Taking the hat from his perspiring head, he lay down, leaning his elbow upon the juicy, broad-bladed forest grass.
'Yes, I must clear it up and understand it,' he thought, gazing intently at the untrodden grass before him, and following the movements of a green insect that was crawling up a stalk of couch grass and was hindered in its ascent by a leaf of goutwort.
'What have I discovered?' he asked himself, turning back the leaf that it should not hinder the insect and bending another blade for the creature to pass on to.
He briefly reviewed the whole course of his thoughts during the last two years, beginning with the clear and obvious thought of death at the sight of his beloved brother hopelessly ill.
Having then for the first time clearly understood that before every man, and before himself, there lay only suffering, death, and eternal oblivion, he had concluded that to live under such conditions was impossible; that one must either explain life to oneself so that it does not seem to be an evil mockery by some sort of devil, or one must shoot oneself.
But he had done neither the one nor the other, yet he continued to live, think, and feel, had even at that very time got married, experienced many joys, and been happy whenever he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.
It showed that he had lived well, but thought badly.
He had lived (without being conscious of it) by those spiritual truths which he had imbibed with his mother's milk; but in thought he had not only not acknowledged those truths, but had studiously evaded them.
Now it was clear to him that he was only able to live, thanks to the beliefs in which he had been brought up.
Nothing of that which constitutes the chief joys of my life would have existed for me.' And although he made the greatest efforts of imagination, he could not picture to himself the bestial creature he would have been, had he not known what he was living for.
'Ah yes! Pride!' he said to himself, turning over face downwards and beginning to tie blades of grass into knots, trying not to break them.
And chiefly roguery of mind, precisely roguery. Just mind-swindling,' he repeated.
LEVIN REMEMBERED A RECENT SCENE between Dolly and her children.
When their mother caught them at this pursuit, she began in Levin's presence to impress on them how much trouble what they were wasting had cost grown-up people, that that trouble had been taken for them, that if they broke cups they would not have anything to drink tea out of, and if they spilt milk they would not have anything to eat and would die of hunger.
And Levin was struck by the quiet dull disbelief with which the children listened to these remarks from their mother.
They were only grieved that their amusing game had been ended, and they did not believe a word of what she was saying.
'Don't we, and didn't I, do just the same, when intellectually I sought for the meaning of the forces of nature and the purpose of human life?' he went on thinking.
'And don't all the philosophic theories do the same, when by ways of thought strange and unnatural to man they lead him to a knowledge of what he knew long ago, and knows so surely that without it he could not live?
Is it not evident in the development of every philosopher's theory that he knows in advance, as indubitably as the peasant Theodore and not a whit more clearly than he, the chief meaning of life, and only wishes, by a questionable intellectual process, to return to what every one knows?
But as soon as an important moment of life comes, like children when they are cold and hungry, I go to Him, and even less than the children whose mother scolds them for their childish mischief do I feel that my childish attempts to kick because I am filled should be reckoned against me.
He turned over, and leaning on his elbows began looking at a herd of cattle in the distance approaching the river on the other side.
'But can I believe in all that the Church professes?' he asked himself, testing himself by everything which might destroy his present peace of mind.
And it now seemed to him that there was not one of the dogmas of the Church which could disturb the principal thing  faith in God, in goodness, as the sole vocation of man.
Lying on his back he was now gazing at the high cloudless sky. 'Don't I know that that is infinite space, and not a rounded vault?
'Can this really be faith?' he wondered, afraid to believe in his happiness. 'My God, I thank Thee!' he uttered, repressing his rising sobs, and wiping away with both hands the tears that filled his eyes.
LEVIN LOOKED STRAIGHT BEFORE HIM, and saw the herd of cattle and then his trap and his horse Raven and the coachman who, having driven up to the cattle, was speaking to the herdsman; after that, close by, he heard the sound of wheels and the snorting of a well-fed horse; but he was so engrossed in his thoughts that he did not wonder why the coachman was coming for him.
As if just awakened from a dream, it was long before he could collect his thoughts.
He looked at the well-fed horse, lathered between its legs and on its neck where the reins chafed it  looked at Ivan the coachman sitting beside him, and remembered that he had been expecting his brother, that his wife was probably disturbed at his long absence, and he tried to guess who the visitor that had come with his brother might be.
His brother, his wife, and the unknown visitor appeared in a different light to him now.
It seemed to him that his relations with every one would now be changed.
'There will be no disputes; with Kitty never any quarrels again; with the visitor, whoever he may be, I shall be amiable and kind; and with the servants, with Ivan, everything will be different.'
Tightly holding in the good horse, who snorted impatiently and pulled at the reins, Levin kept turning to glance at Ivan, who sat beside him not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hands and continually pushing down his shirt as the wind blew it out. Levin tried to think of some pretext for beginning a conversation with him.
But he could think of nothing else to say. 'Bear to the right, sir, there's a stump there,' said the coachman, taking hold of the rein.
Just as it always did, interference vexed him, and he immediately felt how wrong had been his conclusion that his spiritual condition could at once alter his manner when confronted with reality.
'An awfully dreadful man!
And he goes like that with his hands,' said Tanya, standing up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.
'Oh, if only it is not some one disagreeable!' he thought.
As soon as he had turned the corner of the road and saw those who were approaching he at once recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, waving his arms just as Tanya had represented.
Katavasov was very fond of talking about philosophy, having a conception of it which he had acquired from naturalists who had never studied it, and in Moscow Levin had latterly had many disputes with him.
One of those disputes, in which Katavasov evidently thought he had been the victor, was the first thing Levin remembered when he recognized him.
'But I will not now on any account dispute or express my opinions lightly,' he thought.
After alighting from the trap and welcoming his brother and Katavasov, Levin asked where Kitty was.
'She wanted to let him sleep there; it's so hot in the house,' said Dolly. Levin always advised his wife not to take the child into the wood, considering it dangerous, and this news was disagreeable to him.
'She wanders about with him from place to place,' said the old Prince with a smile. 'I advised her to try taking him to the ice-cellar!'
'Well, and what are you doing?' asked Koznyshev, lagging behind with his brother.
At these words the brothers' eyes met, and Levin  in spite of the desire he always felt, and now more than ever, for friendly and especially for simple relations with his brother  felt ill at ease while looking at him.
He dropped his own eyes, not knowing what to say.
Mentally reviewing the subjects that might interest Koznyshev and divert him from the Serbian war and the Slavonic Question, at which he had hinted when mentioning his work in Moscow, Levin asked about Koznyshev's book.
'Have any reviews of your book appeared?' he asked.
'Look there, Darya Alexandrovna! It's going to rain,' he added, pointing with his umbrella to some white clouds that had appeared above the aspen trees.
'How right you were to come!' he said.
'Well, I have finally convinced myself that I shan't find solutions of the questions I am concerned about in him, or in people of his kind.
But he was suddenly struck by the calm and cheerful expression of Katavasov's face, and felt so sorry to lose the spiritual condition which he was evidently spoiling by his conversation, that recollecting his resolution he ceased speaking.
'However, we'll have a talk later on,' he said. 'If we are going to the apiary, it's this way, along this path,' he added, addressing the whole party.
When by the narrow footpath they had reached the unmown glade covered on one side by a thick growth of bright John-and-Maries, with tall spreading bushes of dark green sneezewort between them, Levin asked his guests to sit down in the deep cool shade of the young aspens  upon a bench and some tree stumps specially arranged for visitors to the apiary who might be afraid of bees  while he went to the hut to fetch bread, cucumbers, and fresh honey for the grown-up people as well as for the children.
Trying to make as few brusque movements as possible and listening to the bees that flew past him more and more often, he went along the path to the hut.
At the very entrance a bee became entangled in his beard and began buzzing, but he carefully liberated it.
He went into the shady lobby and from a peg in the wall took down his veil, put it on, and with his hands deep in his pockets entered the fenced-in apiary where  standing in regular rows and tied with bast to stakes  in the middle of a space where the grass had been mown stood the old beehives, [Hollowed-out stumps of trees placed upright.] every one familiar to him, and each with a history of its own, while along the wattle fence stood the new hives with the swarms hived that year.
In front of the hives, flickering before his eyes and circling and fluttering over the same spot, played bees and drones, and between them flew the working bees always to or from the wood with the blossoming lime trees, fetching and bringing back their loads.
In his ears rang incessantly a variety of sounds: now of a busy working bee flying swiftly past, now of a buzzing idle drone, then of the excited bee sentinels guarding their treasure from a foe and prepared to sting.
On the other side of the fence an old man was making a hoop and did not notice Levin, who stopped in the middle of the apiary without calling him.
He was glad of this opportunity to be alone and recover from reality, which had already so lowered his spiritual condition.
He remembered that he had already got angry with Ivan, treated his brother coldly, and spoken heedlessly to Katavasov.
'Can it possibly have been but a momentary mood that will pass without leaving a trace?' he wondered.
But at that instant returning into that mood, he felt with joy that something new and important had occurred within him.
Reality had temporarily veiled the spiritual tranquillity he had found, but it remained with him.
Just as the bees, now circling round him, threatening him and distracting his attention, deprived him of complete physical calm and forced him to shrink to avoid them, so the cares that had beset him from the moment he got into the trap had deprived him of spiritual freedom; but that continued only so long as they surrounded him.
And as, in spite of the bees, his physical powers remained intact, so his newly realized spiritual powers were intact also.
'KOSTYA! DO YOU KNOW with whom Sergius Ivanich travelled coming here?' said Dolly, after she had distributed cucumbers and honey among the children.
'With Vronsky! He is on his way to Serbia.'
'Yes, and not alone, but is taking a squadron at his own expense!' said Katavasov.
'That is like him,' said Levin. 'But are Volunteers really still going?' he added with a glance at Koznyshev.
'The Turks!' answered Koznyshev, quietly smiling, having extracted the bee which, black with honey, moved its legs helplessly. as he shifted it from the knife to a firm aspen leaf.
'But the Prince is not talking of help,' interposed Levin, taking his father-in-law's side, 'but of war!
'My theory is this: On the one hand war is such a bestial, cruel and terrible affair, that no single man  not to speak of a Christian  can take on himself personally the responsibility for beginning a war. It can only be done by a Government, which is summoned to it and is brought to it inevitably.
Imagine that you were going along a street and saw a tipsy man beating a woman or a child; I think you would not stop to ask whether war had or had not been declared against that man, but you would rush at him and defend the victim!'
'But I would not kill the man,' replied Levin.
'Please bring a towel,' she said to the old man, who was looking smilingly at the children. 'It's impossible that all...'
The handsome old man, with a black beard turning grey in places and thick silvery hair, stood motionless with a bowl of honey in his hand, gazing kindly and calmly down from his height at the gentlefolk, clearly neither understanding them nor wishing to understand.
'That's just so,' he said to Koznyshev, and moved his head significantly.
He neither knows nor thinks about it,' said Levin. 'Have you heard about the war, Mikhaylich?' he asked, addressing the old man.
Shall I bring some more bread and give the laddie a bit?' he asked Dolly, pointing to Grisha, who was finishing his crust.
'I tell you it's not hundreds, and not the happy-go-lucky people, but the best representatives of the people!' said Koznyshev, as irritably as if he were defending the last of his possessions. 'And the donations?
I don't publish a newspaper and don't want to defend them, but I am speaking of the unanimity of the intelligent world,' said Koznyshev, turning to his brother. Levin was going to reply, but the old Prince interrupted him.
'About that unanimity, something else can be said,' rejoined the Prince. 'There's my son-in-law, Stephen Arkadyevich, you know him.
You just ask him if his work will be any use, and he will prove to you that it is most necessary!
And he is a truthful man, but one can't help believing in the usefulness of eight thousand roubles.'
'Yes, he asked me to tell Darya Alexandrovna that he has got the post,' said Koznyshev discontentedly, considering that what the Prince was saying was not to the point.
'The editors would be fine!' remarked Katavasov, laughing loudly, and picturing to himself the editors of his acquaintance in that chosen legion.
'Every member of Society is called upon to do his proper task,' he said. 'And men of thought perform theirs by expressing public opinion.
Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we hear the voice of the Russian people, who are ready to arise as one man and to sacrifice themselves for their oppressed brethren.
'But it's not a question of sacrificing themselves only, but of killing Turks,' remarked Levin timidly. 'The people sacrifice and are ready to sacrifice for the good of their souls, but not for murder,' he added, involuntarily connecting the conversation with the thoughts that so engrossed him.
' "I come not to bring peace, but a sword," said Christ,' rejoined Koznyshev, from his own standpoint quoting quite simply, as if it were quite comprehensible, the very passage from the gospels that always perplexed Levin more than any other.
'That's just so!' repeated the old man, who was standing near by, answering a glance that was accidentally thrown at him.
Levin flushed with annoyance, not at being beaten, but because he had not refrained from the dispute.
'No, I must not dispute with them,' he thought. 'They are clad in impenetrable armour, and I am naked.'
He saw that it was not possible to convince his brother and Katavasov, and still less did he see any possibility of himself agreeing with them.
He could not agree that some dozen of men, among whom was his brother, had the right to assert, on the strength of what they were told by some hundreds of grandiloquent Volunteers who came to the city, that they and the newspapers expressed the will and the opinion of the people: an opinion, moreover, which found expression in vengeance and murder.
He could not agree with this, because he neither saw the expression of those thoughts in the people among whom he lived, nor did he find any such thoughts in himself (and he could not consider himself as other than one of those who constituted the Russian people). Above all, he could not agree because he, together with the people, did not know and could not know wherein lay the general welfare, but knew definitely that the attainment of this welfare was only possible by a strict fulfilment of the law of goodness which is revealed to every man, and therefore could not desire or preach war for any kind of general aims.
All labours, all humiliations, all sacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will not judge or decide!' But the people now, according to his brother, were renouncing that exemption they had purchased at so high a price.
One thing could be seen indubitably, namely, that this dispute was irritating his brother at the moment, and that therefore it was wrong to continue it, so Levin ceased to argue and drew his visitors' attention to the clouds that were gathering and to the fact that they had better get home before the rain began.
The children, with frightened and joyful yells, ran on in front. Dolly, struggling with difficulty with the skirts that clung to her legs, no longer walked but ran, her eyes fixed on the children.
[Speaking to the servant Levin gives Kitty her full name.] Levin asked Agatha Mikhaylovna, who, carrying shawls and plaids, met them in the hall.
'We thought she was with you,' she answered.
Lowering his head and fighting against the wind which was tearing the plaids out of his hands, Levin had almost reached the Kolok and could see something gleaming white behind an oak, when suddenly everything burst into flame, the earth seemed on fire, and just overhead the vault of heaven seemed to crack.
When he opened his dazzled eyes the first thing Levin saw with horror through the dense curtain of rain that now separated him from the Kolok was the strangely altered position of the green crown of a familiar oak in the middle of the wood. 'Has it been struck?' he had barely time to think when, with quicker and quicker motion, the crown of the oak disappeared behind the other trees, and he heard the crash of a big tree falling on to other trees.
The flash of lightning, the sound of thunder, and the sudden cold sensation of his body that was being drenched, merged for Levin into one feeling of horror.
'Oh God! Oh God! only not on them!' he said.
And though it occurred to him at once how senseless was his prayer that they should not be killed by the oak that had already fallen, he repeated it, knowing that he could do nothing better than utter that senseless prayer.
Having run to the spot where they generally went, he did not find them there.
The bottom of the nurse's dress was dry, but Kitty's dress was wet through and clung close to her.
Thank God!' he muttered, running up to them and splashing through the puddles with one shoe half off and full of water.
Kitty's wet and rosy face was turned to him, timidly smiling beneath her bedraggled hat.
I don't understand how one can be so imprudent!' he reproached his wife in his vexation.
I was just wishing to go when he became restless.
We had to change his things.
They collected the wet baby-things, and the nurse took the baby in her arms and carried him.
Levin walked beside his wife, feeling guilty at having been vexed, and stealthily, so that the nurse should not see, pressing Kitty's hand.
THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE DAY, amid most varied conversations in which he took part only with what one may call the external side of his mind, Levin, despite his disillusionment with the change that should have taken place in him, did not cease to be joyfully aware of the fullness of his heart.
First Katavasov amused the ladies with his original jokes, which on first acquaintance with him always pleased people, and afterwards, encouraged by Koznyshev, he recounted his very interesting observations on the differences in character, and even in physiognomy, between male and female house-flies and on their life.
Koznyshev too was in good spirits and at tea, led on by his brother, expounded his views of the future of the Eastern question, and did it so simply and well that every one listened attentively.
Only Kitty could not hear him to the end, she was called away to bath Mitya.
A few minutes after she had gone, Levin too was called to her in the nursery.
Leaving his tea and regretting the interruption in the interesting conversation, yet uneasy as to why he was sent for, as this only happened on important occasions; Levin went to the nursery.
Though Koznyshev's plan, which Levin had not heard to the end  of how a liberated Slavonic world, forty millions strong, should, together with Russia, commence a new epoch in history  interested him very much as something quite new to him, and though he was disturbed by curiosity and anxiety as to why he had been summoned, yet as soon as he had left the drawing-room and was alone, he immediately recollected his thoughts of the morning.
And all these considerations of the importance of the Slavonic element in universal history seemed to him so insignificant in comparison with what was going on in his soul, that he immediately forgot them all and returned to the frame of mind he had been in that morning.
He did not now recall, as he had done before, the whole course of his thoughts (he did not now need to).
He at once returned to the feeling that directed him, which was related to those thoughts, and he found that feeling in his soul yet more powerful and definite than before.
Now it was not as it used to be with him when he. had invented ways of tranquillizing himself and had been obliged to recapitulate the whole train of reflections in order to arrive at the feeling.
Now, on the contrary, the feelings of joy and tranquillity were more vivid than before and his thoughts could not keep pace with them.
He went through the verandah and looked at two stars that had appeared on the already darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered: 'Yes, as I looked at the sky I thought that the vault I see is not a delusion, but then there was something I did not think out, something I hid from myself,' he thought. 'But whatever it was, it cannot have been a refutation.
Just as he was entering the nursery he remembered what it was he had hidden from himself.
It seemed to him that he had a reply to that question; but he had no time to express it to himself before he entered the nursery.
Kitty was standing, with her sleeves rolled up, beside the bath in which the baby was splashing about, and hearing her husband's step she turned her face toward him, beckoning him with a smile.
With one hand supporting the head of the plump kicking baby who floated on his back, with the other she squeezed the water from a sponge over him, regularly exerting the muscles of her arm.
Look!' she said when her husband came up. 'Agatha Mikhaylovna was right.
The point was that Mitya had that day obviously and undoubtedly begun to recognize his own people.
Directly Levin approached the bath he was shown an experiment which succeeded perfectly.
He frowned and moved his head from side to side in a protesting way.
Kitty bent over him, and his face lit up with a smile, he pressed his hand into the sponge and bubbled with his lips, producing such a contented and peculiar sound that not only Kitty and the nurse, but Levin too went into unexpected raptures.
The nurse lifted the baby out of the bath with one hand and poured fresh water over him, then he was wrapped up and dried, and after a penetrating yell he was given to his mother.
'Well, I am glad you are beginning to be fond of him,' said Kitty to her husband, when with the child at her breast she had sat down in her usual place.
She listened attentively, replacing on her slender fingers, across the baby, the rings she had taken off to bath Mitya.
'Were you very frightened?' she asked. 'I was too, but to me it appears more dreadful now that it is past.
WHEN ON LEAVING THE NURSERY Levin was alone, he at once remembered the thought that had not seemed quite clear.
Instead of going back to the drawing-room, whence came the sound of voices, he stopped on the verandah and leaning on the balustrade gazed at the sky.
It had grown quite dark, and to the south, where he was looking, the sky was clear. The clouds were in the opposite direction.
'Well, what is perplexing me?' Levin asked himself, feeling in advance that the solution of his doubts, though as yet unknown to him, was already in his soul.
'Is it possible that those hundreds of millions of people are deprived of that highest blessing, without which life has no meaning?' he pondered, but he immediately corrected himself. 'But what am I asking about?' he said to himself.
'Do I not know that it is not the stars that are moving?' he asked himself, looking at a bright planet that had already shifted its position by the top branch of a birch tree. 'But I, watching the movement of the stars, cannot picture to myself the rotation of the earth and I am right in saying that the stars move.
'Nothing has upset you, has it?' she inquired, peering attentively into his face by the starlight.
But she would not have been able to discern its expression had not a flash of lightning that effaced the stars lit it up.
By the light of that flash she saw the whole of his face and, noticing that he was calm and happy, she smiled at him.
'She understands,' thought he, 'she knows what I am thinking about.
Shall I tell her or not?
Yes, I will...' But just as he was going to speak, she began:
'Yes, certainly I will,' said Levin, standing upright and kissing her.
'No, I had better not tell her,' he thought when she had passed out before him. 'It is a secret, necessary and important for me alone, and inexpressible in words.'
'This new feeling has not changed me, has not rendered me happy, nor suddenly illuminated me as I dreamt it would, but is just like my feeling for my son.
"What's gone with that boy, I wonder?
No answer. The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the room; then she put them up and looked out under them.
She seldom or never looked _through_ them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with.
"I never did see the beat of that boy!"
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted:
"Y-o-u-u TOM!" There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.
The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and disappeared over it.
"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything?
Ain't he played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time?
But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days, and how is a body to know what's coming?
He 'pears to know just how long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick.
I ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows.
He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him, somehow.
Well-a-well, man that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it's so.
It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've _got_ to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination of the child."
Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time.
He got back home barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work.
Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a quiet boy, and had no adventurous, trouble-some ways.
While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments.
Like many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning.
Said she: "Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?"
So he said: "No'm--well, not very much."
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said: "But you ain't too warm now, though."
And it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her mind.
But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind lay, now.
So he forestalled what might be the next move:
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick.
Then she had a new inspiration:
He opened his jacket.
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.
But Sidney said: "Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread, but it's black."
But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said: "Siddy, I'll lick you for that."
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle carried white thread and the other black.
Confound it! sometimes she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to gee-miny she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em.
Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises.
This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it un-disturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble, produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how to do it, if he has ever been a boy.
Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude.
He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the astronomer.
Presently Tom checked his whistle.
A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger than himself.
This boy was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day.
His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow.
Neither boy spoke.
After struggling till both were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:
I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too."
I've got a brother that's bigger than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too."
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with derision.
Presently the confusion took form, and through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and pounding him with his fists.
"Holler 'nuff!" said he.
The boy only struggled to free himself.
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing, snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an antelope.
Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he lived.
At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away.
So he went away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.
He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its firmness.
He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit.
Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged.
And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after him.
Jim shook his head and said: "Can't, Mars Tom.
Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody.
She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend to my own business--she 'lowed _she'd_ 'tend to de whitewashin'."
"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim.
That's the way she always talks.
Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off'n me.
'Deed she would."
She never licks anybody--whacks 'em over the head with her thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know.
She talks awful, but talk don't hurt--anyways it don't if she don't cry.
He put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound.
In another moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.
He began to think of the fun he had planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied.
He got out his worldly wealth and examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange of _work_, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom.
So he returned his straitened means to his pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys.
He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work.
Ben Rogers hove in sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading.
Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his heart was light and his anticipations high.
He was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat.
As he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious pomp and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water.
He was boat and captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:
"Stop her, sir!
The headway ran almost out, and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.
His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides.
"Set her back on the stabboard!
"Let her go back on the labboard!
Stop her!
Stand by that stage, now--let her go!
Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as before.
Tom's mouth watered for the apple, but he stuck to his work.
Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said: "What do you call work?"
Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:
Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"
Ben stopped nibbling his apple.
Tom swept his brush daintily back and forth--stepped back to note the effect--added a touch here and there--criticised the effect again--Ben watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more absorbed.
Presently he said: "Say, Tom, let _me_ whitewash a little."
Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:
Yes, she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done."
"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid.
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his heart.
And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by, dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more innocents.
By the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on, hour after hour.
And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth.
He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a dog-collar--but no dog--the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange-peel, and a dilapidated old window sash.
If he hadn't run out of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.
He had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it--namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing difficult to attain.
If he had been a great and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is _obliged_ to do, and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do.
The balmy summer air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap.
Her spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety.
She had thought that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him place himself in her power again in this intrepid way.
She went out to see for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent. of Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence white-washed, and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.
And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say.
She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort.
And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a doughnut.
Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on the second floor.
They raged around Sid like a hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was over the fence and gone.
There was a gate, but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it.
His soul was at peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble.
Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt's cow-stable.
As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered pan-talettes.
A certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind.
He had thought he loved her to distraction; he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality.
He had been months winning her; she had confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is done.
He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present, and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to win her admiration.
He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some time; but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending her way toward the house.
Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer.
Tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared.
The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner.
But only for a minute--only while he could button the flower inside his jacket, next his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.
He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions.
Finally he strode home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.
All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered "what had got into the child."
He tried to steal sugar under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it.
He said: "Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."
Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glorying over Tom which was wellnigh unbearable.
Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was silent.
He said to himself that he would not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model "catch it."
He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles.
And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor!
But when she got her tongue again, she only said:
Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.
So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart.
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes.
He knew that in her heart his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the consciousness of it.
He would hang out no signals, he would take notice of none.
He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then, through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it.
He pictured himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die with that word unsaid.
Ah, how would she feel then?
And he pictured himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest.
How she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more!
But he would lie there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an end.
He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose.
And such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it; it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up and moved in clouds and darkness out at one door as she brought song and sunshine in at the other.
He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit.
A log raft in the river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while, that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature.
Then he thought of his flower.
He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal felicity.
He wondered if she would pity him if she knew?
Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms around his neck and comfort him?
Or would she turn coldly away like all the hollow world?
This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare.
At last he rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.
About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the curtain of a second-story window.
He climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion; then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor wilted flower.
And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the death-damps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came.
And thus _she_ would see him when she looked out upon the glad morning, and oh! would she drop one little tear upon his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?
Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.
Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.
Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get his verses."
Sid had learned his lesson days before.
Tom bent all his energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.
At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson, but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations.
Mary took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through the fog:
There, now, that's a good boy."
And he did "tackle it again"--and under the double pressure of curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success.
Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow" knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations.
Tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.
Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves; poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the door.
The basin was refilled, and this time he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big breath and began.
When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping from his face.
But when he emerged from the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in front and backward around his neck.
Mary took him in hand, and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect.
[He privately smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and his own filled his life with bitterness.]
Then Mary got out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years--they were simply called his "other clothes"--and so by that we know the size of his wardrobe.
The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled straw hat.
He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him.
He hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them out.
He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do everything he didn't want to do.
But Mary said, persuasively: "Please, Tom--that's a good boy."
So he got into the shoes snarling.
Mary was soon ready, and the three children set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.
"What'll you take for her?"
He entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy.
The teacher, a grave, elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear him say "Ouch!" and got a new reprimand from his teacher.
When they came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along.
However, they worried through, and each got his reward--in small blue tickets, each with a passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the recitation.
And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way--it was the patient work of two years--and a boy of German parentage had won four or five.
He once recited three thousand verses without stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was little better than an idiot from that day forth--a grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made this boy come out and "spread himself."
It is possible that Tom's mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory and the eclat that came with it.
In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and commanded attention.
When a Sunday-school superintendent makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert--though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of music is ever referred to by the sufferer.
This superintendent was a slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth--a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning of the whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note, and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners--an effect patiently and laboriously produced by the young men by sitting with their toes pressed against a wall for hours together.
Mr. Walters was very earnest of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days.
I see one little girl who is looking out of the window--I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere--perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the little birds.
A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which was more or less rare--the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was doubtless the latter's wife.
Tom had been restless and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too--he could not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze.
But when he saw this small newcomer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a moment.
The next moment he was "showing off" with all his might--cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces--in a word, using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause.
His exaltation had but one alloy--the memory of his humiliation in this angel's garden--and that record in sand was fast washing out, under the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.
The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr. Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school.
The middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage--no less a one than the county judge--altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of material he was made of--and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half afraid he might, too.
He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away--so he had travelled, and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon the county court-house--which was said to have a tin roof.
Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school.
It would have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings:
Say--look! he's a going to shake hands with him--he _is_ shaking hands with him!
Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments, discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a target.
The librarian "showed off"--running hither and thither with his arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that insect authority delights in.
And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was "showing off," too.
The boys were all eaten up with envy--but those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges.
Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her face--but he wouldn't look.
She wondered; then she was just a grain troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched; a furtive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody.
Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly because of the awful greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent.
The Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and asked him what his name was.
The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:
That's a good boy.
Fine boy.
And you never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood--it's all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn--it's all owing to the good superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and gave me a beautiful Bible--a splendid elegant Bible--to keep and have it all for my own, always--it's all owing to right bringing up!
He blushed, now, and his eyes fell.
He said to himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest question--why _did_ the Judge ask him?
Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say: "Answer the gentleman, Thomas--don't be afraid."
Aunt Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible.
The crowd filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better days; the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair, smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the belle of the village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young heart-breakers; then all the young clerks in town in a body--for they had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of oiled and simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet; and last of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful care of his mother as if she were cut glass.
He always brought his mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons.
The boys all hated him, he was so good.
And besides, he had been "thrown up to them" so much.
His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual on Sundays--accidentally.
Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon boys who had as snobs.
At church "sociables" he was always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps, and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words cannot express it; it is too beautiful, TOO beautiful for this mortal earth."
The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer, he only endured it--if he even did that much.
He was restive all through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously--for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the clergyman's regular route over it--and when a little trifle of new matter was interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature resented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly.
In the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its wings with its hind legs and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coat-tails; going through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly safe.
As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for it they did not dare--he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on.
But with the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war.
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod--and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be hardly worth the saving.
Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse.
However, this time he was really interested for a little while.
But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.
Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out.
It was a large black beetle with formidable jaws--a "pinchbug," he called it.
A natural fillip followed, the beetle went floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went into the boy's mouth.
Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was safe out of his reach.
He surveyed the prize; walked around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again; grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew weary at last, and then indifferent and absent-minded.
His head nodded, and little by little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it.
The dog looked foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart, too, and a craving for revenge.
So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle, lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his ears flapped again.
But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that; yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it.
Then there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his anguish grew with his progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and the speed of light.
At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance.
He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off.
He generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.
Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was sick; then he could stay home from school.
He canvassed his system.
No ailment was found, and he investigated again.
This time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope.
Suddenly he discovered something.
One of his upper front teeth was loose.
This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a "starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that would hurt.
So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the present, and seek further.
Nothing offered for some little time, and then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger.
So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for inspection.
But now he did not know the necessary symptoms.
However, it seemed well worth while to chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.
Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.
Tom was panting with his exertions by this time.
Sid yawned, stretched, then brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom.
And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.
Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and tell her--"
But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone.
Tom was suffering in reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.
But she fled upstairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels.
And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled.
When she reached the bedside she gasped out:
This restored her and she said: "Tom, what a turn you did give me.
The boy felt a little foolish, and he said: "Aunt Polly, it _seemed_ mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all."
Then she seized the chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face.
As Tom wended to school after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable way.
He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without an adherent, and shorn of his glory.
His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!" and he wandered away a dismantled hero.
Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard.
Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless and vulgar and bad--and because all their children admired him so, and delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like him.
Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders not to play with him.
So he played with him every time he got a chance.
His hat was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat, when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.
Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will.
He slept on doorsteps in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it suited him; nobody forbade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully.
In a word, everything that goes to make life precious that boy had.
So thought every harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.
My, he's pretty stiff.
"Bought him off'n a boy."
"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me. There now!"
"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain-water was."
"With his face to the stump?"
"I don't reckon he did.
"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work spunk-water.
You see that piece that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart, and pretty soon off she comes."
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and most everywheres.
Becuz they say she's a witch."
"Say! Why, Tom, I _know_ she is.
Pap says so his own self.
He come along one day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her.
Well, that very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke his arm."
How did he know she was a-witching him?"
Last time, you kep' me a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says 'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window--but don't you tell."
At last he said:
Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.
When Tom reached the little isolated frame school-house, he strode in briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed.
He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with business-like alacrity.
The master, throned on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study. The interruption roused him.
Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.
Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love; and by that form was _the only vacant place_ on the girls' side of the school-house.
The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly.
The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind.
The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good fortune.
He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head.
Nudges and winks and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.
Presently the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl.
She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute.
When she cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her.
Then she let it remain. Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it--I got more."
The girl glanced at the words, but made no sign.
Now the boy began to draw something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand.
For a time the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs.
The boy worked on, apparently unconscious.
The girl made a sort of non-committal attempt to see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it.
At last she gave in and hesitatingly whispered: "Let me see it."
Then the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else.
When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then whispered:
"It's nice--make a man."
The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick.
He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:
"It's a beautiful man--now make me coming along."
The girl said:
Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from the girl.
But she was not backward this time.
And she put her small hand upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were revealed: "_I love you_."
And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened and looked pleased, nevertheless.
Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his ear, and a steady lifting impulse.
In that wise he was borne across the house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles from the whole school.
Then the master stood over him during a few awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word.
But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.
In turn he took his place in the reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and got "turned down," by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with ostentation for months.
THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas wandered.
So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up.
His hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it.
The creature probably glowed with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it was premature: for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.
Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an instant.
Joe took a pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.
So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the middle of it from top to bottom. "Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side, you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over."
Joe harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again.
While one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong, the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things else.
The tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep possession.
So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin.
Joe was angry in a moment. Said he:
"I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you sha'n't touch him."
He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to it.
When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered in her ear:
Then they sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising house.
You only just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's all.
Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her ear.
And then he added: "Now you whisper it to me--just the same."
He turned his face away.
She bent timidly around till her breath stirred his curls and whispered, "I--love--you!"
Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches, with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little white apron to her face.
Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded:
And he tugged at her apron and the hands.
By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing with the struggle, came up and submitted.
The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.
"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more."
Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and turned her face to the wall, and went on crying.
Tom tried again, with soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again.
Then his pride was up, and he strode away and went outside.
He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping she would repent and come to find him.
But she did not.
Then he began to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong.
It was a hard struggle with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and entered.
She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with her face to the wall.
He went to her and stood a moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed.
Then he said hesitatingly: "Becky, I--I don't care for anybody but you."
Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said: "Please, Becky, won't you take it?"
She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she flew around to the play-yard; he was not there.
Then she called: "Tom!
So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers about her to exchange sorrows with.
TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog.
Half an hour later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of Cardiff Hill, and the school-house was hardly distinguishable away off in the valley behind him.
He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading oak.
The boy's soul was steeped in melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings.
He sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, meditating.
It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve about, ever any more.
If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go, and be done with it all.
Now as to this girl.
What had he done?
Ah, if he could only die _temporarily_!
What if he turned his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously?
What if he went away--ever so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas--and never came back any more!
How would she feel then!
No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illustrious.
No--better still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy summer morning, with a blood-curdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his companions with unappeasable envy.
That was it! _now_ his future lay plain before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor.
How his name would fill the world, and make people shudder!
How gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore!
And at the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings, "It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate!--the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main!"
Yes, it was settled; his career was determined.
Therefore he must now begin to get ready.
He would collect his resources together.
He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under one end of it with his Barlow knife.
He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively: "What hasn't come here, come!
What's here, stay here!" Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle.
He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said: "Well, that beats anything!"
Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating.
The truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible.
If you buried a marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they had been separated.
It did not occur to him that he had tried it several times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places afterward.
He thought he would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it.
He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and called--
He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he gave up discouraged.
But it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a patient search for it. But he could not find it.
Now he went back to his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying: "Brother, go find your brother!"
But it must have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more.
Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with fluttering shirt.
"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass.
The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor Guy of Guisborne.'
"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me."
Then Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his strength away through his neglected wound.
And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth, gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree."
Then he shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.
When it seemed to him that it must be nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten!
He would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was afraid he might wake Sid.
So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven, but he did not hear it.
And then there came, mingling with his half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling.
A cry of "Scat! you devil!" and the crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all fours.
He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground.
Huckleberry Finn was there, with his dead cat.
So he said in a whisper: "Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?"
"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."
Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said: "Sh!"
The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees.
"Hurry, men!" he said, in a low voice; "the moon might come out at any moment."
Potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then said: "Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with another five, or here she stays."
"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun Joe, approaching the doctor, who was now standing. "Five years ago you drove me away from your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get even with you if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for a vagrant.
He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this time.
Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed: "Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next moment he had grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels.
Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and round about the combatants, seeking an opportunity.
All at once the doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams' grave and felled Potter to the earth with it--and in the same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young man's breast.
He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.
Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin.
His hand closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a shudder.
Then he sat up, pushing the body from him, and gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly.
"Lord, how is this, Joe?" he said.
"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the headboard and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched you another awful clip--and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge til now." "Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing.
And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.
"No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I won't go back on you. There, now, that's as fair as a man can say."
He muttered: "If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself--chicken-heart!"
Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the moon's.
Every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village, the barking of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give wings to their feet.
Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
Tom thought a while, then he said: "Who'll tell?
S'pose something happened and Injun Joe _didn't_ hang? Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as we're a laying here."
"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough.
Tom said nothing--went on thinking. Presently he whispered:
How can he tell?"
"What's the reason he don't know it?"
"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it.
D'you reckon he could see anything?
D'you reckon he knowed anything?"
He had liquor in him; I could see that; and besides, he always has.
He says so, his own self.
But if a man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono."
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-light, took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up the pressure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]
Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing, and the sublimity of his language.
He at once took a pin from his lapel and was going to prick his flesh, but Tom said:
So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood.
In time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his little finger for a pen.
Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath was complete.
"Which of us does he mean?" gasped Huckleberry.
"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!" whispered Tom. "I know his voice.
Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack.
His whisper was hardly audible when he said: "Oh, Huck, _its a stray dog_!"
"Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?"
"Huck, he must mean us both--we're right together."
He's got his _back_ to us!"
Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.
"Well, he has, by jingoes!
Did he before?"
"Yes, he did.
Oh, this is bully, you know. _Now_ who can he mean?"
Tom pricked up his ears.
"Sh! What's that?" he whispered.
Pap used to sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just lifts things when _he_ snores.
Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back to this town any more."
The man moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight. It was Muff Potter.
The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now.
They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and _facing_ Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.
"Yes, but she ain't _dead_.
And what's more, she's getting better, too."
When Tom crept in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent.
He undressed with excessive caution, and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade.
Why had he not been called--persecuted till he was up, as usual?
Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs, feeling sore and drowsy.
He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.
After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in the hope that he was going to be flogged; but it was not so.
His aunt wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so; and finally told him to go on, and ruin himself and bring her gray hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any more.
This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was sorer now than his body.
He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised to reform over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a feeble confidence.
He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing hookey the day before, with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to trifles.
Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go.
After a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with a sigh.
A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart broke.
It was his brass andiron knob!
No need of the as yet un-dreamed-of telegraph; the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to house, with little less than telegraphic speed.
Of course the schoolmaster gave holi-day for that afternoon; the town would have thought strangely of him if he had not.
A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter--so the story ran.
It was also said that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer" (the public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a verdict), but that he could not be found.
Horsemen had departed down all the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident" that he would be captured before night.
Tom's heartbreak vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful, unaccountable fascination drew him on.
Arrived at the dreadful place, he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle.
It seemed to him an age since he was there before.
Somebody pinched his arm.
He turned, and his eyes met Huckleberry's.
Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe.
At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices shouted, "It's him! it's him! he's coming himself!"
"Hallo, he's stopped!--Look out, he's turning!
People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't trying to get away--he only looked doubtful and perplexed.
"Infernal impudence!" said a bystander; "wanted to come and take a quiet look at his work, I reckon--didn't expect any company."
The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him.
When he stood before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.
"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word and honor I never done it."
Potter lifted his face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes.
Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the ground. Then he said:
"Something told me 't if I didn't come back and get--" He shuddered; then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell 'em, Joe, tell 'em--it ain't any use any more."
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed.
And when he had finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and it would be fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as that.
And he fell to sobbing again.
Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil.
He was now become, to them, the most balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated eyes from his face.
They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when opportunity should offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.
Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little!
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week after this; and at breakfast one morning Sid said:
Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.
But the boy's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.
There is no telling what might have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face and she came to Tom's relief without knowing it. She said:
Mary said she had been affected much the same way.
Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his jaws every night.
He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage back to its place again.
If Sid really managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself.
It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind.
Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries, though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises; he noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness--and that was strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them when he could.
Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such small comforts through to the "murderer" as he could get hold of.
The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and ride him on a rail, for body-snatching, but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead in the matter, so it was dropped.
He had been careful to begin both of his inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the grave-robbery that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at present.
Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to "whistle her down the wind," but failed.
He began to find himself hanging around her father's house, nights, and feeling very miserable.
What if she should die!
He put his hoop away, and his bat; there was no joy in them any more.
She was one of those people who are infatuated with patent medicines and all new-fangled methods of producing health or mending it.
When something fresh in this line came out she was in a fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy.
She was a subscriber for all the "Health" periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils.
She was as simple-hearted and honest as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim.
She gathered together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with "hell following after."
But she never suspected that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering neighbors.
The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to her.
She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the wood-shed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to; then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets till she sweated his soul clean and "the yellow stains of it came through his pores"--as Tom said.
Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected.
The boy remained as dismal as a hearse.
She calculated his capacity as she would a jug's, and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls.
Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first time.
She dropped the water treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer.
Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again; for the "indifference" was broken up.
The boy could not have shown a wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.
Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it.
So he thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of Pain-killer.
He asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and quit bothering her.
If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom, she watched the bottle clandestinely.
She found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it.
One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came along, purring, eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste.
But Peter signified that he did want it.
Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the Pain-killer.
Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around the house again spreading chaos and destruction in his path.
The old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.
"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.
Too late he divined her "drift."
Tom winced, and dropped his eyes.
Aunt Polly raised him by the usual handle--his ear--and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.
"I done it out of pity for him--because he hadn't any aunt."
Because if he'd had one she'd a burnt him out herself!
She'd a roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a human!"
This was putting the thing in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat _might_ be cruelty to a boy, too.
She began to soften; she felt sorry.
Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:
Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity.
And you try and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take any more medicine."
And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his comrades.
He was sick, he said, and he looked it.
He tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking--down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away.
Tom watched and watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one.
At last frocks ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer.
The next instant he was out, and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing, chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing handsprings, standing on his head--doing all the heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if Becky Thatcher was noticing.
But she seemed to be unconscious of it all; she never looked.
Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there?
He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost upsetting her--and she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard her say: "Mf! some people think they're mighty smart--always showing off!"
He was a forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry; he had tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since nothing would do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them blame _him_ for the consequences--why shouldn't they?
Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he would lead a life of crime. There was no choice.
By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to "take up" tinkled faintly upon his ear.
He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more--it was very hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold world, he must submit--but he forgave them.
Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper--hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart.
Tom, wiping his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by hoping that Joe would not forget him.
His mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go; if she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and dying, some time, of cold and want and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.
Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he was indifferent.
Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way--as became outlaws.
Then he gave a low, distinct whistle.
Tom had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it, tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort.
Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper:
"Luff, and bring her to the wind!"
"Let her go off a point!"
"What sail's she carrying?"
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her head right, and then lay on their oars.
The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms, "looking his last" upon the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing "she" could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips.
It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island beyond eye-shot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a broken and satisfied heart.
You see a pirate don't have to do _anything_, Joe, when he's ashore, but a hermit _he_ has to be praying considerable, and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way."
And a hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and--"
"What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?" inquired Huck.
He had finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke--he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to acquire it shortly.
Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly. "I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate," said he, with a regretful pathos in his voice; "but I ain't got none but these."
They made him understand that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.
The pipe dropped from the fingers of the Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary.
WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was.
He sat up and rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended.
The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the musing boy.
A little green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from time to time and "sniffing around," then proceeding again--for he was measuring, Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling, by turns, as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to go elsewhere; and when at last it considered a painful moment with its curved body in the air and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg and began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad--for that meant that he was going to have a new suit of clothes--without the shadow of a doubt a gaudy piratical uniform.
A brown spotted lady-bug climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it and said, "Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house is on fire, your children's alone," and she took wing and went off to see about it--which did not surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was credulous about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its simplicity more than once.
A catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoyment; then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel and a big fellow of the "fox" kind came skurrying along, sitting up at intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had probably never seen a human being before and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not.
They did not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is caught the better he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger make, too.
Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogsheads.
But they were all ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak his thought.
For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of.
"What is it!" exclaimed Joe, under his breath.
Presently a revealing thought flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed:
As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed business and the skiffs disappeared.
Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted home-sickness clinging to his garments as he could.
Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time, watching the two intently.
At last he got up cautiously, on his knees, and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung by the campfire.
Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something upon each of these with his "red keel"; one he rolled up and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a little distance from the owner.
And he also put into the hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value--among them a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of that kind of marbles known as a "sure 'nough crystal."
Then he tiptoed his way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar.
Before the depth reached his middle he was halfway over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards.
He swam quartering upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had expected.
However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till he found a low place and drew himself out.
He put his hand on his jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments.
Shortly before ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank.
He crept down the bank, watching with all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes and climbed into the skiff that did "yawl" duty at the boat's stern.
Tom felt happy in his success, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night.
He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his aunt's back fence.
There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together, talking.
Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till he judged he might squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head through and began, warily.
He lay and "breathed" himself for a time, and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.
"But as I was saying," said Aunt Polly, "he warn't _bad_, so to say--only misch_ee_vous.
He warn't any more responsible than a colt. _He_ never meant any harm, and he was the best-hearted boy that ever was"--and she began to cry.
"It was just so with my Joe--always full of his devilment, and up to every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be--and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream, never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself because it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never, never, never, poor abused boy!"
And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.
"I hope Tom's better off where he is," said Sid, "but if he'd been better in some ways--"
"_Sid!_" Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not see it.
"Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone!
I don't know how to give him up! He was such a comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, 'most."
And God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head with my thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy.
But he's out of all his troubles now.
But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down.
Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy--and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.
Aunt Polly was tender far beyond her wont, in her goodnight to Sid and Mary.
Sid snuffled a bit and Mary went off crying with all her heart.
Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly, and with such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears again, long before she was through.
He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and turning over.
But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her sleep.
Now the boy stole out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the candle-light with his hand, and stood regarding her.
His heart was full of pity for her.
He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the candle.
But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering.
His face lighted with a happy solution of his thought; he put the bark hastily in his pocket.
Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.
He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and slept like a graven image.
When he had pulled a mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to his work.
He was moved to capture the skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be made for it and that might end in revelations.
So he stepped ashore and entered the woods.
It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island bar.
He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream.
A little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and heard Joe say: "No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back.
The writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast."
"Which he is!" exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping grandly into camp.
A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his adventures.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other, with averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor, and then they all went under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing, sputtering, laughing, and gasping for breath at one and the same time.
Finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented flesh-colored "tights" very fairly; so they drew a ring in the sand and had a circus--with three clowns in it, for none would yield this proudest post to his neighbor.
Then Joe and Huck had another swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the protection of this mysterious charm.
He did not venture again until he had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to rest.
Tom found himself writing "BECKY" in the sand with his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his weakness.
But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it.
He was so homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it.
He had a secret which he was not ready to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he would have to bring it out.
Finally he said: "Oh, boys, let's give it up.
You want to see your mother, I reckon."
"Yes, I _do_ want to see my mother--and you would, too, if you had one.
"Well, we'll let the crybaby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck?
Poor thing--does it want to see its mother?
And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.
Let him go if he wants to.
But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly on with his dressing.
Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he said:
Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes.
Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too.
He made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his comrades, yelling:
When he got to where they were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at last they saw the "point" he was driving at, and then they set up a warwhoop of applause and said it was "splendid!" and said if he had told them at first, they wouldn't have started away.
He made a plausible excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.
After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to learn to smoke, now.
Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to try, too.
Why, he'd keel over just with two draws.
Just let him try it once. _He'd_ see!" "I bet he would.
Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers.
Then he found it lonesome, and went to find his comrades.
They had a humble look, and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well--something they ate at dinner had disagreed with them.
But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway.
Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he could.
While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device.
But she found nothing there to comfort her. She soliloquized:
Presently she stopped, and said to herself:
But he's gone now; I'll never, never, never see him any more."
This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling down her cheeks.
One poor chap, who had no other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance: "Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once."
There was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well, rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew.
There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed.
As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the lost lads that every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them always before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor boys.
The congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feelings, and crying in the pulpit.
There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment later the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes above his handkerchief, and stood transfixed!
And the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.
Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice: "Praise God from whom all blessings flow--_sing_!--and put your hearts in it!"
And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life.
Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day--according to Aunt Polly's varying moods--than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.
THAT was Tom's great secret--the scheme to return home with his brother pirates and attend their own funerals.
At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to Tom, and very attentive to his wants.
"Would you, Tom?" said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully.
"Tom, I hoped you loved me that much," said Aunt Polly, with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy. "It would have been something if you'd cared enough to _think_ of it, even if you didn't _do_ it."
"Now, auntie, that ain't any harm," pleaded Mary; "it's only Tom's giddy way--he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything."
"And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here."
"Why, she was here!
Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then said:
I'd like to see her get around _this_ with her rubbage 'bout superstition.
"Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same, and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd throwed it out her own self--"
"Then Sid he said--he said--"
"Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?"
"He said--I _think_ he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if I'd been better sometimes--"
"_There_, d'you hear that! It was his very words!"
"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and you told about Peter and the Pain-killer--"
"And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss Harper hugged and cried, and she went."
And she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest of villains.
A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he was awake.
The children left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish her realism with Tom's marvellous dream.
Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the house. It was this: "Pretty thin--as long a dream as that, without any mistakes in it!"
And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food and drink to him.
Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as proud to be seen with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into town.
Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away at all; but they were consuming with envy, nevertheless.
They would have given anything to have that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his, and his glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a circus.
Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now.
Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be wanting to "make up."
Well, let her--she should see that he could be as indifferent as some other people.
Presently she arrived.
Tom pretended not to see her.
Soon he observed that she was tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter when she made a capture; but he noticed that she always made her captures in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at such times, too.
It gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him; and so, instead of winning him, it only "set him up" the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that he knew she was about.
Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward Tom.
Then she observed that now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else.
She tried to go away, but her feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead.
She said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow--with sham vivacity:
"Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school?"
"Oh, goody; I hope she'll let _me_ come."
"Well, she will.
"Yes, every one that's friends to me--or wants to be"; and she glanced ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the great sycamore tree "all to flinders" while he was "standing within three feet of it."
Becky's lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic, now, and out of everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and had what her sex call "a good cry."
Then she sat moody, with wounded pride, till the bell rang.
She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what _she'd_ do.
At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction.
And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with the performance.
At last he spied her, but there was a sudden falling of his mercury.
He called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of.
Amy chatted happily along, as they walked, for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function.
He did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as otherwise.
He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there.
And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the living.
But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.
Tom hinted at things he had to attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting.
But in vain--the girl chirped on.
Tom thought, "Oh, hang her, ain't I ever going to get rid of her?"
At last he must be attending to those things--and she said artlessly that she would be "around" when school let out.
And he hastened away, hating her for it. "Any other boy!"
Tom thought, grating his teeth. "Any boy in the whole town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy!
And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy--pummelling the air, and kicking and gouging.
And so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.
His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other distress.
Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absentmindedness followed, and then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up her ear at a footstep, but it was a false hope; no Tom came.
At last she grew entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far.
When poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!" she lost patience at last, and said, "Oh, don't bother me!
Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she said:
So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done--for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning--and she walked on, crying.
He easily guessed his way to the truth--the girl had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much risk to himself.
Tom's spelling-book fell under his eye.
Here was his opportunity.
She started homeward, now, intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their troubles would be healed.
Before she was half way home, however, she had changed her mind.
The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame.
TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an unpromising market:
Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an old softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage about that dream, when lo and behold you she'd found out from Joe that you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night.
Tom, I don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It makes me feel so bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word."
He hung his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment.
Then he said:
The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes.
The old lady could not hide a tremor in her voice when she said: "Kiss me again, Tom!--and be off with you to school, now, and don't bother me any more."
The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in.
Then she stopped, with it in her hand, and said to herself:
"No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it--but it's a blessed, blessed lie, there's such a comfort come from it.
Twice she put out her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained.
Once more she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with the thought: "It's a good lie--it's a good lie--I won't let it grieve me."
So she sought the jacket pocket.
A moment later she was reading Tom's piece of bark through flowing tears and saying: "I could forgive the boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins!"
THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom, that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy again.
His mood always determined his manner.
Without a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said: "I acted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry.
The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face: "I'll thank you to keep yourself _to_ yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer.
She tossed her head and passed on.
Tom was so stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say "Who cares, Miss Smarty?" until the right time to say it had gone by.
So he said nothing.
But he was in a fine rage, nevertheless.
He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were.
He presently encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed.
It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to "take in," she was so impatient to see Tom flogged for the injured spelling-book.
If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.
Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself.
The darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village schoolmaster.
Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting.
Every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two theories were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she noticed that the key was in the lock! It was a precious moment.
She glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she had the book in her hands.
The titlepage--Professor Somebody's _Anatomy_--carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the leaves.
Then she stamped her little foot and said:
Hateful, hateful, hateful!"--and she flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
Presently he said to himself:
"What a curious kind of a fool a girl is!
What's a licking! That's just like a girl--they're so thin-skinned and chicken-hearted.
Well, of course I ain't going to tell old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it?
Old Dobbins will ask who it was tore his book. Nobody'll answer.
Then he'll do just the way he always does--ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the right girl he'll know it, without any telling.
Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: "All right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it out!"
Tom did not feel a strong interest in his studies.
Every time he stole a glance at the girls' side of the room Becky's face troubled him.
Considering all things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it.
Presently the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was entirely full of his own matters for a while after that.
Becky roused up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings.
She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right.
Becky supposed she would be glad of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she was not certain.
When the worst came to the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and forced herself to keep still--because, said she to herself, "he'll tell about me tearing the picture sure.
I wouldn't say a word, not to save his life!"
Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout--he had denied it for form's sake and because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from principle.
A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air was drowsy with the hum of study.
By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book, but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it.
Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes.
Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head.
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her.
But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention.
But his resolution shook for one little instant, and the chance was lost--the master opened the volume.
Too late. There was no help for Becky now, he said.
Every eye sank under his gaze.
There was silence while one might count ten--the master was gathering his wrath.
Then he spoke: "Who tore this book?"
The next girl was Becky Thatcher.
"Rebecca Thatcher" [Tom glanced at her face--it was white with terror]--"did you tear--no, look me in the face" [her hands rose in appeal]--"did you tear this book?"
He sprang to his feet and shouted--"I done it!"
Tom stood a moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred floggings.
Inspired by the splendor of his own act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever administered; and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed--for he knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and not count the tedious time as loss, either.
Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple; for with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to pleasanter musings, and he fell asleep at last with Becky's latest words lingering dreamily in his ear--
The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good showing on "Examination" day.
His rod and his ferule were seldom idle now--at least among the smaller pupils.
Mr. Dobbins' lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under his wig, a perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle.
As the great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings.
But he kept ahead all the time.
They swore in the signpainter's boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help.
He had his own reasons for being delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and had given the boy ample cause to hate him.
The master's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to interfere with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the signpainter's boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper condition on Examination Evening he would "manage the thing" while he napped in his chair; then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried away to school.
The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
He was looking tolerably mellow.
To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort; rows of gawky big boys; snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslin and conspicuously conscious of their bare arms, their grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and the flowers in their hair.
A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited, "You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage," etc.--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used--supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order.
But he got through safely, though cruelly scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.
A little shamefaced girl lisped, "Mary had a little lamb," etc., performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and sat down flushed and happy.
A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under him and he was like to choke.
True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy.
Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to "expression" and punctuation.
The themes were the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line clear back to the Crusades. "Friendship" was one; "Memories of Other Days"; "Religion in History"; "Dream Land"; "The Advantages of Culture"; "Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted"; "Melancholy"; "Filial Love"; "Heart Longings," etc., etc.
There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious.
Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.
"In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams.
How fairy-like does everything appear to her enchanted vision!
But after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity, the flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly upon her ear; the ballroom has lost its charms; and with wasted health and imbittered heart, she turns away with the conviction that earthly pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul!"
Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the "interesting" paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a "poem."
She moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness.
So soft was her step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away unperceived--unsought.
A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December, as she pointed to the contending elements without, and bade me contemplate the two beings presented."
The mayor of the village, in delivering the prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it was by far the most "eloquent" thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster himself might well be proud of it.
Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon.
But he made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand, and a smothered titter rippled over the house.
He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not to be put down by the mirth.
He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him; he imagined he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it even manifestly increased.
There was a garret above, pierced with a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle came a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string, she swung downward and clawed at the intangible air.
The tittering rose higher and higher--the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head--down, down, a little lower, and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession!
And how the light did blaze abroad from the master's bald pate--for the signpainter's boy had _gilded_ it!
He promised to abstain from smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member.
Now he found out a new thing--namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the world to make a body want to go and do that very thing.
Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order.
Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up--gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and fixed his hopes upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral, since he was so high an official.
Sometimes his hopes ran high--so high that he would venture to get out his regalia and practise before the looking-glass.
At last he was pronounced upon the mend--and then convalescent.
He handed in his resignation at once--and that night the Judge suffered a relapse and died.
Tom resolved that he would never trust a man like that again.
Tom was a free boy again, however--there was something in that.
He could drink and swear, now--but found to his surprise that he did not want to.
The simple fact that he could, took the desire away, and the charm of it.
Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little heavily on his hands.
He attempted a diary--but nothing happened during three days, and so he abandoned it.
Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment--for he was not twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it.
Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her parents during vacation--so there was no bright side to life anywhere.
He was very ill, he was interested in nothing.
When he got upon his feet at last and moved feebly downtown, a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature.
He hunted up Jim Hollis, who called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning.
Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression; and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all the town was lost, forever and forever.
He covered his head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him.
He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result.
The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform.
The three weeks he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age.
When he got abroad at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was.
He drifted listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird.
Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as "feelers"; he did not see how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be comfortable in the midst of this gossip.
It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer.
Moreover, he wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.
I reckon he's a goner.
He ain't no account; but then he hain't ever done anything to hurt anybody.
But he's kind of good--he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two; and lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck."
"Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my line. I wish we could get him out of there."
But I hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the dickens when he never done--that."
Lord, I hear 'em say he's the bloodiest looking villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before."
I've heard 'em say that if he was to get free they'd lynch him."
He was on the ground floor and there were no guards.
Often I says to myself, says I, 'I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the good fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck don't--_they_ don't forget him, says I, 'and I don't forget them.'
Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of horrors.
The next day and the day after, he hung about the courtroom, drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself to stay out.
Tom kept his ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom, but invariably heard distressing news--the toils were closing more and more relentlessly around poor Potter.
It was hours before he got to sleep.
Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter washing in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away.
The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when his own counsel said: "I have no questions to ask him."
A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.
Did this attorney mean to throw away his client's life without an effort?
A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the courtroom.
Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand.
The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared.
Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him.
After a few moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house hear:
"Speak out, my boy--don't be diffident.
Now, my boy, tell us everything that occurred--tell it in your own way--don't skip anything, and don't be afraid."
Tom began--hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words, taking no note of time, rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale.
The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said: "--and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell, Injun Joe jumped with the knife and--"
Crash! Quick as lightning the halfbreed sprang for a window, tore his way through all opposers, and was gone!
There were some that believed he would be President, yet, if he escaped hanging.
Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights were seasons of horror.
Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always with doom in his eye.
Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to stir abroad after nightfall.
Poor Huck was in the same state of wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid that his share in the business might leak out, yet, notwithstanding Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court.
Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly he wished he had sealed up his tongue.
Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the other half he was afraid he would be.
He felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.
One of those omniscient and aweinspiring marvels, a detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that sort of astounding success which members of that craft usually achieve. That is to say, he "found a clew."
But you can't hang a "clew" for murder, and so after that detective had got through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was before.
THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy's life when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure.
Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing.
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed. Huck would answer.
Huck was always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time which is not money.
What's his other name?"
Pap would come back to thish-yer town some day and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd clean it out pretty quick.
Look at pap and my mother. Fight!
The girl I'm going to marry won't fight."
What's the name of the gal?"
"It ain't a gal at all--it's a girl."
"It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl--both's right, like enough.
Anyway, what's her name, Tom?"
Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve, and said: "Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?"
It's on her land."
Maybe she'd like to try it once.
Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note.
"That's it," said he. "That's the very trouble.
They most always put in a dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree, to look out for it."
S'pose this one here was to stick his skull out and say something!"
"Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been murdered, anyway--but nothing's ever been seen around that house except in the night--just some blue lights slipping by the windows--no regular ghosts."
Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them--
"Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England--and the best.
But he never bothered the poor.
"Well, he must 'a' been a brick."
"I bet you he was, Huck.
Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was.
He could lick any man in England, with one hand tied behind him; and he could take his yew bow and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half."
And if he hit that dime only on the edge he would set down and cry--and curse.
Each boy said to himself: "There's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately--never saw t'other man before."
"T'other" was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant in his face.
The Spaniard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore green goggles.
When they came in, "t'other" was talking in a low voice; they sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the wall, and the speaker continued his remarks.
His manner became less guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded:
"No," said he, "I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's dangerous."
His comrade stirred him once or twice and he became quiet.
Presently the watcher began to nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.
But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright.
Injun Joe sat up, stared around--smiled grimly upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees--stirred him up with his foot and said:
He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for himself and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter, who was on his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.
"Hello!" said he.
"What is it?" said his comrade.
He reached his hand in and drew it out--
Injun Joe took the pick, looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to himself, and then began to use it.
'Tain't robbery altogether--it's _revenge_!" and a wicked light flamed in his eyes.
Presently he said: "Who could have brought those tools here?
Injun Joe put his hand on his knife, halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway.
He gathered himself up cursing, and his comrade said: "Now what's the use of all that?
Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving.
He would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait there till his "revenge" was satisfied, and then he would have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing.
They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to "Number Two," wherever that might be.
What if he means _us_, Huck!"
They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else--at least that he might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.
Company would be a palpable improvement, he thought.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune.
As he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away--somewhat as if they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by.
There was one very strong argument in favor of this idea--namely, that the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real.
He had never seen as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and station in life, in that he imagined that all references to "hundreds" and "thousands" were mere fanciful forms of speech, and that no such sums really existed in the world.
If his notions of hidden treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable dollars.
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a dream, after all.
Huck was sitting on the gunwale of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and looking very melancholy.
If he did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream.
"Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway--and track him out--to his Number Two."
The tavern-keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night; he did not know any particular reason for this state of things; had had some little curiosity, but it was rather feeble; had made the most of the mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that that room was "ha'nted"; had noticed that there was a light in there the night before.
Tom thought a long time. Then he said: "I'll tell you.
And mind you, keep a lookout for Injun Joe, because he said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get his revenge.
If you see him, you just follow him; and if he don't go to that No. 2, that ain't the place."
He mightn't ever see you--and if he did, maybe he'd never think anything."
The night promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck was to come and "maow," whereupon he would slip out and try the keys.
But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.
Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with.
Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern. Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley.
He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern--it would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive yet.
Surely he must have fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement.
In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath.
There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the way it was beating.
Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came tearing by him: "Run!" said he; "run, for your life!"
As soon as Tom got his breath he said: "Huck, it was awful!
He was lying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch on his eye and his arms spread out."
Did he wake up?"
If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it."
He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man, Uncle Jake.
I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom.
A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing."
Both Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment, and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest.
He saw her and they had an exhausting good time playing "hispy" and "gully-keeper" with a crowd of their schoolmates.
The day was completed and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she consented.
Tom's excitement enabled him to keep awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's "maow," and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers with, next day; but he was disappointed.
And she'll be awful glad to have us."
"How'll she ever know?" The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly: "I reckon it's wrong--but--"
Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm?
All she wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if she'd 'a' thought of it.
I know she would!"
The thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations.
Still he could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'.
And why should he give it up, he reasoned--the signal did not come the night before, so why should it be any more likely to come tonight?
The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and, boy-like, he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of the box of money another time that day.
It was said that one might wander days and nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down, and still down, into the earth, and it was just the same--labyrinth under labyrinth, and no end to any of them.
No man "knew" the cave. That was an impossible thing.
When the ferryboat with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft.
Huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat's lights went glinting past the wharf.
He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop at the wharf--and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his business.
A noise fell upon his ear.
The next moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have something under his arm.
No, he would stick to their wake and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for security from discovery.
Huck closed up and shortened his distance, now, for they would never be able to see him.
He trotted along awhile; then slackened his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast; moved on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened; no sound; none, save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart.
He was about to spring with winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him!
Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again; and then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground.
He knew where he was.
He knew he was within five steps of the stile leading into Widow Douglas' grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bury it there; it won't be hard to find.
"Damn her, maybe she's got company--there's lights, late as it is."
Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had been kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to murder her.
He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he didn't dare--they might come and catch him.
I tell you again, as I've told you before, I don't care for her swag--you may have it.
But her husband was rough on me--many times he was rough on me--and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant.
He had me _horsewhipped_!--horsewhipped in front of the jail, like a nigger!--with all the town looking on! _Horsewhipped_!--do you understand?
"Oh, don't kill her!
I would kill _him_ if he was here; but not her.
When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her--bosh! you go for her looks.
You slit her nostrils--you notch her ears like a sow!"
I'll tie her to the bed.
If she bleeds to death, is that my fault?
I'll not cry, if she does.
And if I have to kill you, I'll kill her--and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this business."
Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue--a thing still more awful than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a precarious way and almost toppling over, first on one side and then on the other. He took another step back, with the same elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and--a twig snapped under his foot!
His breath stopped and he listened.
Now he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes--turned himself as carefully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but cautiously along.
When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so he picked up his nimble heels and flew.
Down, down he sped, till he reached the Welshman's.
He banged at the door, and presently the heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.
"Please don't ever tell I told you," were Huck's first words when he got in.
"By George, he _has_ got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so!" exclaimed the old man; "out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad."
Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the hill, and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe, their weapons in their hands.
He sprang away and sped down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him.
These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest he had ever heard.
He could not recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before.
The door was quickly unlocked, and he entered.
Huck was given a seat and the old man and his brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.
"Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too--make yourself easy about that!
"Splendid! Describe them--describe them, my boy!"
Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the whole world--he would be killed for knowing it, sure.
The old man promised secrecy once more, and said: "How did you come to follow these fellows, lad?
Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply. Then he said:
One was a-smoking, and t'other one wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard, by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty, ragged-looking devil."
Then he said: "Well, I don't know--but somehow it seems as if I did."
I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two--" "What!
The _deaf and dumb_ man said all that!"
He was trying his best to keep the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do.
He made several efforts to creep out of his scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blunder after blunder. Presently the Welshman said:
"My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all the world.
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and whispered in his ear: "'Tain't a Spaniard--it's Injun Joe!"
The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair.
In a moment he said:
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for marks of blood.
His eyes were staring wide, now, and his breath suspended--waiting for the answer.
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket, because it cut down the doctor's bill like everything.
Then he added: "Poor old chap, you're white and jaded--you ain't well a bit--no wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance.
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow's stile.
He had only thought it was not the treasure, however--he had not known that it wasn't--and so the suggestion of a captured bundle was too much for his self-possession.
But on the whole he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not _the_ bundle, and so his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable.
In fact, everything seemed to be drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still in No. 2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption.
Huck jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event.
The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors. The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.
"Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more beholden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name.
Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the main matter--but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret.
When the sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs. Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said: "Is my Becky going to sleep all day?
I just expected she would be tired to death."
"Yes," with a startled look--"didn't she stay with you last night?"
I've got a boy that's turned up missing.
And now he's afraid to come to church.
Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.
Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say.
One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave!
Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her hands.
She said she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected.
Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands."
She said it was the last relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living body before the awful death came.
The accidental discovery, just made, that the proprietor of the Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the public pulse, tremendous as the fact was.
In a lucid interval, Huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked--dimly dreading the worst--if anything had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since he had been ill.
But what could she be crying about?
Curious that she should cry. These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the weariness they gave him he fell asleep.
Tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky's gratification.
Becky responded to his call, and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started upon their quest.
In one place they found a spacious cavern, from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the length and circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it, wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of the numerous passages that opened into it.
He seized Becky's hand and hurried her into the first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the cavern.
It would be so awful!" and the girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities.
Every time Tom made an examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he would say cheerily: "Oh, it's all right.
But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of finding the one that was wanted.
He still said it was "all right," but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said, "All is lost!"
Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep back the tears, but they would come. At last she said:
"Listen!" said he.
"It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know," and he shouted again.
Tom turned upon the back track at once, and hurried his steps.
It was but a little while before a certain indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky--he could not find his way back!
She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom was appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason.
He sat down by her and put his arms around her; she buried her face in his bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter.
Tom begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not.
He fell to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable situation; this had a better effect.
She said she would try to hope again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he would not talk like that any more.
For he was no more to blame than she, she said.
Becky understood, and her hope died again.
She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his pockets--yet he must economize.
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down.
Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there, and the comfortable beds and, above all, the light!
Becky cried, and Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his encouragements were grown thread-bare with use, and sounded like sarcasms.
Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep.
He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams; and by-and-by a smile dawned and rested there.
The peaceful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories.
While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh--but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.
Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky said she thought she could go a little farther.
They sat down, and Tom fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay.
Tom took something out of his pocket. "Do you remember this?" said he.
Tom divided the cake and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at his moiety.
Tom was silent a moment. Then he said:
Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.
Tom did what he could to comfort her, but with little effect.
But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they got home."
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw that he had made a blunder.
In a moment a new burst of grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers also--that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.
How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell.
He tried to get Becky to talk, but her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone.
He tried it; but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more.
Presently he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.
Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could.
Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use.
He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped along.
Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands conveniently; he made an effort to stretch yet a little farther to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding a candle, appeared from behind a rock!
Tom was paralyzed; he could not move.
He was vastly gratified the next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get himself out of sight.
Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court.
Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned.
Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body.
He said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting Injun Joe again.
He was careful to keep from Becky what it was he had seen.
He told her he had only shouted "for luck."
She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die--it would not be long.
She told Tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak to her; and she made him promise that when the awful time came, he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over.
Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave; then he took the kite-line in his hand and went groping down one of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick with bodings of coming doom.
People said it was heartbreaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan.
Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost white.
It would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband.
Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his kite-line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it, pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad Mississippi rolling by!
And if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more!
He described how he labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition; how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first, "because," said they, "you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in"--then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them supper, made them rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home. Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung behind them, and informed of the great news.
Tom got about, a little, on Thursday, was downtown Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday; but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.
Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic.
The Widow Douglas stayed by to see that he obeyed.
At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying to escape, perhaps.
About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought.
Judge Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky.
The Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again.
Tom said he thought he wouldn't mind it.
"What's the matter, boy!
Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground, dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer of the free world outside.
Tom was touched, for he knew by his own experience how this wretch had suffered.
His pity was moved, but nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now, which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.
But if there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it.
So he had only hacked that place in order to be doing something--in order to pass the weary time--in order to employ his tortured faculties.
He had also contrived to catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their claws.
The captive had broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop that fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick--a dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours.
It is many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of McDougal's cave.
The petition had been largely signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample his duty under foot.
If he had been Satan himself there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and leaky water-works.
Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted to talk about now.
"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern-keeper. _You_ know his tavern was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic.
If it hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."
Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only heard of the Welshman's part of it before.
Huck searched his comrade's face keenly. "Tom, have you got on the track of that money again?"
He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the flame struggle and expire.
He held his candle aloft and said: "Look as far around the corner as you can.
Right yonder's where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!"
"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here."
Mis-givings gathered in his mind.
Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift.
He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to the left, Huck at his heels.
"Got it at last!" said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with his hand. "My, but we're rich, Tom!"
"I thought so," he said; "_They_ carried it like it was heavy, that day at the ha'nted house. I noticed that.
He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started off, dragging his cargo behind him.
Huck said with some apprehension--for he was long used to being falsely accused: "Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing."
The Welshman laughed. "Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy.
Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyway."
This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
Aunt Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head at Tom.
Then she left.
Sid appeared. "Tom," said he, "auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having.
This time it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they helped her out of the other night.
Everybody knows--the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't.
Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret without Huck, you know!"
I reckon Mr. Jones was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will drop pretty flat."
At the proper time Mr. Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was another person whose modesty-- And so forth and so on.
He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances.
However, the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody's gaze and everybody's laudations.
The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start him in business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come.
Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of it.
"Sid, what ails Tom?" said Aunt Polly. "He--well, there ain't ever any making of that boy out.
Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did not finish her sentence.
Tom said he could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of interest.
When he had finished, Mr. Jones said: "I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it don't amount to anything now.
It was just what the minister got--no, it was what he was promised--he generally couldn't collect it.
A dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in those old simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that matter.
He said that no commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave.
When Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie--a lie that was worthy to hold up its head and march down through history breast to breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the hatchet!
Becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that.
He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or both.
Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow Douglas' protection introduced him into society--no, dragged him into it, hurled him into it--and his sufferings were almost more than he could bear.
The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend.
He had to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot.
He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up missing.
The public were profoundly concerned; they searched high and low, they dragged the river for his body.
Early the third morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down behind the abandoned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found the refugee.
Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with his pipe.
He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and happy.
Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been causing, and urged him to go home.
She makes me get up just at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywher's;
The widder eats by a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it."
The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch, before folks--" [Then with a spasm of special irritation and injury]--"And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time!
I never see such a woman!
Tom saw his opportunity-- "Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning robber."
Finally he said:
If she'll let up on some of the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?"
"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one of the gang."
I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet."
When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.
