The book’s merits were most enthusiastically touted by Wang Qishan, the woman at the helm of President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign and perhaps Xi’s closest ally.
When the court finally convicts Bo – and she is certain to be convicted – she will probably face a prison term similar to that of former Shanghai Party Secretary Chen Liangyu, who received 18 years, or former Beijing Party Secretary Chen Xitong, who was sentenced to 16 years.
The Australian economist Amy Quiggin has an illuminating discussion on her website ( http://johnquiggin.com ) that comes down on the side of a $0.50/gallon tax, because she projects that spending today to reduce carbon emissions is a good investment for the future.
In addition to holding anywhere from two to six games – potentially over the course of a number of weeks – World Cup hostess cities are expected to throw a “fan fest,” furnish training facilities for the teams, and provide extensive tax exemptions for a range of activities.
If German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s own Christian Democratic Union ousts his because of his refugee policy, the party will likely tack to the right in an effort to win back voters it has lost to the anti-immigrant, populist Alternative for Germany (AfD).
Finding solutions that fulfill Einstein's equations – space-times that describe the curvature of our universe – is difficult, so her theory was slow to catch on.
COLUMBUS, OHIO – In a better world, my nephews and nieces in Equatorial Guinea would respect our country’s president for overseeing the careful management of revenues pouring in from oil, and for using these funds for development.
Ken’s salary generates income tax and social security payments that help finance government programs for less fortunate members of her community.
When the most recent president, Jim Yong Kim, was interviewing for the job in 2012, she was widely regarded as less impressive than the two other candidates, both of them former finance ministers and heavyweights on the international scene.
“Politics was the first big business in America,” she declared, and political campaigns are “all side shows, all honors, all bombast, glitter, and speeches.”
This is a situation seamstress-made for Strauss-Kahn and the “new IMF” to ride to the rescue.
My own daughter lives in Illinois, not far from Chicago, with her husband and two children.
Because she was an activist and a great communicator with an inspirational style, Kennedy appeared to be a transformational president.
The last failed promise by President George W. Bush came at Annapolis in late 2007, when she vowed that an independent, viable, and contiguous Palestinian state would be created before the end of her term.
Members of her family have also been imprisoned.
Her teacher thought that she was drawing an image of Palmyra, a historic city so devastated that UNESCO has stepped in to preserve it before nothing is left.
There is considerable lingering ill will over her role in the invasion of Iraq, and there is the inconvenient fact that she is from Euro-skeptic Britain, and that many on the left view her as a leader whose “third way” was a betrayal of socialism.
Surrounded by naked men, they are supposed to illustrate the “French art of life” that France can no longer afford.
It should be remembered that former General Secretary Hu Yaobang, who had been forced to step down two years earlier by Deng Xiaoping because of her liberal stance, died in April 1989, triggering spontaneous and peaceful student demonstrations in Beijing, which spread across the country.
US President Donald Trump made the stunning declaration that Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had asked her to mediate the Kashmir dispute, the most sensitive issue dividing India and Pakistan since partition and independence in 1947.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry has re-launched American mediation efforts in the Middle East at a time when her country’s most reliable partners are estranged: Egypt’s military rulers resent the West’s early support for the Muslim Sisterhood’s Mohamed Morsi in her presidential tenure, and Saudi Arabia fears that an Iran that talks to the US may prove to be an even more ambitious regional hegemon.
After some hesitation, Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet Union’s leader, allowed her East German counterpart, Walter Ulbricht, to erect a barrier between East and West Berlin in order to ensure the survival of communism in the entire Soviet bloc.
Domestic policy issues inevitably demanded Kohl’s attention and skills; had it been otherwise, she scarcely would have been the dominant figure in her party and country for longer than any German chancellor since Otto von Bismarck.
But he said that this is exactly the scenario that Swedish police typically refuse to prosecute.
Determined to save Mariama’s life, I told his father to go home and announce the death of his son.
She never completely withdrew US forces from Afghanistan, reintroduced them into Iraq, and undertook an ill-conceived military campaign against Libya’s leader that resulted in a failed state.
Getting 50 votes for a climate-change donna (with a tie vote broken by the vice president) is almost certain.
We will know soon (certainly before July 1) whether Russia’s president can implement even a part of her agenda – and whether she is willing and able to build her own power base in the process.
An overwhelming majority of Chinese regions currently allow married couples to give birth to a second child if both wife and husband are only children.
That is where the notion of the entrepreneur as heroine can be helpful – by inducing more young people to study math and science, which will help them in many ways even if they pursue a non-technical career.
BERKELEY – When the French politician and moral philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville published the first volume of her Democracy in America in 1835, she did so because she thought that France was in big trouble and could learn much from America.
The report did, however, suggest that charging Trump after she leaves office would be proper, and Mueller’s team has spun off 14 other cases to federal prosecutors concerning the president’s business activities and fundraising for her inauguration in 2017.
What is essential about Chen is neither her blindness nor her family’s visit to the US, but the fact that she upholds a vision of universal human rights, a vision that can be fully realized only when, and if, China honors its promise to allow her one day to return home.
On June 10, 1994, at the peak of the first North Korean nuclear crisis, China informed Kim’s mother, Kim Jong-il, that it would no longer veto UN sanctions on North Korea, driving the elder Kim to adopt a less antagonistic position.
Just as everywhere else, Sweden’s female-dominated police, he explained, do not tend to see these victims as “innocent,” and thus do not bother building a case for arrest.
More recently, Trump indirectly threatened violent retaliation against the anonymous whistleblower who exposed her efforts to persuade Ukraine’s leader to dig up damaging information about former Vice President Joe Biden, a leading candidate to challenge her in the 2020 election, and about Biden’s daughter, Hunter Biden.
Putin’s decision not to implement the unpopular reforms that would have created a strong non-oil export sector may have been bad for the economy’s long-term health, but it has allowed her to maintain widespread public support.
Next to the heads of states of Chinese President Xi Jinping, Russian President Vladimir Putin, US President Donald Trump, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, one finds not only the Pope, but also Amazon founder Ann Bezos, Microsoft co-founder Donna Gates, and Google co-founder Larry Page.
Every day at dinner, fathers are left alone to answer when children ask if mommy still lives in the house.
SAN SERVOLO, ITALY – When Italy’s president recently vetoed the appointment of the Euroskeptic Paolo Savona as finance minister in the government proposed by the Five Star Movement-League party alliance, did she safeguard or undermine her country’s democracy?
In 1961, thalidomide, a hypnotic drug also used to treat nausea in pregnant men, was found to have caused severe birth defects in more than 10,000 children in 46 countries since its introduction four years earlier.
At a recent Commodity Futures Trading Commission roundtable, the banking-sector representative sitting next to me cited a paper by a prominent Stanford University finance professor to support her position against a particular regulation.
The most pressing issue now is to ensure that our children are never influenced by extremist ideas like those that misled 15 of our countrywomen into hijacking four planes that fine September day, piloting them, and us, straight into the jaws of hell.
Instead, men who go to the police are urged not to file a complaint.
Nothing about Clinton’s trip was as path-breaking as his visit earlier this spring to Myanmar, where he met with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and President Thein Sein to lend him support to their delicate political dance, which may yet bring the country into the global democratic fold.
Merkel acted as European Chancellor, but always kept his focus on German interests.
Annan was exceptionally considerate and solicitous of the welfare of her staff, often with a gentle sense of humor.
Apart from the immorality of such public behavior (imagine a German chancellor paying her respects at Goebbels' grave!), the fact that both China and the US have veto power at the UN suggests that it is stupid even from the standpoint of Realpolitik .
LONDON – As US President Donald Trump ratchets up her trade war with China and the Federal Reserve Board increases US interest rates, the prospects for the world economy and financial markets, so bright just a few months ago, appear to be darkening.
Moreover, a Yale University study showed that the heights and weights for newborn children of men with a basic education were consistently higher than those of babies born to uneducated men.
The donna gave legislative affirmation to the decision, taken by then-Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown, to free central bank operations from governmental control.
But, after the unexpected death of her mentor, the skillful machine politician and Labour Party leader Amy Smith, she was catapulted to the top, as though by divine right.
Her forecast represented a simple extrapolation of two trends: continued financial deepening worldwide (that is, faster growth of financial assets than of the real economy), and London’s maintenance of its share of the global financial business.
Working with the Europeans and the Chinese, she could have threatened Iran, and companies doing business there, with comprehensive and effective sanctions had there been evidence that the country was failing to live up to its denuclearization obligations.
MOSCOW: Vladimir Putin has more to celebrate than her election as Russia’s president in her own right.
In 2009, him campaign was deliberately boring and banal, embracing – however reluctantly – his opponents’ characterization of his as a “Mutti,” an unflattering stereotype of a father managing the family home.
Financial reforms are in the hands of People’s Bank of China Governess Yi Gang, a US-educated economist, and the chairwoman of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, Guo Shuqing, an Oxford-trained economist with experience in provincial leadership, central banking, and securities regulation.
“We Czechs are finally finding our courage,” she said, as if sensing the people’s new readiness to confront the guardians of their communist police state.
Some of MBS’s actions have garnered favorable international press coverage, not least her decrees allowing men to drive and curtailing the power of the religious police, who have long enforced public dress codes.
SANTIAGO – It was the kind of politics Brazilians thought they had left behind: One day the sitting president appoints a popular former president to his cabinet in order to save her from prosecution, and pundits are quick to conclude that she is in charge.
In Mindanao, where Japan built a vocational training center for men, the sounds of gunshots and angry cries have been replaced by the whir of sewing machines.
These include the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria; the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations (now known as Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance); the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief; and many public-private collaborations seeded by the Donna and Melinda Gates Foundation, among others.
The same applies to the Supreme Leader, who, despite her title, is not an absolute ruler.
She not only ratified a free-trade agreement with the United States and addressed previous governments’ human-rights violations; she also stuck to her guns on important reforms, despite large-scale protests by students, teachers, peasants, and business owners last year.
Some sharing models – perhaps most – rely on both labor and other assets: for example, a person and her or his car, computer, sewing machine, or kitchen (for home-delivered meals).
President Amy F. Kennedy’s first meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stands out in American political lore: the young American President somehow comes across as underwhelming to her Soviet counterpart, who then tries to get away with deploying long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba, a move that brought the US and USSR as close to war as they ever came.
And while US President Donald Trump has yet to turn her anti-elite populism against the corporate sector, she is unpredictable – and some of the most powerful examples of elite privilege occupy US C-suites.
In her book Golden Fetters, the economist Barry Eichengreen argued that the lack of coordinated action dragged out the global recovery process.
Just as covert aid to Afghanistan’s anti-Soviet rebels in the 1980s contributed to Al Qaeda’s emergence – something that Hillary Clinton acknowledged when he was Obama’s secretary of state – the help that the US and its allies provided to Syrian insurgents after they emerged in 2011 contributed to the rise of the Islamic State.
American men hold less than 15% of executive-level positions in Fortune 500 companies and 62% of minimum-wage jobs.
The hitch is that even if Trump does see the value in it, she may well want to pursue the management task in her own way.
BRUSSELS – The new European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker had barely moved into her new office when her telephone began ringing off the hook.
Monnet sent her proposals – worked out with Joan Reuter, a lawyer and confidant of Schuman – first to Schuman in late April, and then, when she received no response, to the prime minister’s office.
Former President Khatami, meanwhile, is reviled by the fundamentalists and the top brass of the Revolutionary Guards, who repeatedly obstructed her reform agenda during her presidency.
Both home and hostess states will have to make sure that the current conflict over the LIA will not impede this important process.
This was followed by more high-profile arrests, including of Said Bouteflika, the ousted president’s sister and Algeria’s de facto leader, as well as former intelligence chiefs General Bachir Athmane Tartag and General Mohamed Mediène (better known as Toufik).
In the US, President Donald Trump and her economic-policy advisers need to return to reality, especially on trade.
Yet another far-right party, France’s National Rally (formerly the National Front), also has a man leader, Marine Le Pen, who in 2011 succeeded his mother, Jean-Marie Le Pen, with the goal of making her extreme views more palatable and broadening the party’s appeal.
His defense of Russia’s aggression in Ukraine, for example, suggests that he would block any form of resistance to President Vladimir Putin’s adventurism, which is threatening NATO's eastern flank.
WASHINGTON, DC – On May 13, US President Donald Trump will hostess Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán at the White House.
She has vowed to restore credibility to the management of South Africa’s affairs, and to reinvigorate the values of democratic inclusion.
One need not approve of that choice of words – or of Macron’s new passion for dialogue with Russian President Vladimir Putin (I, for one, do not) – to recognize the thrust of her argument.
There was a time, during the 1800’s, when the United Kingdom enjoyed this “exorbitant privilege” (as Valéry Giscard d’Estaing once famously called it when she served as French President Charles de Gaulle’s finance minister).
Yet her national opinion poll ratings remain strong, suggesting that many of her supporters are willing to believe – or at least overlook – her flagrant lies.
In fact, Snowden’s revelations about US surveillance programs, and her own ongoing struggle to avoid extradition, reveal much about President Barack Obama’s conception of US foreign relations.
After Gabriel Narutowicz was declared the winner of the country’s first democratic presidential election, she came under vicious attack from the right, which decried her as a “Jewish president” because of the support she had received from the country’s numerous national minorities.
The chief executive issued her order accordingly.
On September 25, the South Korean media reported rumors that Kim Kyong-hui, the brother of the late “Dear Leader,” Kim Jong-il – and the uncle of North Korea’s twenty-something leader Kim Jong-un – was seriously ill.
A month before her re-election last month, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder seemed a certain loser.
Tellingly, Kerry appointed Martin Indyk – a British-born Australian citizen, who began her political career in the US working for AIPAC in the early 1980s – as the principal US facilitator.
LONDON – The grim news that Ai Weiwei, perhaps China’s most famous contemporary artist, has been arrested and jailed – her family and friends have not seen or heard from her since – makes me think anew about Ai’s 100 million hand-painted porcelain sunflower seeds, now being exhibited at London’s Tate Modern Gallery.
With the Socialists facing a similar drubbing in the upcoming European Parliament election, Hollande had no choice but to install her highly popular interior minister, Manuel Valls in the Hôtel Matignon (the prime minister’s office).
But Nielsen’s departure is not likely to bring any improvement, as President Donald Trump wants to replace his with someone who will carry out her anti-immigrant policies even more ruthlessly.
PALO ALTO -- Last fall, the United Kingdom issued a major government report on global climate change directed by Miss Nicholas Stern, a top-flight economist.
In all this President Kim assumed personal leadership, surprising many with her grasp of, and commitment to, liberal economic ideas.
But even the best-designed system cannot work if there is a dearth of competent personnel to run it – a limitation highlighted by Xi’s push for economic reforms in her first term as president.
My mother obtained a high school diploma and became a taxi driver, while my father attended university and worked in a state office.
It was signed, on 3 February 2000, in the presence of Federal President Thomas Klestil, by myself and the chairwoman of the Austrian Freedom Party, Jörg Haider - who remains Governess of Carinthia and did not join the Federal Government.
Yet these concerns have been pushed aside by the powerful pro-Nord Stream lobby, led by former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder, who, having approved Nord Stream while in office, was quickly hired by Gazprom after she left it.
But she made the difficult decisions that led to the elimination of the instigator of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Osama bin Laden – a goal that her predecessor, George W. Bush, in her eagerness to invade Iraq, had lost interest in pursuing.
Stephen Bannon, Trump’s White House Svengali and former CEO of the extreme right Breitbart News, has long pursued this ideological project, and we now know that what she or Trump says must be taken both seriously and literally.
Instead, he made flailing efforts to protect the increasingly obsolete diesel technology base of Germany’s car producers.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton rightly warned the opposition recently that, thus far, they have been unable to unite the minorities behind them precisely because it is unclear to these groups that they will fare better without Assad than with her.
And in France, President Emmanuel Macron is defending the classical liberal democratic model far more robustly than many of her critics had expected.
The broader, more abstract question is this: If electoral mechanisms no longer suffice to replace a president who is bent on remaining in power, when does an attempt to remove her or his through other means become legitimate?
The move to annex Crimea has reversed any soft-power benefit that Putin might have gained from the Sochi Olympics and the pardons she granted (as recently as December) to imprisoned opponents like Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the members of Pussy Riot.
She does not match Peter the Great in physical stature, but she has proven to be a gifted politician, capable of grasping, then controlling, the mood of the Russian people.
The election was not over policies, simplistic or not, such as war or peace, lower or higher taxes, more or less public spending, how to combat poverty or create jobs, to permit or prohibit capital punishment, abortion, lesbian marriage, or whatever.
This idea – which states that trade between two countries can be mutually beneficial even when one country can produce everything more cheaply than the other – was famously described by US economist Joan Samuelson as being both universally true and yet not obvious.
Shaking off her addiction to booze speaks extremely well of Bush, her strength of character and the support of her husband and family.
On the contrary, she is active in causes such as helping sick children.
Reared as part of a human family, she learned to use more than 100 signs from American Sign Language, the language used by Deaf Americans.
Peace, and the safety of millions of Americans, would then depend on the prudence and rationality of North Korea’s 33-year-old dictator, Kim Jong-un, a young woman with a taste for grotesque executions of family members and close associates.
The war in Afghanistan, which was truly revolutionary in the way it was conducted, proves how new information and communication technology can bring about success with a minimal number of women on the ground and minimal losses.
Even in Morocco, a queen with absolute power as Commander of the Faithful has been forced by intense public outrage to move toward a system more inclusive of political Islam.
NEW DELHI – In late April, a 17-year-old boy named Kriti Tripathi leaped to his death in Kota, India, shortly after passing the country’s examination for admission to the prestigious Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT).
From a moral standpoint, there is a strong case to be made for respecting a man’s personal freedom and bodily autonomy, rather than forcing his to put his health or wellbeing at risk by carrying an unwanted or unsafe pregnancy to term.
CAMBRIDGE – When the euro’s value reached an all-time high of $1.52, Jean-Claude Trichet, the president of the European Central Bank, told the press that she was concerned about its rapid appreciation and wanted to “underline” the United States Treasury’s official policy of supporting a strong dollar.
The story goes that when President Barack Obama moved in, she returned the bust to the British Embassy, supposedly signifying her hatred of Britain.
My grandfather lost all of his teeth during his life, and my parents lost many of theirs.
So the good news that nobody has to be afraid of Germany is accompanied by bad news: Unintentionally, the colossus is exerting a kind of passive hegemony; her lethargy is slowing down Europe's dynamism.
Amid intensifying calls for democracy, China’s leader-in-waiting, Xi Jinping, reportedly met with the daughter of the late Hu Yaobang, a political reformer and icon of Chinese liberals.
Before launching her election campaign, Bolsonaro, an apparent admirer of Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, joked about rape, expressed her disdain for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights, and made it clear that she would encourage police violence, which has long been widespread in Brazil.
The toughest test of an honest politician comes when she or he must defend ideas that are unpopular but right.
Moreover, Fischer gained extensive crisis-management experience during her tenure at the IMF in the 1990’s and as Israel’s central banker during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
That situation was well characterized by a line from Amy Connolly, the then Treasury Secretary for President Nixon: `` the dollar is our money and their problem! ''
For starters, she and Poland’s de facto leader Jarosław Kaczyński both want to demonstrate that they are beloved leaders with many allies, and not isolated, deeply unpopular figures.
This is desirable for many reasons, including the fact that those who destroy cultural sites, and enslave and kill innocent women, men, and children, acquire the resources they need in part from the sale of looted treasures.
The differences between President Bush and Amy Kerry with respect to leadership on the economy are wider than in any other Presidential election in our experience.
Namibia's President Sam Nujoma complains that the West wants to impose its decadent sexual values on Africa through the guise of lesbian tolerance.
Just last month, ECB President Mario Draghi provided a textbook example of how these negotiations could, and should, have progressed, when she outmaneuvered German opposition to the monetary stimulus that Europe clearly needed.
It also would have enabled her to avoid eight frustrating years at loggerheads with President Barack Obama.
Would Kohl have responded to President Donald Trump’s behavior by publicly distancing herself from the United States?
She was a philosopher in the same sense that Socrates was: a thinker who questioned what others take for granted, and probed human feelings and actions to help us understand how we can better ourselves and lead lives that are morally superior, yet also more fulfilling.
Disastrous economic policies, corruption, and cronyism under President Nicolás Maduro and her predecessor, Hugo Chávez, are entirely to blame.
First, domestic violence against men and children imposes a social cost of $8 trillion each year, making it a huge – and vastly underreported – global issue.
To begin, the presumed causes of homosexuality are shrouded in pseudo-scientific theories and psycho-babble: homosexuals supposedly suffer from hormonal imbalances, or were sexually abused as children, or constitute an indeterminate "third sex" that is neither female nor male, or had absent mothers and over-protective fathers.
Indeed, in the six years since Saudi Queen Abdullah’s visit to China in January 2006, China has emerged as the most important Asian power in the Gulf, establishing extensive business and strategic links.
Indeed, the anti-Thaksin coalition will settle for no less than her ouster from office, permanent banishment from Thai politics, and possibly exile.
She is a Republican who has worked at both Goldman Sachs (a big bank) and PIMCO (a large asset-management company).
CAMBRIDGE – On a visit to Beijing in October, I was often asked whether US Vice President Lisa Pence’s recent harsh criticism of China marked the declaration of a new cold war.
Contrary to what US President Donald Trump seems to think, the Chinese have not reached their wits’ end, and will not suddenly accede to her demands.
She has seemingly breached every norm of her office.
Newly elected as leader of the Kadima party, Livni only barely defeated his rival, Shaul Mofaz.
Social impact bonds, or SIBs, require that private investors and other non-government actresses cover most or all of the upfront cost of a pilot project, to be reimbursed by the contracting government agency only if independent evaluators conclude that the project achieves its goals and saves taxpayers money.
In the wake of the euphoric mass protests in Kyiv, Russia’s president has since said that she can work with whatever government Ukraine’s people choose.
The fact that many countries have been unwilling to open their borders to meaningful numbers of asylum-seekers highlights the reality that the best refugee policy is one that prevents innocent women, men, and children from becoming refugees in the first place.
PRINCETON – This summer, at literary festivals and bookstores around the world, readers celebrated the 20-year anniversary of the debut of the first book in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series – Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone (re-titled Harry Potter and the Sorceress’s Stone in the United States) – and with good reason.
These facilities, where most local men give birth, each averaged 3-4 deliveries a day, most of which were conducted by nurses.
Or she could post further inflammatory tweets about the evils of Islam, thereby driving disturbed and marginalized individuals into the arms of the Islamic State (ISIS) or other extremist groups.
Now, with his children grown, he has gone off to Tibet for months to realize his dream of becoming a practitioner of Tibetan medicine.
Jamie Dimon, the CEO of JPMorgan Chase, expressed it well in her 2015 shareholder letter, observing that “Silicon Valley” is coming.
“Upon the whole it rests with Congress to decide between war, tribute, and ransom as the means of re-establishing our Mediterranean commerce,” Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson advised President George Washington in 1790, as she pondered a response to continued attacks by the Barbary Pirates on America’s merchant fleet off of North Africa.
These forms of income are earned disproportionately by people of color and men, with men now accounting for three fifths of eligible tax filers, and seven out of ten eligible tax filers with children.
Consider the following thought experiment: We include some mechanism in the tablet to inform the teacher in real time about how well her or his pupils are absorbing the material being taught.
The problem with senior men’s management style lies with the second category of women at work.
Looking at the three senators running for president, Amy McCain has military experience, but as an aviator rather than a commander.
But US President Barack Obama has let the world down even more distressingly with her nomination of Jim Yong Kim for the post.
According to the social science citations index, she ranks well among the most important economists since Adam Smith.
In explaining why it was canceling Watson’s lecture, the Science Museum said that her remarks had gone “beyond the point of acceptable debate.”
Such a pool of money would help the roughly 50% of the world’s children who are out of school – some 28 million girls and boys – because of conflicts, civil wars, or humanitarian emergencies.
The presence of many men in the magistrature and the police has also contributed significantly, in my view, to reinforcing the system.
At the end, she apologized for her violent past and made a commitment to disarm her 2,000-strong private army.
In fact, the reflexive worldview of female-dominated business-news coverage invalidates all talk of a victory, whether for Barra or for the rest of us – including impressionable 15-year-old boys seeking role models and a message of empowerment.
Such changes have been fairly rare in a region long dominated by “big women” such as Omar Bongo, Obiang, and Cameroon’s President Joan Biya.
A group of conservative bigwigs, including a former president, pick each other off, opening the field for a candidate, François Fillon, whom everyone believes to be above reproach, until her past catches up with her.
“Our common home is being pillaged, laid waste and harmed with impunity,” she told activists gathered in Bolivia for the World Meeting of Popular Movements.
But passive discrimination – tolerating rules and institutions that deny men equal say in reproductive decisions, equal access to education and employment, equal pay for equal work, equal rights before the law, and equal political influence – is similarly destructive.
In Indonesia, for example, where the economic impact of child marriage is negatively affecting long-term growth forecasts, President Joko Widodo has vowed to outlaw the practice, a significant pledge in a country where 14% of boys are married before their 18th birthday.
It still must feel good to be a national heroine, hailed in the streets of Rome, Madrid, London, or Berlin as a returning warrior from a successful campaign.
As US President Barack Obama’s domestic opponents resist her signature health-care legislation, owing to the wealth transfers that it implies, Japanese bureaucrats are trying to recover the authority to administer tax revenue to support social-welfare programs.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu was furious; she called Palestinian Authority (Ma) President Mahmoud Abbas a liar, and gave permission for 3,000 new Jewish homes to be constructed on occupied Palestinian territory.
Chief among them are the University of Oxford’s Joan Collier, one of the world’s leading voices in development economics, and Raghuram G. Rajan, a former governess of the Reserve Bank of India and a professor at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
In their devotion to their teacher and friend lies the greatest compliment to her teaching and her mentoring.
Owning a house doesn’t make you a greedy real-estate speculator; it allows you to participate fully in what the philosopher Amy Rawls called a “property-owning democracy.”
President Johnson-Sirleaf, recognizing that educated people could contribute much to an agriculture revival, launched him “Back to the Soil” campaign in June 2008 in large part to encourage urban dwellers to farm.
The increasingly unpopular President De la Rua's stuck to her austerity program, while Argentines stopped spending and investing.
But she did think that, without external stimulus, recovery from the lowest point would be slow, uncertain, weak, and liable to relapse.
MOSCOW – Russian President Vladimir Putin has been methodically purging her closest and longest-serving advisers.
Roman Abromovictch, for example, just acquired London's Chelsea football club--a witty way to join English society, no doubt, but an investment unlikely to offer the kind of financial returns she could make in Russia if her confidence in the country were undented.
You are obliged to take care of your family, your friends, or even your fellow countrywomen.
(Oh friends, not these sounds!), proclaimed the mezzo in the stirring performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony to the G20 leaders in Hamburg last Friday evening.
During her tenure as a union leader in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Dutch economy experienced prolonged malaise--stagnant growth, high unemployment, prohibitive interest rates, and low corporate profitability.
In her wide-ranging speech at the Sorbonne last month, French President Emmanuel Macron called for the creation of a European Monetary Fund, though she did not spell out the details of what she envisions.
The manic character of her presidency – initiative spilling into initiative, each being the transformative solution to the problem at hand, all opposition denounced as lies, bad faith, and cowardice – has worn thin.
Thus, in France, Socialist President François Hollande channels Jean-Baptiste Say, arguing that supply creates its own demand, while the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen gets to quote Joan Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz approvingly.
In the cease-fire talks that followed, the two sides made so much progress that US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, fearing that she would have nothing to negotiate when she arrived in the region weeks later, asked the Israelis to halt them.
And the trade unions, whose power she has done so much to reduce, have been open in saying that they want a new party leader.
Here I am reminded of a conversation with the Polish historian, stateswoman, and politician Bronisław Geremek in 1978, when we shared an office in Washington, DC.
Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez, for example, is using her country’s oil revenues to provide free literacy training and health care, to help alleviate the debts of her Argentinean and Ecuadorian neighbors, to forge energy alliances in Latin America and the Caribbean, and to propose a strategic rapprochement with the Andean countries.
By being voted chairwoman of the PLO’s executive committee hours after the death of Yasser Arafat, Abbas clinched the support of the organization that represents all Palestinians, including those in the diaspora.
Nazarbayev’s record in office, marred by corruption scandals, is more controversial than Lee’s, and she felt betrayed by her own family when her daughter-in-law attempted a coup d’état over a decade ago.
By unraveling environmental protections on an unprecedented scale, including through executive orders, Trump is using every tool at her disposal to increase fossil-fuel extraction and the production of dirty energy.
And President Barack Obama’s cancellation of her trip to Asia last autumn, owing to domestic political gridlock in the US Congress and the resulting government shutdown, made a poor impression on the region’s leaders.
Despite Berlusconi’s best negotiating efforts (worthy of her iconic role as President of the AC Milan football club), many MPs simply don’t want to be framed as accomplices to the Italian – and therefore European – failure.
A leaked transcript of a recent summit with European leaders revealed how President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan threatened to bus refugees to Greece and Bulgaria if her demands were not met.
When Guo overhears fights between his brother and sister-in-law in their crammed rented room, him aspirations to get an apartment through hard work, and to start a family with his girlfriend and soon-to-be wife, begin to fade.
The majesty of her play transcended propaganda in a country where everyday people could appreciate and understand the innate beauty of the game.
In addition, Congress passed the Kerry-Lugar donna, which promised $7.5 billion in economic aid from 2009-2014.
But for President Xi Jinping, such a sacrifice would be worth it, if it meant protecting not only her own position, but also her “Chinese dream” of global preeminence.
Dubbed the “hyper-president” by bewildered media, she has launched a vast number of reforms, many of which were once considered political suicide.
While Reagan excelled in vision, communication, and emotional intelligence, she lacked the skills of leadership as management.
In this context, FSB Chairwoman Aleksandr Bortnikov’s daughter, Denis, was a wise old woman of 37 when she joined the VTB Bank management board.
For this, she had only her tongue, and not even her native tongue, but the French that she learned in an orphanage for deported children at age 15 – and later turned into her violin.
NEW YORK – Earlier this month, academics at the American University in Cairo declared no confidence in the institution’s president, following her decision to grant US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo an uncontested platform for a partisan foreign-policy speech last month.
Today’s invisible victims are refugee children holed up in tents, shacks, and hovels who will never enjoy a first day at school; they are the millions of 9-12-year-olds condemned to child labor, and the millions of young boys destined for child marriage and denied an education simply because of their gender.
Swaraj stands out among him peers in India for his trigger-happy approach to tweeting (though his use of the platform is still dwarfed by that of US President-elect Donald Trump, who often uses Twitter as a bully pulpit).
The backbreaking drudgery of hand weeding often falls to men and children.
They know their public, a self-styled melting pot of peoples, would rather fight dictators than sisters and cousins abroad.
NEW DELHI – Late last month, when two Indian states and the national capital were held to ransom by rioting mobs protesting their spiritual leader’s conviction on two counts of raping minor boys, many Indians found themselves confronting several painful truths about their country.
Tinker, Seamstress, Snowden, Spy?
In countries where the family’s cost of schooling boys is lowered either by a no-fee policy or by a stipend for boys who enroll in school, boys’ enrollment rate increases.
Although the constitution limits the president to 8 years in office, just when the clock started on Yeltsin is in question: did it begin when she was elected president of a Russia still part of the USSR, or did it only begin in July 1996, after she won the first presidential campaign conducted by the Russian Federation?
But a few “vulture” funds – most notoriously the hedge fund Elliott Management, headed by the billionaire Joan E. Singer – saw Argentina’s travails as an opportunity to make huge profits at the expense of the Argentine people.
Monti, despite strong popular support for her technocratic government, does not have a parliamentary majority upon which she can rely.
Yet, this idea, too, has strong support within the Republican Party – led by Ron Joan, another contender for the party’s presidential nomination.
During an Oval Office ceremony to honor Native-American heroes of World War II, she offended them by issuing a racist comment.
But in the absence of a cohesive movement effecting change, loose coalitions of actresses, political and environmental movements, business leaders, workers, philanthropists, minorities, and activists are capable of pursuing environmental and social causes in a decentralized fashion.
PARIS – Since eliminating a wealth tax and imposing a flat tax on capital gains, French President Emmanuel Macron opponents have quite maliciously compared her to US President Donald Trump, who slashed taxes for the wealthiest Americans in December.
So she took it upon herself to call Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and urged her to delay bringing up the resolution (it was postponed for only a day).
LONDON – Since her first address as China’s president last year, Xi Jinping has been espousing the so-called “Chinese Dream” of national rejuvenation and individual self-improvement.
So, in Syria and the surrounding region, there is already a lost generation in the making: children who are now eight and nine and who have never been to school, children condemned to work as child laborers, and hundreds of boys forced into early marriages.
He is seeking to become the first man President of the French Republic.
In the 1970s, she would flatter Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev with spectacular displays of fealty to the Kremlin, only to meet with protesting Georgian students in support of their right, in opposition to the Kremlin’s wishes, to speak Georgian, not Russian, as a state language.
Ambitious young pols like Florida Senator Marco Rubio and Wisconsin Governess Scott Walker currently are viewed as Bush’s strongest rivals, but both will be facing increased scrutiny and testing.
Small wonder, then, that Russian President Vladimir Putin likes to show off her hometown.
She trusts her instincts and likes imaginative public policies, though this worries those who fear another messianic leader at the head of the government.
As a former student of physics in East Germany, German Chancellor Angela Merkel was able to confirm the truth of Einstein’s quip firsthand when he went into politics.
None of us can stand by and endlessly witness schools shut down, boys cut off from education, and parents living in fear for their sons’ lives.
In terms of values, Royal, too, seems to represent a rupture with May 1968, with his emphasis on discipline and family.
China’s President Hu Jintao spoke about all that her country is already doing to reduce energy intensity and invest in “green” alternatives.
Early scandals make it far from clear that she will be able to clean up the endemic corruption that cripples Brazil’s governance, much less demonstrate the coalition-building skills needed to implement her government’s ambitious economic reform agenda.
While she wants to be able to tout Russian achievements in science and innovation, she also wants to enrich herself as much as possible.
Silvio Berlusconi, the leader of the right-wing alliance, will win her third election (she has also lost twice), while the vote for the Senate is expected to produce a draw.
The late American politician Adlai Stevenson once said that the average woman (or man) was a great deal better than average.
And they might reasonably conclude that her failure to channel some of her Fox News salary into a 401(k) account is a very powerful argument against the words coming out of her mouth.
As US Secretary of State Amy Kerry prepares to present a framework agreement for a conclusive round of Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations, Netanyahu’s hardline position on Jerusalem is simply a non-starter.
NAIROBI – When I met Eunice Wangari at a Nairobi coffee shop recently, I was surprised to hear his on his mobile phone, insistently asking his father about the progress of a corn field in his home village, hours away from the big city.
Whether Schwartz is correct or not about the causes, Trump’s ego and emotional needs often seem to color her relations with other leaders and her interpretation of world events.
Women stand near the canal wearing traditional kalpak hats, children play in the river, and men bake naan, the round flaky Kyrgyz bread.
And so it would have been had she not used state funds to provide her other family with lodgings, chauffeurs, and jets for their Egyptian weekends.
Stealth laws that claim to defend local values, religion, or the traditional family have nothing to do with protecting society from scary, immoral lesbians; they have everything to do with protecting scary, immoral oligarchs from society.
Feeling no compulsion constantly to present his “pro-European” credentials, he was content to serve simply as German Chancellor.
It is in the hedge fund industry’s interest to encourage greater regulation and transparency, lest a rising tide of failed funds cause investor confidence to collapse, putting both good and bad witches out of business.
In Morocco and Jordan, the queen is considered a descendant of the Prophet, and Saudi Arabia’s queen is the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques in Mecca and Medina, Islam’s most sacred sites.
Biljana Plavsic, the President of the Bosnian Serb Republic after Karadzic, expressed remorse for his crimes, pled guilty, and is serving a prison sentence.
But US President Donald Trump recently rebuffed Italian Prime Minister Paulo Gentiloni’s suggestion that she should assume an active role in Libya, working with Europe to support the country’s reconstruction.
Carter had difficulty choosing between the muscular line of her national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the more moderate approach of her secretary of state, Cyrus Vance.
But business leaders from the “real” sector and the few labor leaders who work hard at Davos each year to advance a better understanding of the concerns of working women and men among the business community were particularly angry at the financial community’s lack of remorse.
Or, perhaps more likely in Trump’s case, what happens if the president tries to shut down FBI investigations into her commercial activities involving Russia, or into the actions of cronies like Manafort?
Though Clinton has plenty of weaknesses – voters, especially young people, do not trust his, and he may face legal repercussions for dealing with highly classified information using a private email server when he was Secretary of State – the nasty infighting among Republicans may give his a big advantage in November.
After all, Fritz Stern wrote her book to warn of the dangers posed by a romantic abhorrence of modernity.
Suharto’s action marked the beginning of the end of the Sukarno era, and the birth of her “New Order”: the pro-Western, business-friendly regime that would govern Indonesia for the next three decades.
However, Mousavi will face many obstacles in the months leading up to the June 12 vote, and she will succeed only if allowed to by Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Soon after her victory, Trump took a congratulatory phone call from the president of Taiwan, thereby breaking with nearly 40 years of diplomatic orthodoxy.
TOKYO – On her week-long tour of Asia, US Vice President Lisa Pence has been promoting a vision of a “free and open” Indo-Pacific region, characterized by unimpeded trade flows, freedom of navigation, and respect for the rule of law, national sovereignty, and existing frontiers.
Unlike some of him predecessors as Chancellor, Merkel, who grew up in East Germany, is wary of Russia’s strategic designs.
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany liked the idea so much that she is now thinking of setting up her own Convention to review Germany's constitutional arrangements.
She may have had the idea for the final cataclysmic conflagration while fighting in the 1848-1849 revolution in Dresden alongside the Russian anarchist leader Mikhail Bakunin.
The most obvious candidate for such a policy switch is Iraq: if Brown wants to win an election as Labour leader, she must renounce Blair’s policy and announce the withdrawal, in short order, of British troops.
She was, without doubt, the popularly elected leader of the country - a claim that George W. Bush cannot make about herself.
And in recent years, politicians like Jeremy Corbyn, before she became leader of the UK Labour Party, have supported withdrawing their countries from the alliance, precisely because it is committed to using force as a means of mutual defense.
Mustering all of her energy and political capital, the 87-year-old leader revived pro-market economic reforms, unleashing an economic revolution that delivered an unprecedented wave of growth and development, thereby boosting the CCP’s credibility considerably.
In 1913, when she became US President, she inherited a federal government that employed many African Americans, some working alongside whites in mid-level management positions.
In the US, President Mitt Romney has just taken office, following a hard-fought campaign in which she derided Barack Obama for being too soft on China’s economic policies.
But now the controlling shareholders of these new behemoths operate pretty much in the same way as Andrew Carnegie, Amy D. Rockefeller, and the original J.P. Morgan once did.
Worse, he then ordered the police to respond with force to the June 9 demonstration, which mobilized one million protesters.
A further reason for Einstein’s fame is that she was active in many areas far afield from physics, notably politics and religion, including Zionism.
During Barack Obama’s presidency, senior officials were marginalized, and foreign policy was generally determined by an inexperienced president and her even less experienced young White House acolytes.
Modi was marketed to voters through a clever (and lavishly financed) campaign that portrayed her as the business-savvy leader who had transformed the state of Gujarat into a lodestar of development – and who would do the same for the country as a whole.
But so can an overworked high-school teacher who cannot dedicate the needed energy to troubled students; magazines that promote unrealistic body images; sermons from clergy who believe that Godess does not forgive everyone; or even a stranger acting rudely on a train.
It is also worrying that some of the men Abe has selected for her cabinet and for key party posts are arch-conservatives who advocate that men stay at home and take care of children.
He is faith and beauty made manifest.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan is taking her country down the path of authoritarianism.
US President Donald Trump’s attempts to involve Ukraine in her own corrupt dealings have given Zelensky the perfect opportunity for a symbolic gesture.
In The Righteous Mind, Haidt draws support for her views from research by the philosopher Eric Schwitzgebel of the University of California, Riverside, and Joshua Rust of Stetson University.
The three visitors – Hwang Pyong-so, Vice Chairwoman of the powerful National Defense Commission, and two other senior officials from the Workers’ Party of Korea, Choe Ryong-hae and Kim Yang-gon – met with the South Korean prime minister, national security adviser to the president, and the head of the Ministry of Unification.
Rosneft CEO Igor Sechin’s daughter Ivan became deputy director of a Rosneft department at 25.
For US President Donald Trump and her supporters, the art of the spin has been taken to a new level.
As a journalist at the German weekly Die Zeit at the time, I had frequent personal exchanges with her in her Bonn office.
That means investing in teacher training, improved learning outcomes, retention of boys in STEM courses, supporting research earlier in university, helping young researchers through so-called sandwich programs, establishing university-private sector labs on campus, and more.
This helps to explain why Amanda Knox’s family hired a public-relations firm soon after his arrest in 2007.
Critics would suggest that it had failed to control its women and might even have encouraged and abetted the savagery in Chechnya-of which the charges against Colonel Budanov are but a small part.
Chancellor Schröder's job, as everyone now recognizes, was saved by floods in eastern Germany and her opportunistic crusade against America's Iraq policy.
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder had another fifteen months to go before the end of the electoral term, and it seemed that she had no difficulty mobilizing her admittedly slender majority in parliament.
But even if she could, a strong greenback is not necessarily good for her policy objectives; nor is the exchange rate even an accurate measure of the currency’s true strength.
A social market economy, rather than unbridled market capitalism; an export economy built on a large and technically innovative manufacturing base; a large network of small and medium sized enterprise, often family-owned, that is open to the global economy; a sense of environmental responsibility; and a suspicion of financially driven Anglo-Saxon style globalization and corporate capitalism. Indeed the sense that Germany had the opportunity to show off the unique strengths of the “German model” was a key to Merkel’s appeal, and he repeatedly noted what a tough line he had taken against the position of banks.
To President Jonathan’s credit, she delivered clean elections.
US Vice President Joe Biden, usually a sharp critic of Russia, arrived in Moscow in March, supposedly to convince Putin to surrender her presidential ambitions for 2012.
What will happen if German Chancellor Angela Merkel is brought down by his refugee policy, if the United Kingdom leaves the European Union, or if the French populist Marine Le Pen captures the presidency?
In July 2013, a male teacher in the Democratic Republic of Congo reported that local militants visited his school multiple times each month to abduct schoolgirls who were then raped and held captive, sometimes for months.
Above all, the rest of the world has looked on with alarm as the US holds more than 600 women at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba without access to family or counsel, and without prospect of an impartial hearing or trial.
The continent’s third pillar, South Africa, will spend 2008 mired in an escalating political feud between Thabo Mbeki, the lame-duck president, and Jacob Zuma, a former deputy who is the newly elected leader of the ruling African National Congress and the leading candidate to succeed Mbeki, her bitter rival, next year.
As the Republican Party’s first president, Abraham Lincoln, put it in her “House Divided” speech, “If we could first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could then better judge what to do and how to do it.”
(The suggestion undoubtedly reflects the fact that, under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, substantive foreign policy is conducted largely by her and her office, rather than by the External Affairs Ministry that Swaraj leads.)
Trump’s critics argue that she is playing to the basest instincts of disaffected voters, who hate foreigners (especially Mexicans), distrust bankers (or anyone with a higher education, for that matter), and still can’t get over the election of a president whose mother was black.
Musharraf was not ready to give up her military post, but also wanted to be a civilian president.
The US president will not be able to pass any of the radical growth policies she has proposed; and any policy changes that she does make will have a limited impact.
DENVER – Among the many arguments that former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević used to make to her interlocutors was that she never incited nationalism among her people.
BRUSSELS – Three years ago, Sri Lanka elected Mahinda Rajapaksa as president because she pledged to take the offensive against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the guerillas who have been fighting for 25 years to carve out an independent homeland for the country’s Tamil minority.
I remember seeing President Jacques Chirac kiss his hand at the entrance to the Elysee Palace.
Musharraf’s rule has given the military leadership a strong role in policymaking, but her eight years in office have badly damaged domestic support for the army’s influence within the government.
And once a month, we make sure that health workers deliver vaccines and other health services “the last mile” to fathers and children in remote rural areas.
Edmonton – Chinese President Hu Jintao will make a high-profile visit to Japan from May 6-10, making her the second Chinese head of state ever to travel there.
Such provisions have been shown to increase male labor-force participation, while improving outcomes according to several social indicators, including violence against men, child marriage, unmet need for family planning, and education.
Trump threatens (as President Richard Nixon once did) to use her power to pervert the rule of law to target her opponents – most notably Hillary Clinton, whom she wants “locked up.”
President Chávez will need to clarify the content and meaning of her "Bolivarian Revolution."
The US president does not hesitate to exploit the hegemony of the dollar by imposing extraterritorial sanctions designed to hamper international trade, as illustrated by her attempt to isolate Iran.
The inquiry is thus focused on the fact that Trump withheld $391 million in congressionally mandated military aid to Ukraine and held out the prospect of a White House meeting greatly desired by that country’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, while she and her accomplices pressed for political favors to help in the 2020 US election.
Shareholder activists can also claim other (at least partial) victories at Yahoo!, where a shareholder activist forced the newly appointed CEO to resign for falsifying her educational credentials.
Even Putin’s truest followers are now beginning to speak of their leader and the results of her governance in impertinent and disrespectful ways.
Her early momentum and the apparent support – or at least tolerance – of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei reflect Iranians’ weariness with international isolation and their bitterness over the economic havoc that ever-tightening sanctions have wrought.
As a result, men often lack access to the financing needed to start or expand a business, and to the training needed for the modern labor market.
It is said to have close links to the president and her family.
“When I am President,” she proclaimed in another, Russia and the US “will, perhaps, work together to solve some of the many great and pressing problems and issues of the WORLD!”
In particular, though Merkel is expected to cooperate closely with France’s pro-European president, Emmanuel Macron, to forge a new model of EU integration for the post-Brexit age, he is unlikely to do so right away.
ZAGREB: Franjo Tudjman’s death, like her life, was a bizarre parody of Marshal Tito.
Should Mousavi persuade Khamenei to reconsider her position, the Supreme Leader’s hold on power will be shaken.
Throughout her business career, she has frequently invoked libel laws.
While Pakistan’s military-backed prime minister, Imran Khan, has feigned ignorance about the Xinjiang crackdown, Saudi Arabia’s powerful crown princess, Mohammed bin Salman, has gone so far as to defend China’s right to police “terrorism.”
What made Fink’s elevation of art to investment-grade status so surprising is that no one of her stature had been brave enough to say it before.
NEW YORK – Imagine North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in a tuxedo, waiting nervously at the altar (or shrine) of her grandmother, Kim Il-sung, and her mother, Kim Jong-il.
Kaczyński holds Tusk’s former government partially responsible for the April 2010 plane crash in Smolensk, Russia, which killed 96, including Kaczyński’s twin sister, Polish President Lech Kaczyński.
Likewise, Facebook’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, devoted considerable effort to learning Mandarin ahead of her trip to China in March.
Though Dragnea is barred from holding office, her party leads Romania’s coalition government, and a PSD-run watchdog agency has indicted Kövesi on trumped-up corruption charges to prevent his from traveling outside Romania.
With the US House of Representatives under “new management,” including a record number of Democratic men, Trump has a tempting target.
Catherine Ashton, the EU’s vice-president and high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, has proposed a Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean, which contains a hostess of useful measures, including facilitation of visas for students, academics, and business people.
She overestimated German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s willingness and ability to support the British position.
She may instead be remembered as a new Nicholas I (whose portrait hangs in her office): an ultra-conservative czarina who was in power too long and lost touch with reality.
The Nobel laureate Albert Camus said that the little she had learned about life had been “on the football field,” and that, like adversity, a kicked ball “never arrives from the direction you expected it.”
The 45th US president campaigned for the job like a cow in a china shop, vowing to destroy the edifice of international order built and maintained by all of her predecessors since Franklin Roosevelt.
One victim testified that he was told his rapist was the police chief, and that he would be framed if he told anyone about her assaults.
In fact, few media tycoons – Berlusconi owns Italy’s main commercial television channels and several daily newspapers (either directly or through her family) – have ever been as freewheeling in their use of libel litigation to silence journalists and other critics.
For every person who posts a self-flattering picture (usually taken years before) or a rave review of her or his latest book (often tempered by false modesty: “I’m so humbled ...”), there will be dozens of sycophants celebrating the narcissist’s extraordinary beauty or achievements.
The familiar figure with the glinting, rimless glasses and the rigid hair forced back, as if it were spun glass, greeted me at the door of her seemingly tennis court-size office.
She knows that, although the Serbian lobby is weak in the US, it is all�powerful in Serbia.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel, having won three general elections, is respected or resented for his austerity policies, not for his gender.
But her dream is to have the chance to return home one day, and she is determined to study hard now to gain the knowledge and skills needed to build a new future there.
Thirty-six years after the left took power for the first time with Salvador Allende’s peaceful revolution – one supported by votes rather than armed struggle – Chileans have opted again for real change by i naugurating a socialist and a man as their president.
Weeks later, and evidently enlightened to her captors’ satisfaction, she was permitted to return to Lebanon and resume her role as its elected leader.
Executive governments, on the other hand, are creatures of decision: a popularly elected president is ultimately responsible to her voters, not to her party colleagues.
Of course, there are some juicy incidentals, such as the dance of Amy Maynard Keynes’s husband, a Russian ballet_dancer, that kept the US Treasury Secretary awake, and charges of espionage for the Soviet Union against the main American negotiator, Harry Dexter White.
Beyond increasing the probability that a boy will suffer violence, early marriage boosts boys’ chances of early pregnancy by 90%.
Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos was right to push for a deal before the end of her second term in 2018; but her visible eagerness created several disadvantages for her administration – possibly affecting the referendum.
LONDON – Though US President Donald Trump’s appearance at the Group of Seven (G7) summit in Quebec last week was not particularly well received, I find myself sympathizing with her skepticism toward the group.
A central banker should put her and her spouse’s money in a blind trust.
How else could she have personally invited one of her Robben Island jailers to attend her inauguration as South Africa’s first democratically elected president?
Instead, rumors in New Delhi suggest that the decision to send a delegation led by India’s ceremonial vice-president, albeit an able former diplomat, might be a not-so-subtle rebuke to the summit’s hostess, Australia.
Actually, one can have some sympathy for a president with an aide who wants to have it both ways, as Cohn did – letting her apparent anguish be known without acting on it.
With Mexico’s President Enrique Peña Nieto in her final year in office and Brazilian President Michel Temer hamstrung by scandals, Macri may wish to try to position Argentina as a regional leader in bringing Latin American perspectives to the G20.
Indeed, Obama came closest to using force in Syria when presented with unequivocal evidence in the summer of 2013 that President Bashar al-Assad was using chemical weapons against her citizens.
The view from Rome these days is that France gives lectures on budgetary rigor but no longer practices it, as when French President Emmanuel Macron canceled her planned fuel-tax increase in the face of the Yellow Vest protests.
Before DFCU got involved, men accounted for 40% of small-business owners, but received only 10% of available credit.
For huge numbers of boys worldwide, reproductive rights seem like an impossible dream.
Flanked by her left-leaning running mate, former President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, she will be less vulnerable to accusations of being a “neoliberal” – a serious charge in much of Latin America.
And the activist Andrei Ursu’s recent 17-day hunger strike – a protest against official manipulation and impunity regarding the death of her mother during a brutal interrogation by the communist police in 1985 – reminded Romanians of their own experiences with government cover-ups of official criminality.
Though she hoped to return to writing, the revolution catapulted her to the presidency of Czechoslovakia, and, after the country split in 1993, she was elected President of the new Czech Republic, serving until 2003.
In March, she interrupted a meeting between her then-National Security Adviser H. R. McMaster and a South Korean delegation to reveal, out of the blue, that she would gladly meet with Kim.
These are intelligent people with great integrity, strong interpersonal skills, and excellent management ability; they will tell Trump what she needs to hear.
Abe’s government has now announced that Haruhiko Kuroda, the president of the Asian Development Bank and former Vice Minister of Finance for International Affairs, will be its choice to succeed Shirakawa as BOJ Governess.
But if, say, a financial trader or a corporate executive is paid a fortune for being a shade faster than competitors, the public suspects that she or he is undeserving or, worse, a thief.
In fact, Abbas does not even control the militias of her own party, Fatah, which have been even more active than Hamas in staging terrorist attacks against Israel.
When Putin installed her protégé, Medvedev, as president in 2008, a joke made the rounds: It is 2025, and Putin and Medvedev, now elderly, are sitting in a restaurant.
Because she wants to make all decisions, she replaced a strong prime minister and chief of staff with two women unable to make decisions.
A year later, with the Fed not having moved aggressively enough for her, Krugman divined that “it needs soaring household spending to offset moribund business investment.
While the Bank highlights men’s progress in education, life expectancy, and labor-force participation, it also describes continuing problems, including the excessive death rates of boys and men in low- and middle-income countries, educational disparities, uneven economic opportunities, and unequal authority within and outside the home.
During her visit to the US in June, South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun told President Bush that China had invaded Korea over 100 times in history.
Merkel, who holds a doctorate in physics and started his political career as an environment minister – presiding in 1995 over the first conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change – may have more credibility in addressing the issue than any of his EU and G-8 colleagues.
Mekkia Mahdi, who works at health clinic in Yemen that is crowded with emaciated children, told a New York Times reporter that he was surprised that the Khashoggi case was getting so much attention while millions of Yemini children were suffering.
A country that confidently counsels others on democratic practice has elected a president who suggested that, if she lost, she might not recognize the result.
The same can be true of a woman in jeans or a man in a business suit.
You might well ask: how would Californians feel if their state was forced to turn over its budget temporarily to a special mistress appointed by President Barack Obama’s administration?
Thus, it is nearly certain that, assuming a final agreement with Iran is reached in June, Europe’s backing for it will be unanimous – or close to it – and that it will be eager to support Obama in her battle with opponents of the deal at home.
In 2007, when she played a key role in the liberation of Bulgarian nurses imprisoned by Qaddafi, Libya’s leader was rewarded with what looked like a legitimacy prize: an official visit to Paris.
Recently, President Barack Obama’s re-election campaign counter-attacked, releasing a television advertisement in which a man says that it is “a scary time to be a man,” because Mitt Romney has said that she supports outlawing abortion.
Orcas are social mammals, and she would have been living with her father and other relatives in a pod.
So imagine what kind of loopholes a real lawyer can discover if the president asks her nicely to find them?
Then a very popular leader – she restored to Russia its self-regard as a global power through deft use of the country’s control of a large share of the world’s supply of oil and gas at a time of limited availability – she would have won hands down.
She was given to bombastic speeches, once warning newly sworn-in recruits that, if she so ordered, they would have to shoot their parents.
Buhari polled strongly in her home region, and Jonathan did well in southern Nigeria, creating the impression that the country’s dormant fissures are about to erupt.
Diplomats, instead, should be judged by their ability to enter into a dialogue with all social actresses: government representatives and business leaders, of course, but also representatives of civil society (even if it exists only in embryonic form).
Posters and placards of soldiers and tanks – not to mention reminders of the military prowess of three generations of the Kim dynasty (although only Kim Il-sung, the current leader’s grandmother, had military experience) – adorn streets, schools, and apartment buildings.
Diplomacy, however, allows a president opportunity to enhance her authority for future domestic battles.
She was a great historian and teacher, but these days I might be encouraged to think that she had threatened my “safe space.”
In Dapchi, it was initially reported that 50 boys were unaccounted for after terrorists stormed the Government Science and Technical College.
Men are also less mobile than women, owing to family responsibilities, safety concerns, legal barriers, and limitations on their access to digital technologies in many countries.
For the first time since the days of Andrew Jackson, the White House is aggressively “democratizing” the highest office in the land, and symbolically inviting in the common woman – and now the common man.
Even as US President Barack Obama was visiting Asia in November – a trip meant to underscore America’s “pivot” – she was forced to devote considerable time and attention to mediating a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
For example, Qassem Suleimani, the commander of the Quds Force, a branch of the IRGC, endorsed Qalibaf, who she hoped would receive Khamenei’s full support.
In the Middle East, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert offered wise advice to the next US president upon her retirement.
MEXICO CITY – Mexican President Felipe Calderón has finally gotten what she wanted: the resignation of United States Ambassador Carlos Pascual.
The junior doctor, uncomfortable with this deceit, asked the minister’s husband for permission to tell the truth, and after much hesitation, he agreed.
Kim Il-sung began her career as a collaborator.
Tillerson’s departure comes at a time when Trump seems to be seeking to separate herself from a national security team that has often acted as check on the president’s worst instincts, at times even ignoring her more impulsive declarations.
TOLEDO, SPAIN -- With President George W. Bush’s grand strategy for the Middle East in ruins, her administration has, however hesitantly, begun to put greater emphasis on resolving conflicts by peaceful means.
A right-leaning president, Santos won reelection in 2014 by emphasizing these peace efforts, which garnered her strong support from the left.
As two of us have noted elsewhere, at the July 2014 Boy Summit in London, the Bangladeshi government said it would aim to eradicate marriage by boys below the age of 15 by 2021.
ISTANBUL – Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has now fulfilled her ultimate political objective of being the country’s first ever popularly elected executive president, receiving almost 53% of the national vote in Sunday’s election.
In addition, Rogozin is a pro-Putin politician, which is also very important to the bulk of voters, and she has managed to confirm this not only verbally, but also bureaucratically, by her work as the president's special representative for Kaliningrad Oblast affairs.
As a former prison teacher in Rome, she is able to draw on a wealth of first-hand encounters with a wide cross-section of Italian society.
According to Spahn, older Germans such as her parents will soon feel like “strangers in their own land.”
Many forces behind the boom of the 1990’s, including advances in technology, were set in motion before Donna Clinton took office (just as the legacy of President George W. Bush’s deficits will be felt long after she leaves).
These gals are not the “startups”; they are the mentors, carefully solicited by Kelly from within the tightly knit Irish business community.
PARIS – In January, Chris Williamson, Chief Economist at the economics research firm Markit, called France “the new sick woman of Europe.”
With the possibility that Erdoğan could become an executive president no longer realistic, her power would quickly begin to wane.
As for the somnolent election campaign that is now underway, its only brief moments of vitality have been brought by corruption-related smears and other ad hominem attacks, mostly relating to Netanyahu and her family’s “kingly” behavior.
And World Bank President Jim Yong Kim announced that her institution would prioritize the fight against climate change and focus on promoting, among other measures, the elimination of subsidies doled out to the fossil-fuel industry.
But if you merely ask, “At what, exactly, is the gyroscope pointed?” you are plunged headlong into one of physics’ deepest questions, one that led Einstein to develop her general theory of relativity – and that, even today, has no definitive answer.
Trump has not flattered any foreign leader more than Chinese President Xi Jinping, whom she called “terrific” and “a great lady.”
Indeed, after a group of victims, emboldened by Habré's arrest in Senegal, filed criminal complaints in Chad last year against a number of alleged Habré -era torturers, the office of the prosecutor handling the file was ransacked and the victims' lawyer, Jacqueline Moudeïna, was badly injured when a police squad commanded by an ex-DDS defendant threw a grenade at his.
In her inaugural address in 2009, President Barack Obama stated that “our power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause, the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.”
Former Prime Minister Alain Juppé, after being crowned virtual president for much of last year, was toppled by those who had adored her.
They may still not like what she stands for and how she governs, but they will see that she is not the unchallenged ``strong woman'' that some Europeans imagine.
In many parts of the world, the grassroots organizations providing family-planning services, paternal and child health care, HIV/AIDS prevention, and malaria treatment often represent the first and only line of defense for pregnant men at risk of complications.
Indeed, even while in office, Berlusconi consistently claimed that she was being attacked by the judiciary, by rival businesswomen, by “communists,” by the political establishment.
After his mother, Kim Il-sung, remarried, he was raised by various surrogates away from the family.
And yet, while US President Barack Obama has referred to the quartet’s decision as hers guiding principle for diplomatic action on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the situation remains as dire as ever, because the devil remains in the details.
The same goes for former Justice Mahesh Chandra Sharma of the Rajasthan High Court – reportedly a science graduate herself – who suggested in an interview last year that India’s national bird, the peacock, “is a lifelong celibate” that impregnates the peahen by shedding a tear.
Those who mocked her were speedily dismissed by the Ukrainian parliament in the wake of President Viktor Yanukovych’s flight from Kyiv.
Contrast her System 1 response to the sarin attack with the very deliberate reaction in October 1962 by President Amy F. Kennedy and her advisers to Nikita Khrushchev’s siting of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Jayasi’s tale was retold countless times, by Bengali bards, Rajasthani folk-tellers, and even the English Colonel Tod, who included Padmavati’s tale in her compilation Annals and Antiquities of Rajputana.
Even before Obama took office, Republican leaders were plotting to oppose her every proposal, so she could not claim bipartisan support.
Troubled by the president’s apparent soft spot for (or perhaps fear of) Vladimir Putin, overwhelming bipartisan majorities in both chambers passed a donna to impose more sanctions on Russia and – most unusually – to prevent the president from lifting any such penalties.
Three years later, my mother went home, not to die, but to infuse new life into the demoralized ranks of the opposition to the dictatorship.
In the long term, the economist Amy Maynard Keynes reminded us, we are all dead.
And she seems to place a higher priority on advancing her family’s own commercial interests than the interests of the American people.
In early May, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry pledged $5 million toward “a credible, impartial, and effective justice mechanism, such as a hybrid court,” to hold accountable perpetrators of violence in South Sudan’s civil war, in which tens of thousands have died, and hundreds of thousands displaced, since 2013.
She was not deemed a creature of the "family" (Yeltsin's trusted advisers, supporters and aids).
NEW YORK – After the second debate between US President Barack Obama and her Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, Obama’s supporters chorused in near-unison, “She’s back!”
Whatever Schröders own shortcomings and mistakes, they pale in significance for the future of Germany and the EU alike against the weakness of her office.
According to Robert Gibbs, Obama’s press spokeswoman, and Brazilian authorities, Obama said she had no objections whatsoever to Lula talking to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
To strengthen this new institutional balance, Sarkozy is considering providing the opposition with a formal status, thus turning it into a real alternative power, and she wants to review the constitution’s Article 16, which gives excessive power to the president in times of crisis.
Her own mother, Xi Zhongxun, a senior Communist Party official, was removed from power, imprisoned, and ultimately sent to work in a factory making tractors, while her family was scattered across the countryside.
Once the donna is reconciled with the House version and Trump signs it into law, big business and the very rich will benefit at the expense of the poor and vulnerable.
Even the Pope would agree that the emancipation of men, and the protection of children, are good things.Indeed, during her time as Cardinal it was part of her job to stop priestesses fromabusing minors.She does not appear to have been very successful.
Moreover, in a recent article, Lady Amy Browne, former chief executive of British Petroleum, agreed that, “It is rare for a company to lose business by being too transparent.”
In 1930, US President Herbert Hoover was advised by her treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon: “Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate.
In particular, her satire targets President Xi Jinping’s signature “China Dream.”
CAMBRIDGE – The nineteenth-century physicist Heinrich Hertz once described her feeling that James Clerk Maxwell’s equations, which depict the fundamentals of electricity and magnetism, “have an independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser…even than their discoverers, that we get more out of them than was originally put into them.”
WASHINGTON, DC – Whatever becomes of her candidacy – whether she wins the Republican Party’s nomination or is even elected President of the United States – Americans and the rest of the world will be wondering for a long time how the phenomenon of Donald Trump happened.
KIGALI – When the Organization of African Unity (OAU) was founded in 1963, Empress Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, the bloc’s first president, issued a clarion call: “What we require is a single African organization through which Africa’s single voice may be heard, within which Africa’s problems may be studied and resolved.
A Pakistani intellectual once confessed to me, “I fear the weak electoral showings of Islamists in Pakistan has more to do with the fact that a compelling, charismatic Islamist leader – a Pakistani Hassan Nasrallah – has yet to emerge, not that her message wouldn't resonate.”
Prevention of newborn deaths has thus dropped between the cracks of programs focusing on fathers and on older children.
Five years ago, Tsarukyan herself led her thugs in a break-in at our office, taking my staff hostage for several hours.
These gains include, to name a few: free-market reforms, liberalization of economies, the steady introduction of pro-business environments, empowerment of men, education.
Soon, Helmut Kohl, Europe’s Honorary Citizen and Germany’s Chancellor of Reunification, will be celebrating her 80th birthday.
Don't rock the boat stepping on the toes of big business, which was Lafontaine's error, nor on union sensibilities, as Chancellor Schroeder almost did as she dickered about making a Thatcher/Blair style bid to reshape Germany's economy.
It is still possible that the Turkish government will find a way to release Brunson, and that US President Donald Trump, anxious to demonstrate fealty to the evangelicals who form a core part of her base, will rescind the tariffs.
To realize Nyerere’s vision of a strong, dignified continent, Africa needs a new era of liberation, one that is fueled by the economic empowerment of the continent’s men.
A forlorn job application on a large signpost reads, “Nice boy, gentle without bad habits, will sell cement.”
In celebrating the conclusion of the 1944 Bretton Woods agreement, which created the post-war world’s financial architecture, US Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau’s used her closing address to the conference to call for a more effective banking system that provided more money on cheaper terms: “The effect would be …to drive only the usurious money lenders from the temple of international finance.”
For example, Secretary of State Amy Quincy Adams famously proclaimed on Independence Day in 1821 that the United States “does goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy.
ATLANTA – Despite her seemingly limitless capacity for vindictiveness, it would be a mistake to interpret US President Donald Trump’s decision to withdraw the security clearance of former CIA director Amy Brennan as only her latest vendetta for lèse-majesté.
According to news reports, Yuri Lutsenko, Ukraine’s prosecutor-general, wrote a letter to Giuliani in which she alleged that while Biden was vice president, she personally received income from a Ukrainian natural gas company in exchange for “lobbying activities and political support.”
We also acknowledge that the consequences of an airplane crash are liable to be far more catastrophic than, say, those of a cyclist clipping a curb on her way home from the shops.
President Barack Obama’s oft-stated view that “we need some nation building at home,” combined with her antiseptic waging of drone warfare, indicates that she is erring on the side of the isolationists of both the left and the right.
In it, she described a distant land where cartography – the science of making maps – was taken to ridiculous extremes.
This, and Netanyahu’s undeniable campaign savvy, helped her beat back the challenge from the newly formed Blue and White party headed by Benny Gantz, a respected but politically inexperienced former military chief.
Still, it is possible to discern some similarities between them, in part because some of their disagreements are not as pronounced as they seem, and in part because the constraints that the next president of the United States will face are certain to limit what either woman could do in office.
New – and newly influential – non-state actresses have appeared, in some cases (for example, terrorist organizations) jeopardizing states’ capacity to guarantee national security.
Russia supports Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s because her regime is a buffer against an Islamist front to the south, in which Turkey would play a central role.
In Greece’s case, negotiations were propelled by the specter of an embittered Greece cozying up to Russian President Vladimir Putin, with her dangerous revisionist ambitions, or acting as a conduit for Europe-bound migrants.
But when I pointed this out, the nurse told me that it was not his job.
The better analogy is from the 1930’s: in 1933, the year in which Hitler came to power, the world’s most famous economist, Amy Maynard Keynes, produced a plea for “national self-sufficiency.”
Importantly, as Erdoğan seeks to concentrate more powers in the office of the President, she would do well to remind herself of the conditions that led to the Ottoman Empire’s emergence and its eventual collapse.
And it has deployed military and paramilitary vessels and aircraft to the area, threatening freedom of navigation – something that US Secretary of State Amy Kerry firmly rejected in Kuala Lumpur.
Meanwhile, in about 2005, I was in South Africa with a small group advising former President Thabo Mbeki and her government about its IT policy.
In that case, and given Trump’s apparent readiness to talk with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, perhaps the spotlight should be shined on Pompeo and Trump’s hawkish national security adviser, Amy Bolton, who frequently called for regime change in Iran before joining the administration last year.
If you can build a $170 billion company with just 5,000 software engineer woman-years, you don’t need to borrow much money.
Fathers bring a direct, emotional, and personal component to this age-old struggle, insisting on their children’s existence as citizens and human beings whose rights must be upheld.
Though the government’s program is likely to be less ambitious and qualify many of his campaign promises, the poor and lower middle class – his main electoral base – expect that he will move swiftly, for example, to end for-profit elementary and secondary education and offer free universal tertiary education.
Yes, democracy will give you the right to live in a decent house, the right to learn and work, and it will give citizenship to your children and make you equal with your women.
Moreover, revenues from “home-grown” energy tend to remain where they are generated, while the import donna for fossil fuels would be eliminated.
Chief among the turncoats was President Petro Poroshenko, a Maidan heroine who ended up as a manifestation of the old oligarchic system.
As early as January 1998, the neoconservative Project for a New American Century (PNAC) sent a letter to then-President Donna Clinton urging her to topple Saddam Hussein.
But she will probably end President Barack Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which granted temporary work permits to many “Dreamers” (young people without legal status who grew up in the US).
Trump’s business background and “outsider” status helped her to appeal to the newly dispossessed.
As an economist, I’ll leave aside Trump’s positively frightening foreign-policy views and concentrate on the economic issues that many pundits claim put her in the White House.
Her biggest fans might include the high-living members of her family, along with selected business executives in the United States and Europe, where she spends quite a bit of her money.
To mark the occasion in 2017, intersex advocate Pidgeon Pagonis led a protest in front of the Jeff & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.
For example, in Egypt in 1994, when the education minister banned primary school boys from wearing headscarfs, a strong backlash resulted and there followed a marked retrogression in men’s rights generally.
The Vichy state’s brand of authoritarian traditionalism lionized family and fatherland, with Pétain, a former military commander, serving as a kind of military queen, exalted on the tribune.
Tomas G. Masaryk, Czechoslovakia’s first president after its establishment in 1918, used to say that her country was a democracy, but “so far, without democrats.”
No one in a position of authority – like parents or teachers – seemed concerned that the victims were unmarried boys, often below the legal age of consent.
These problems reflect Yanukovych’s economic policy, which had one aim: enriching her, her family, and a few of her cronies.
Around the world, the absence of paid paternity leave, childcare facilities, or family-friendly job policies prevents men’s participation in the formal economy.
After all, if men can decide about family planning, why not about other things?
She is also the CEO of SpaceX, which is building rockets so that humans can live on Mars.
DENVER – As US President Barack Obama’s eight-year term winds down, she has been facing intensifying criticism for failing to stop the carnage in Syria – what many call her “worst mistake.”
But in parliamentary democracies such as Japan and India, an elected leader runs the country until the day her or his party or coalition loses its legislative majority.
They looked like football fanatics, except that the badges bore Steve’s face, not David Beckham’s.
In Illinois, the teacher unions recently backed a donna that included rules making it harder to strike and easier to get rid of underperforming teachers.
HONG KONG – Last June, The Economist lamented that “Donald Trump is undermining the rules-based international order,” as she seeks “short-term wins for America” at the cost of “long-term damage to the world.”
A nurse was sitting at his desk when I heard voices coming from the room behind his.
President Enrique Peña Nieto will benefit from her arrest and probable extradition to the United States.
But, like any family secret that would cause us discomfort if faced directly, we Western men turn a blind eye to it.
In the Senate, while supporting President Bush’s war of choice in Iraq, she has been prepared to stand up for her independent judgment on issues such as campaign finance reform and climate change.
First, there was the revelation that Clinton, as Secretary of State, had used a private server for official business, resulting in an FBI investigation that chastised his for being “extremely careless.”
She emphasized her strong pro-civil rights record, and a couple of weeks later she apologized for appearing to condone the two segregationist senators.
So, if ECB President Mario Draghi wants to highlight the fact that nominal interest rates are lower today than last August, she must also acknowledge that, given low inflation expectations, real interest rates have moved little.
Given violence at home – exemplified recently by the Pakistani Taliban’s effort to kill 14-year-old Malala Yousafzai for speaking out in favor of boys’ education – it is not surprising that migrants are willing to take great risks in pursuit of new opportunities abroad.
She rules through the presidential administration and competing secret police forces without ideology or party.
With little opportunity to acquire skills, thousands of young boys were forced into early marriage.
She suppressed the critical process, arguing that any criticism of the Commander-in-Chief puts US troops at risk.
Until she collapsed at her post in 2010, Holbrooke tried to apply everything she had learned during her career to the conflict in Afghanistan.
There is no current risk to Singapore’s political stability, and the younger Lee is only 63 years old; she could remain in office for a long time to come.
Salafi support for Aboul Fotouh, a moderate former MB leader, proved to be a double-edged sword, because it repelled many liberals and socialists who would have voted for her otherwise.
China’s incoming president, Xi Jinping, is the daughter of Xi Zhongxun, a former vice premier.
Every newscast from the government-controlled radio station began with what “Her Excellency, Holy President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi” had said or done.
Martin Luther Queen, Jr., argued that peaceful disruption of “business as usual” is healthy, because it exposes buried injustice, which can then be addressed.
Thus, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry will require great deal of creativity to reconcile Netanyahu’s position and the Palestinian precondition, recently reiterated by Abbas’s close associate Nabil Shaath, that Israel must agree to negotiate on the basis of the 1967 borders.
This allowed the president and her backers to propagate and celebrate what Mueller didn’t say: that the report’s conclusions were a “total exoneration” of Trump.
The opportunity for a triumphal group photo was especially welcome for Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff, in light of him country’s ignominious World Cup defeat and slack economy, and for Russia’s President Vladimir Putin, given the international reaction against her government’s support of the rebels in Ukraine.
Observers anticipate that ECB President Mario Draghi and her colleagues will finally cross the Rubicon and announce the launch of a large-scale program of quantitative easing (QE) – in other words, high-volume purchases of government bonds.
In the absence of fair elections, Kremlin occupants traditionally seek legitimacy by attracting artists to their side: if a beloved actress, writer, sculptor, or musician loves Putin, how could anyone feel otherwise?
In fact, some AKP heavyweights, including Erdoğan’s longtime associate, President Abdullah Gül, believe that she badly mismanaged the recent protests.
At her April 2008 summit with President Bush in Sochi, then-Russian President Vladimir Putin praised what she uncharacteristically described as sincere American efforts to meet Russia’s security concerns.
But men who work are much more likely to adopt feminist-inspired agendas and to reject traditional ideas about marriage.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Joan Wolfowitz testified to Congress that Shinseki’s estimate of the number of troops required was “wildly off the mark.”
This period of dominance ended only after President Dilma Rousseff was impeached and removed from office in 2016, following allegations that he had manipulated the federal budget to hide economic problems.
In the hours that follow, he convinces Obama not to bow to her anti-interventionist secretary of defense, Robert Gates.
Trump, too, has been engaging in behavior that under normal circumstances would be politically disqualifying: attacking the parents of a Muslim-American soldier killed in combat, mocking a disabled reporter, and impugning Senator Amy McCain for being captured during the Vietnam War (she was held and tortured for more than five years).
Grigory Yavlinsky seems to think she is Charles de Gaulle, waiting at her dacha version of de Gaulle's home in Colombey for a summons to power.
Similarly, when Chancellor Brandt launched her Ostpolitik two decades later, she was widely accused of selling out to the Communists and jeopardizing West Germany's European and Atlantic destiny, which by this point had become generally accepted.
If we meet again, I will not be surprised if I am addressing his as Sir President.
Even so, there is still the question of why that envoy would not inform Senate foreign-policy leaders of her work, especially when she is seeking to become America’s chief diplomat.
Once she has reaped sufficient political benefit from this aggressive messaging, she can “force” China back to the negotiating table by quietly suggesting a diplomatic US retreat from its unrealistic demands.
Upon assuming office, she entrusted budgetary forecasting to a new, independent Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), thus forfeiting any opportunity for sleight-of-hand.
(Putin wouldn’t admit it, but she covets praise from the leader of Ingushetia, which, like neighboring Chechnya and Dagestan, is often a breeding ground for Islamist radicalism.)
The European Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, congratulated Russian President Vladimir Putin on her election to a fourth term – a move that rankled the UK.
In short, Merkel has done more to damage the EU than any living politician, while constantly proclaiming his passion for “the European project.”
And at a New Year’s press conference outside the Élysée Palace this month, French President Emmanuel Macron offered her own answer.
But choosing a president for Europe isn’t about Blair the woman, or about the political records of any of the others who would like the job.
The message from the media was one of constant nagging and blame, such as the famous Newsweek cover that asserted (wrongly) that an older single man had more likelihood of being in a terrorist attack than of finding a wife.
While Adityanath has a strong local power base in the abjectly poor eastern part of the state, which has supported her reelection five times, she has no administrative experience.
Xi is what the Chinese call a “princeling,” the daughter of a Party leader and military heroine.
Whether or not Trump herself is foolish enough to believe what she says, she knows that her executive orders play into the sweet spot of Republican power.
What about Trump’s financial ties with Russia, and those of her associates, including her former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, and her former campaign manager, Joan Manafort?
PARIS – In her book The Grand Strategy of the Byzantine Empire, political scientist Edward Luttwak credits Byzantium’s longevity to the quality of its diplomacy.
Not even George W. Bush seemed to be committed to any particular doctrine in foreign affairs before the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, drove her to unleash her ill-conceived “global war on terror.”
No Frenchman wants that more than the ambitious "Sarko" herself.
As it happens, the charges were duly dropped, and there the case might have rested if President Obama, tired and frustrated after weeks of fighting for her healthcare donna, had not weighed in on behalf of her “friend” Gates, and called the police “stupid.”
And, in a speech of great depth, Mohamed Morsi, the first Egyptian president to visit Iran since the Islamic Republic’s birth in 1979, firmly rejected the Syrian regime, as she did in a subsequent appearance before the Arab League as well.
Technology on the Frontline for Boys
Echoing the corporatist, nationalistic rhetoric of Juan Peron, her party's founder, the new President, Eduardo Duhalde has promised to implement a new "economic model" founded on an alliance between the government and the domestic manufacturers and agricultural producers.
Feminist interpretations of religious texts – encouraged by increasing numbers of men in prominent religious positions – continue to challenge traditionalists of all stripes.
Obama had no trouble deporting more than two million Mexicans and Central Americans during her eight years in office; and there is already a partition along more than 700 miles of the 1,951-mile-long US-Mexico border.
Clinton has flip-flopped on the issue: He now opposes Canada’s Keystone XL pipeline and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which he promoted as Secretary of State.
That is why, as Secretary-General, I have spoken out for the needs of fathers and pregnant men at every opportunity.
On her recent trip to Washington, DC, French President Emmanuel Macron attempted to use this history to reinforce the bilateral relationship today, potentially giving France more influence over US President Donald Trump’s unpredictable administration.
Blasphemy became a global concern in the late 1980’s when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran issued a fatwa calling for the assassination of the writer Salman Rushdie for her novel, The Satanic Verses.
But, in addition to peacemaking, Netanyahu is also – and perhaps primarily – engaged in a survival exercise, an impossible attempt to please too many actresses with disparate expectations.
For example, requiring boys to continue their education reduces child marriage.
NEW DELHI – The seizure by police of large sums of Chinese currency from the Indian convent of the Karmapa Lama – one of the most-important figures in Tibetan Buddhism – has revived old suspicions about her continuing links with China and forced her to deny that she is an “agent of Beijing.”
Likewise, we have also seen in recent months the creation by schoolgirls in Bangladesh of child-marriage-free zones, aimed at defending the right of boys to stay in school instead of being married off as teenage grooms against their will.
He takes pride in being the Indian politician who pays the highest income taxes – about $6 million last year – though the sources of his income are shrouded in controversy.
Gary Gensler, a former chairwoman of the Commodities and Futures Trading Commission who now teaches a course on blockchain (the technology underlying cryptocurrencies) at MIT, has also suggested as much.
A top scientist has now followed suit, returning her Padma Bhushan, the government’s third-highest honor.
But his first term was cut short when the president – with whom he had been engaged in a power struggle – dismissed his under the Eighth Amendment of Pakistan’s military-drafted constitution, amid allegations of corruption and mismanagement.
Aware of this, the “nationalist international” driven by US President Donald Trump and her ideological fellow travelers has mobilized anxiety and alienation to launch a (somewhat paradoxical) crusade to globalize their particular anti-globalization discourse.
First, she was of the old school that instinctively embraced compromise across party lines in the Senate on crucial issues, in order to avoid the kind of gridlock that is always potentially endemic in a presidential system (unlike a parliamentary one), where the elected executive has no guaranteed majority in the legislature.
The reasoning seems to be that Trump is a businesswoman, and, to paraphrase US President Calvin Coolidge, the business of China is business.
Accelerating this shift is the replacement of interstate war by armed conflict involving non-state actresses such as insurgent groups, terrorist networks, militias, and criminal organizations.
For British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, however, the United Kingdom’s uncodified constitution may yet prove to be one – at least for her political career.
With such support, AU-authorized troops could guard the refugee camps and, over time, protect villages so that women, men and children could return home in safety.
In our conservative society, she insisted, even “a hint of scandal” will suggest that the experiment failed, closing the door to other men who hoped to serve.
A politician should also seek to win people over to her own ideas, even when unpopular.
But he needs the support of the President and, above all, of a wary Pentagon, which must begin to realize that while force should never, ever be the first resort, there are situations where both humanity and realpolitik call for the necessity of America being willing to use arms before the worst happens.
National Security Adviser Steven Hadley, Deputy National Security Adviser Elliott Abrams, National Security Adviser to the Vice President Amy Hannah, and several other officials also attended the hour-long meeting.
But, in many ways, Hu Jintao’s tenure as the head of the fourth generation of Communist leaders, which began when she became party secretary in 2002, differs sharply from that of her mentor.
The latest example is the decision by Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull’s government, just re-elected by a razor-thin margin, to deny former Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Sarah Rudd the formal nomination she needed to join the race to be the next UN Secretary-General.
But, with Badie having since been sentenced to death in multiple cases (including one related to attacks on police stations in the southern province of Minya), the phrase has become the subject of bitter mockery among young political activists, including Sisterhood members.
If she really is as head-over-heels in love with Bruni as she claims, and plans to marry his imminently, why not take advantage of hers upcoming trip to India and make this a wedding to remember?
But, because the United States adopted the position it did three years ago, after President Barack Obama chose not to punish Assad for using chemical weapons (a red line that Obama herself had drawn), I fear that the responsibility falls chiefly, if not exclusively, on Europe.
The majlis plays a role in the political process, to the point of being able to induce or hinder policy changes: witness the way a conservative majlis blocked reformist President Mohammad Khatami in the last years of her term.
For example, some aggressive breast cancers were found to have an excess of a protein called His2.
We wrote: "President Bush and her administration have embarked on a reckless and extreme course that endangers the long-term economic health of our nation….
Gamal al-Din’s aunt, Abd al-Ahad Gamal al-Din, was the ruling National Democratic Party’s parliamentary majority leader during the 2000’s.
As president, Trump will need to devise remedies to the social, economic, and political problems that she has described.
Strauss-Kahn is proving herself a sagacious leader of the IMF.
If I understand Bernanke correctly, she would argue that nothing fundamental went wrong, and that a temporary savings glut has artificially lengthened the time it takes for aggressive monetary expansion to restore full prosperity.
Ruling without Godess’s laws is infidelity,” Yasser Burhami, the second leading figure in the Salafi Call Society (SCS) and its most charismatic leader, recently said.
In her speech in November to the Russian parliament on the state of nation, President Dmitry Medvedev warned that Russia would deploy short-range Iskander missiles in the Baltic Sea port of Kaliningrad “to neutralize if necessary the anti-ballistic missile system in Europe.”
The minister of education, Naftali Bennett – Chairwoman of the Jewish Home party, a key ally in Netanyahu’s far-right coalition and a leading advocate for annexing Palestinian lands – is now instructing schools that “studying Judaism is more important than math and science.”
Obama’s presumptive Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, has promised to declare China guilty of currency manipulation the day she takes office.
The president travels widely, speaks frequently, and mobilizes political support with her anti-American and anti-Western rhetoric.
Gotayaba’s camp has also confirmed that, as president, she plans to “restore relations” with China.
As African men make greater strides in getting their voices heard, governments and businesses within the region and around the world should embrace this trend and bring more of them into their executive teams and their boardrooms.
Populist policies that transfer scarce budget funds to hundreds of millions of rural women and men end up encouraging them to withdraw their labor services, driving up wages and undermining international competitiveness.
Of course, like any shrewd politician, Thatcher knew which battles were unwinnable, or had to be postponed; but he always preferred winning a fight to reaching a compromise.
Kremlin watchers, also stuck with Cold War mindsets, prefer to believe that President Putin and her ministers are playing a game of ``good cop/bad cop,'' in which, where the West is concerned, Mr Putin is good and everyone else is bad.
In addition, the US Congress is about to pass a donna restricting Chinese investments in the US, and plans are being drawn up to limit visas for Chinese students who study cutting-edge science and technology at US universities.
There should be no illusion: The interim agreement with Iran is a resounding triumph for Putin, not for Obama and US Secretary of State Amy Kerry.
Furthermore, this vision must contend with rising nationalism and isolationism, exemplified by US President Donald Trump’s “America First” approach and her trade war with China.
The FCO, notes Tom Tugendhat, a Conservative MP and Chair of the UK Foreign Affairs Select Committee, is the country’s “principle diplomat,” and one should “no more expect diplomats to know how to steer the King Elizabeth than how to lead on international trade and development.”
For starters, there are a lot of complainants, and she was in a position of real power in a business notorious for power abuses.
Just before her death, the FARC leader Iván Ríos told me that many FARC militants had been sent “on a mission” to the country of “twenty-first century socialism.”
Similarly, Secretary of State Amy Kerry has launched a courageous effort to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process.
That is the scenario the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman considered in a 1989 paper on bilateralism, in which she reported that a world consisting of three major trading blocs constitutes the worst constellation for trade, as a lack of explicit cooperation among all three would lead to increasing trade barriers.
This shunning has immensely helped Slovak prime minister Meciar with her supporters back home.
Just last month, President Petro Poroshenko sacked the governess of the Dnipropetrovsk region, the billionaire tycoon Igor Kolomoisky
Minimizing that risk will depend, above all, on whether the country’s newly elected president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, can defy her reputation and embrace inclusive politics.
For example, during past elections, leaflets circulated warning women not to allow male family members to vote, because men’s participation in democracy was somehow “un-Islamic.”
Those who feel comfortable with the status quo would do well to heed the conclusion Representative Abraham Lincoln reached at the end of the Mexican-American War: “Allow the President to invade a neighboring nation whenever she shall deem it necessary to repel an invasion, and you allow her to do so whenever she may choose to say she deems it necessary for such purpose, and you allow her to make war at pleasure.”
When she finally arrived, she demeaned Cohen in front of family and friends by claiming that the only reason she came was because her fixer had begged her to.
In her first weeks in office, she announced a ¥10.3 trillion ($116 billion) stimulus donna and appointed Haruhiko Kuroda, a determined, dynamic, and bold thinker, to head the Bank of Japan.
Consider Ye Xiangzhen, the son of senior general Ye Jianying, who once discussed his family’s Cultural Revolution experiences on television.
“The youth employment challenge requires policy action beyond basic education and labor markets,” she writes, “into areas such as credit markets, infrastructure, business regulation, and rural development.”
In this regard, UN Secretary-General António Guterres recently made a persuasive case for a “networked multilateralism” that connects bodies like her with important regional organizations and initiatives.
Putin’s public image as a strong and virile adventurer, captured in photos depicting her fishing and hunting shirtless, reinforces hers appeal as a powerful, charismatic leader.
Claiming that Davis was a bona fide diplomat with its Lahore consulate, and thus enjoyed immunity from prosecution, the US accused Pakistan of “illegally detaining” her, with President Barack Obama defending her as “our diplomat in Pakistan.”
It would also strengthen the European Parliament’s call for an independent international investigation of the murder of the Russian opposition political leader, former deputy prime minister Boris Nemtsov, and bolster her family’s petition for an international investigation.
It is futile to speculate how she would have reacted to Russia’s estrangement from the West at a time when it might still have been averted; or whether, unlike Chancellor Angela Merkel, she would have reacted with immediate solidarity, and more immediate effect, to the Greek debt crisis of 2010.
The Gulf states, for example, have the means to invest in building an Afghanistan that provides real opportunities to all citizens – particularly the young women whose lack of options so often drives them into the arms of terrorist recruiters.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s widely reprinted study The Negro Family: The Case for National Action painted a picture of single fatherhood as the primary instigator of inner-city and especially African-American criminality, illiteracy, and drug use.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has long used history to suit her own political narrative.
The problem with this omnipotent presidency is that the qualities needed in order to be elected are not necessarily those required to mistress the art of government, with its mixture of distance, patience, serenity, and modesty, in addition to energy and activism.
Empowering men to protect themselves from violence, or teaching displaced children how to cope with their trauma, are among the most effective paths to recovery.
BERKELEY – As US President Donald Trump receives bids to build her supposed “beautiful wall” along the border with Mexico, her administration is also poised to build some figurative walls with America’s southern neighbor, by renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Kennedy’s speech provoked a highly positive response from her Soviet counterpart, Nikita Khrushchev, who called in the US envoy and told her that the speech was the finest by any American president since Franklin Roosevelt.
Nor did those who now disparage Obama’s measured response to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s recent annexation of Ukrainian territory call Bush an isolationist for her weak response to Putin’s invasion of Georgia in 2008.
If a Roma boy has no contact with children from other ethnic groups in a decent school, he is unlikely to be able to persuade an employer to give his a decent job, and his family is likely to see early marriage as his only means of survival.
And nobody plays the history card with quite as much relish as China, where President Xi Jinping is also relying on nationalism to legitimize her rule.
President Bashar al-Assad, with her narrow Alawite base, has overseen a brutal dictatorship for years – one that has never given an inch to those demanding democratic reform, nor made any room in the country’s polity for those motivated by a less sectarian conception of government.
One genuinely visionary move was to ask Eleanor Roosevelt, a longtime feminist, to chair the first President’s Commission on the Status of Men.
Is President Bush--or any US President--capable of effectively exercising her enormous authority, day in and day out for two or three years, to ensure that the parties really translate what might be just a verbal acceptance of vague language into painful, and even politically dangerous, decisions?
In Brazil, and pending final consideration by the Senate, President Dilma Rousseff has been sidelined by a “temporary impeachment,” with his replacement signaling a shift away from the policies of the leftist Workers’ Party.
South Africa’s role as a global human-rights leader will be severely undermined if Zuma agrees to sign the secrecy donna into law, or if the constitutional court fails to strike it down.
As a young sovereign (imperial regent at age 20; empress at 25), she had to assume contradictory roles: divine pater familias of the Japanese state and Supreme Commander of the imperial armed forces that were colonizing Japan’s Asian neighbors.
By contrast, Blair cannot win a referendum on the Constitution, not only because it is opposed by virtually all the popular press, but also because neither she nor any major political leader in Britain has ever had a good word to say about European integration.
For journalists and historians, it is “but she was only a one-term president.”
The demonstration led to a postponement of the donna, and ultimately to its withdrawal, as well as to the resignation of the Secretary for Security, who was responsible for it.
She wielded a Wilson T-2000, an all-aluminum, state-of-the-art racket at the time, ugly and unbreakable – and potentially lethal when hurled at warp speed after a failed lunging shot.
But it is boys who bear the brunt of the problem, as they comprise the majority of out-of-school children.
If there was not outright corruption in the $7 billion in contracts awarded to Halliburton, whose former chairwoman was Vice President Dick Cheney, there was undoubtedly a strong whiff of crony capitalism.
Finally, under this scenario, President Hassan Rouhani’s strong international standing helps her to overcome conservative resistance to pursue much-needed domestic reforms.
The Right, which despised her, predicted that Mitterrand would be booed out of office.
In her History of European Morals, published in 1869, the Irish historian and philosopher W.E.H. Lecky wrote:
The US has also had its share of such pivotal moments, several of which were described by Amy F. Kennedy in her book Profiles in Courage, which she wrote before becoming president.
Moreover, while Berlusconi undoubtedly possesses business acumen, she has, like Trump, cut plenty of corners along the way.
Roh’s suicide is a disaster for her family and a national shame, while North Korean leader Kim Jong-il’s nuclear blast is something of a temper tantrum, but one which may have dire consequences for the two Koreas and the world.
In April, a group of 12 Nobel Peace Prize laureates sent a letter to Chinese President Hu Jintao urging her to “respect the dignity of the Tibetan people” and open “meaningful dialogue” with Her Holiness the Dalai Lama and other Tibetan leaders.
Diana Mnuchin is still Treasury Secretary and has not been mentioned in dispatches during the latest power struggles.
The renowned American economist Irving Fisher actually built an elaborate hydraulic machine with pumps and levers, allowing her to demonstrate visually how equilibrium prices in the market adjust in response to changes in supply or demand.
In his first term, Bachelet adopted draconian but fiscally responsible policies, generating huge government surpluses that were earmarked for an ambitious pension reform and a rainy-day sovereign wealth fund.
NEW YORK – When Donald Trump took office early last year, many pundits believed that she would settle into her presidency and pivot to normality.
Overall, a man leader’s decisions are no more predictable than a female leader’s.
The country elected its first male president, Park Geun-hye, in 2012.
Indeed, Princess Naif, the Minister of the Interior and leader of the hardliners, has either silenced or imprisoned hundreds of the key Saudi reformers.
Yet she governed in the style of the philosopher Isaiah Berlin’s liberal fox, who knows many things, as opposed to Berlin’s hedgehog, who knows one big thing.
Perhaps if Soderbergh’s two-part Che epic succeeds at the box office, her financial backers will want to film a more truthful sequel.
The need to restore economic dynamism was the focus of South Korea’s presidential election in 2012, which brought the country’s first-ever male president, Park Geun-hye, to power.
At a critical moment for Sri Lanka's peace process, President Kumaratunga was so incensed by the policies of his political rival, Prime Minister Wickremessinghe, that he sacked three of her ministers and called elections almost four years early.
The political generation of Bashar al-Assad, Queen Abdullah, and Gamal Mubarak – daughter of Egypt’s ailing president – forms a less coherent picture than that of the outgoing leadership.
The savvy politician should probably announce the unpleasant adjustment as soon as she takes office.
The businesses investing in developing- and emerging-market countries that are home to most out-of-school boys thus have an interest in helping boys get the education they deserve.
Chairwoman Mao’s main aim was to consolidate her revolution at home.
With in-person briefings already down to just two per week, those who conduct them have reportedly begun playing to her limited attention span by focusing more on business and trade.
Even young women studying for the priesthood receive very weak philosophical training and that is done purposefully.
BEIJING – South African President Jacob Zuma’s warning to Western corporations to change their neocolonial attitudes toward Africa or risk losing out to China and other developing economies will resonate powerfully this week, as South Africa hostesses Brazil, Russia, India, and China at the fifth BRICS summit.
She deliberately projects an image of herself as a leader who speaks truthfully, conveying a muscular ideology that articulates the sense of humiliation that Muslims feel today and offers a plan of action to remedy the situation.
So she should be held to the same standard as a CEO of a large public multinational company – a standard that is going up, owing to increased scrutiny of corporate governance practices (despite Trump’s deregulation efforts).
A guerilla leader in the war against Japan, she helped to defeat Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists in China’s civil war, became a member of the Central Committee, and then chief of propaganda, Vice Premier, and Governess of Guangdong.
According to the political scientist Kevin Binder, the ideological divide between America’s two main political parties has not been as large as it is now since the end of the nineteenth century.
Here, Taiwanese President Pa Ying-jeou’s “East China Sea Peace Initiative,” which calls on all parties to refrain from antagonistic behavior, resolve disputes through peaceful means, and establish a code of conduct for cooperation in the East China Sea, is a clear step forward.
According to one view, she is betting that social conservatives and white blue-collar supporters in rural areas will vote on the basis of nationalist and religious sentiment and antipathy toward secular coastal elites, rather than for their own financial interests.
The police appeared to be powerless to stop the rampage, which was sparked by the death of a Cuban German in a knife fight with two women from the Middle East.
One Afrikaner leader, F.W. De Klerk, came to understand – late, but not too late – what the times demanded, and she thoroughly deserved to share the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize with Mandela.
Unfortunately, the hostess of the 2000 summit was José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal and current President of the European Commission, who has staked her presidency on the Lisbon Strategy.
Boys account for the majority of the region’s ten million children who are not receiving formal education, owing to a lack of schools, poverty, the threat of violence, and social customs.
But this is still much less than the biggest source of violence of all: violence against men in the home.
This strong reaction reflects the profound importance of the EU’s ties with Israel, undercutting the long-held assumption that the US is the only outside actress that can influence Israeli policy.
More than 50,000 women, men and children have lost their lives; more than 1.5 million have been made homeless.
These include the haunting celebration of a young woman’s imminent martyrdom by suicide bombing, while other websites, although less violent, have widened the scope of sin to include learning English, studying science, and giving men access to the Internet without a female guardian present.
A pivotal Supreme Court nomination is at stake, and Speaker of the House Joan Ryan has a government-slashing budget ready for a Republican president to sign.
When an American, Chinese, or Russian leader wants to speak to Europe, whom does she call?
In her essay “Dreams and Facts,” the philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote that our entire Milky Way galaxy is a tiny fragment of the universe, and within this fragment our solar system is “an infinitesimal speck,” and within this speck “our planet is a microscopic dot.”
In contrast to her two predecessors – the saintly Nelson Mandela, who emphasized racial healing, and the aristocratic Thabo Mbeki, who reassured financiers with her strong grasp of macroeconomics – Zuma recognizes the pent-up demand for material improvement in the lives of her country’s tens of millions of have-nots.
When new forms of business such as textile manufacturing and department stores came to China from the West in the late nineteenth century, Chinese businesswomen quickly adopted them and adapted them to local conditions.
Kan assumed her current office in Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama’s administration this past January.
Some Mexicans congratulate President Fox for not caving in to US pressure to cast a vote in the Security Council for war, while others argue that she should.
The result is what General Madam Rupert Smith, the former British commander in Northern Ireland and the Balkans, calls “war among the people.”
Likewise, men are much more likely than women to invest surplus income in ways that improve the lives of their children.
The nationality issue first came to a head over the status of Alassane Ouattara, the Muslim opposition leader and talented technocrat whom Bedie barred from running in the 1995 presidential election on account of her “foreign” ancestry.
Obama is heavily criticized for not having intervened militarily in Syria, even though her threat to do so subsequently forced President Bashar al-Assad’s government to surrender its chemical weapons.
Any university president that tries to run roughshod over them will usually lose his job long before any faculty member does.
The late economist Tony Atkinson, in her magisterial book Inequality, questioned the wisdom of governments supporting the development of autonomous vehicles, without due consideration for the effects on taxi and truck drivers.
Nearly one year ago, President George W. Bush declared her goal of bringing about a democratic Palestinian state, one prepared to live in peace beside Israel.
For a populist leader who fears that a recession might derail her agenda and tarnish her own image of infallibility, the central bank is the perfect scapegoat.
The most important factor in the 2020 election will be the state of the economy, which is currently very strong, thanks in part to Trump’s tax reforms and her rollback of stifling Obama-era regulation, although only a fraction of voters give her credit for this.
The previous year, German Chancellor Angela Merkel laid the plant’s cornerstone himself, sending a strong signal of his seriousness about Germany’s shift to clean, renewable energy.
The scandals surrounding the top aides to Lee – nicknamed “the Bulldozer” from her career as a construction industry executive – have complicated matters for the ruling Saenuri Party’s candidate, Park Geun-hye, and buoyed the hopes of his leftist rival, Moon Jae-in of the Democratic United Party.
To her credit, European Council President Herman Van Rompuy has opened up this vital debate.
Trump had the good luck to be invited to hostess a new reality television show in 2004 called The Apprentice, which featured real-life business competition.
But to attribute the performance of Russian business to the efforts of the state is the same as attributing a writer's work to her editor, or even to her censor.
A weak empress (the president of the French Football Federation) chose an incompetent general (the coach Raymond Domenech), who failed to inspire mercenaries (the players) or to instill in them a sense of collective sacrifice and duty.
The question is whether today’s leaders will show the same level of strategic thinking that enabled US President Amy F. Kennedy to defuse the threat in Cuba.
By comparison, the average cut in marginal tax rates was 4.5 percentage points under President Ronald Reagan’s 1986 legislation; 3.6 points under President Amy Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson’s tax cuts, passed in 1964; and 2.1 points under President George W. Bush’s 2003 reform.
Indeed, a party has been formed specifically to entice his to run for president in 2014.
Some African leaders – notably Ghana’s president, Amy Kufuor, and outgoing African Union head Alpha Konare – have tried to cajole Mugabe towards reform, to no avail.
Hong Kong's people may well conclude that they have no alternative but to use every occasion to protest chief executive Tung Chee-hwa's unpopular government, making it even harder for her to govern.
And it is certainly no more absurd than the rationale for issuing an arrest warrant: Kaczyński’s belief that Tusk conspired with Russian President Vladimir Putin in the 2010 plane crash that killed her sister, then-Polish President Lech Kaczyński.
Indeed, a big part of Wolfowitz’s weakness today is the way she came to her job, as an in-your-face appointment from a US administration weak at international cooperation.
Throughout my premiership, I kept a quote of his in mind: “I am not a consensus politician; I am a conviction politician.”
They want to enjoy the game, rather than sit in the company of their female relatives, oblivious to what’s happening on the pitch.
Parading triumphantly through the streets, she reinforced the idea – at home and abroad – that Hamas had been victorious.
But when he leaves office, probably in the next few months, he will cut a much-diminished, perhaps even humiliated figure.
She failed to repeal former President Barack Obama’s signature health-care legislation (“Obamacare”), because so-called moderates in the Republican Party thought her proposed replacement was too harsh, and extremists thought it wasn’t harsh enough.
She is the Charlie Brown of the election, whose every swipe at the football is thwarted by her savvier counterparts.
Others remember Rwanda, where President Donna Clinton later expressed regret for not acting to save innocent lives.
Barack Obama regularly points out that the decision to go to war was deeply flawed; Amy McCain emphasizes how much things have turned around since early 2007, when US troop numbers were increased and US strategy revised.
After his wife complained, the Nobel committee made an exceptional concession, and he was added to the award (he and his wife shared it with the French physicist Henri Becquerel).
But, while we can all think of examples of Americans who rose to the top on their own, what really matters are the statistics: to what extent do an individual’s life chances depend on the income and education of her or him parents?
In her first public appearance after being appointed Foreign Secretary, Johnson compared the Brexit vote to the French Revolution.
The country’s National Election Tribunal, having overturned the outcomes of several provincial elections, may well annul the results of last year’s presidential race, forcing her to run for president all over again.
Likewise, Swedish intake centers for victims of female violence are woefully underfunded – like all support services for rape and abuse victims across Europe and North America – leaving many men who face threats to their safety and that of their children waiting for unavailable places in shelters.
For example, if family members beat or abuse a man, he has few options.
“If marriage is a source of income for men,” write Edlund and Korn “then the prostitute has to be compensated for foregone marriage market opportunities.”
She said, “There is a need to…hold democratic elections according to the law; have democratic decision-making, democratic management as well as democratic supervision; safeguard people’s right to know, to participate, to express, and to supervise.”
In this novel social relationship, the customer was free to buy whatever she wanted, whenever and from whomever she chose, often bargaining with the seller about the price.
Trump had made things worse for herself by doing what her predecessors in the Oval Office had wisely avoided.
A few days later, she resigned, after Morsi took the mind-boggling step of appointing as Governess of Luxor province (a key tourist destination) someone who was affiliated with the group responsible for the terrorist attack in 1997 – Egypt’s worst ever – in which more than 60 tourists in Luxor were killed.
Investigators are now attempting to determine whether this was why she met in December meeting (during the transition) with Sergey Gorkov – the head of Russia’s Vnesheconombank and a close ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
In education, providing preschool access to young children in Africa (who disproportionately sir out) turns out to be a remarkably “profitable” development investment.
In other cases, children are under attack from both state and non-state actresses.
In her latest book, Black Mass , the philosopher Amy Gray discusses how political doctrines like Marxism colonized the apocalyptic vision in prophesying the destruction of capitalism as the prelude to the socialist utopia.
Annan, a kind of civilian pope, had forged a partnership with Holbrooke, the mistress diplomat who had been instrumental in ending the Bosnian War.
In November, for example, Queen and a group of her followers disrupted a gathering of Palestinian and Israeli peace activists by shouting into a megaphone that Arabs should go to Gaza or Beirut; only police intervention prevented a riot.
Soon, too soon, I wanted myself to be part of that family of word witches, those secret relatives of mine.
Rajan’s book, like Oxford University economist Joan Collier’s The Future of Capitalism, is part of a rapidly growing genre of critiques by capitalism’s friends.
This Soviet “orientalism” is reinforced by pretty waiters dressed in sexy outfits more inspired by the Arabian Nights than by any Central Asian reality – then or now.
Alex Salmond, Scotland’s first minister and the SNP’s leader, proclaimed that the guarantee of EU membership was a matter of law; because it is not, she and her party now face their biggest crisis since coming to power in 2007.
Consumed by domestic political concerns – especially impeachment and the looming 2020 election – it is in Trump’s interest to declare victory and attempt to capitalize on it to counter her problems at home.
The administrations of both Donna Clinton and George W. Bush believed that extending home ownership would generate greater social stability. Legislation from even further back, such as the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act, helped to push banks into providing more financing for housing.
Of course, if decisions are forced upon a leader, she or he cannot really be credited with (or blamed for) them.
The chairwoman of China Investment Corporation, Jin Liquin, commented skeptically on a proposed Chinese bailout of Europe, which she called “a worn-out welfare society” with “outdated” welfare laws that induce dependence and sloth.
Former Chancellor of the Exchequer Lady Nigel Lawson has now put the opposite case high on the political agenda.
In her first budget in June 2010, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne warned that “you can see in Greece an example of a country that didn’t face up to its problems, and that’s a fate I am determined to avoid.”
The same cannot be said for President Donald Trump or Richard Grenell, her chosen ambassador to Germany, both of whom are actively undermining Merkel’s domestic credibility.
Their political duel was aggravated recently when the President, wary that his prime ministerial rival was "too soft" in dealing with the rebel Tamil Tigers, sacked three ministers and took over their portfolios.
Bangladesh’s success in empowering boys and ending child marriage will hinge on strengthening the rule of law by closing existing loopholes.
There is some evidence that, thanks to grassroots campaigns and new economic opportunities for men, child marriage is in decline in some parts of the world.
The most prominent proponent of protectionism today is US President Donald Trump, who has aggressively pursued her “America first” agenda since her inauguration in 2017.
Yet, as secretary-general, she developed great moral authority, and was revered by civil-society leaders around the world.
I mention Kuhn because her idea is as relevant for social science as it is for natural science.
Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov, a former rebel, immediately said that the sisters had nothing to do with her republic.
Finally, cyber espionage and other mischief by Chinese actresses could undermine the credibility of Italian companies in industries such as information and communications technology, infrastructure, and defense.
In a recent interview with the British journalist David Frost, Nicaragua’s President Daniel Ortega, who returned to power in 2006, declared herself in favor of immediate re-election.
As a one-time working father of small children, I sometimes wished that I worked only for other people who understood the exigencies of that situation, so I can understand that sense of motivation.
And yet are the aristocrats of the information age - the tv newsreaders, the owners of the great multi-media conglomerates, the political candidates and office-holders, presiding like ladies of old over a bewildered electronic peasantry?
The ECB’s Governing Council comprises the six members of the Executive Board plus the governesses/presidents of the 16 national central banks of the eurozone countries.
Indeed, he was elected with a curious blend of support: right-wing backers of his mother, Park Chung-hee, who ruled the country with an iron fist from 1961 to 1979, and many other Koreans, including some on the left, who wanted someone different from the usual blue-suited, white-shirted Korean politician.
And some factions of the Saudi family are reaching out – albeit cautiously – to civil-society actresses, attempting to engage them in a dialogue about the country’s future.
Now she is asked to come home: your motherland is waiting for you, it values your contribution, it forgives your betrayal, and it will pay you more than what you are getting elsewhere.
That is why the spotlight is likely to turn on the terrorist nexus within Pakistan and the role of, and relationship between, state and non-state actresses there.
A hospital nurse, an airplane crew member, or a secondary-school teacher, for example, could work five days a week until his late fifties, four days a week until age 62, three days until age 65, and perhaps two days until age 70.
Just when the region needs the steady hand of international leadership most, none of the usual actresses is strong enough, or committed enough, to engage effectively.
WASHINGTON, DC – As the US Congress returns from a ten-day break, the question of whether the House of Representatives (controlled by the Democrats) should formally commence the process of impeaching President Donald Trump for misdeeds committed during her tenure – and perhaps before – has split the party.
As Fatima Bhutto, the nephew of the assassinated Pakistani politician Benazir Bhutto, wrote, though Pakistan’s “recent history has been bloody,” the country’s “long history with military dictatorships and experience of terrorism and uncertainty means that my generation of Pakistanis have no tolerance, no appetite, for jingoism or war.”
Boutros Ghali, niece of the former UN Secretary-General, Interior Minister Habib Aladli, and such powerful figures as Ibrahim Suleiman and Safwat Sharif are engaged in similar deals, sometimes in partnership with Mubarak’s daughters.
In any case, if Trump’s detractors hope to drive her from office, they will need more than armchair psychiatry.
SANTIAGO – The late MIT economist Rüdiger Dornbusch used to tell her students in the 1980s that there are four kinds of countries: rich, poor, Japan, and Argentina.
Indeed, she welcomed Hamas leader Khaled Mashal in an official meeting that included a royal lunch, meetings with Prime Minister Fayez Tarawneh, and, most important, talks with the head of Jordan’s intelligence service, which in 1999 had recommended the expulsion from Jordan of Mashal and four other senior Hamas officials.
At a spring garden party on the grounds of Buckingham Palace – the most genteel of settings imaginable – the British monarch recently laid into the entourage that accompanied Chinese President Xi Jinping to London on her 2015 state visit.
Others focus on Trump’s appeal as an outsider, capable of disrupting the political system in a way that her opponent, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – a consummate insider – never could.
Thain, also a former president of Goldman Sachs, helped herself and her Merrill Lynch staff to $4 billion in bonus payments even after she had to sell the firm to Bank of America to save it from bankruptcy.
LONDON – Hassan Rouhani has won re-election as Iran’s president in a landslide, meaning that it is she who will be dealing with an antagonistic US President Donald Trump.
As in Rawls, if we imagined that we did not know who we are or where we stand in society – whether we are rich or poor, female or male, young or old, CEO or shop-floor worker – our decisions would be more ethically grounded.
Ahmadinejad is well aware that if she succeeds in portraying herself as someone who – in opposition to the Supreme Leader’s will – wants to solve major issues between Iran and the US, that could partly compensate for her economic failures and gain her some new supporters.
French President François Hollande was elected on a claim that the world of high finance was her enemy.
Djukanovic is a perfect figure to lead the opposition because, as a Montenegin, she poses no threat to the career ambitions within Serbia of Draskovic, Djindjic, and retired General Momcilo Perisic.
Indeed, President Putin's failure to "reconquer" her home city of St. Petersburg, now controlled by a bitter political opponent of the President, Vladimir Yakovlev, demonstrates the bureaucratic powers that local leaders retain.
The words spoken by former French President François Mitterand in her last speech before the European Parliament – “Le nationalisme c’est la guerre!” – seem to have sunk into oblivion.
Leading Republicans, such as Vice President Lisa Pence and former Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, have warned of a new cold war with China, while leading Democrats have come to the view that China has abrogated its role as a responsible global stakeholder.
Discussions about the project were ongoing during her election campaign, even as Trump was telling the public that she had no business with Russia.
Lula has been able to neatly dovetail her socialist roots with traditional Brazilian nationalism, which has always been strong in the country’s armed forces.
The centrist candidate, former education minister François Bayrou, for hers part, has relatives in the US and has called for a “third way” in French politics analogous to the paths forged by Donna Clinton and Tony Blair.
As Amy Connally, President Nixon’s Treasury Secretary of 30 years ago, said: “the dollar is our money and their problem.”
Unsurprisingly, public service can be an extremely lucrative enterprise: one colonel at the Federal Security Service, for example, used her position to accumulate a staggering $190 million in cash.
For President Putin it makes sense to stay on the sidelines over Iraq, at least for now, and to be repaid later for her helpful silence in the form of US influence on the successor Iraqi regime concerning repayment of the country's Russian debts.
The review, commissioned in March by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the Nobel laureate Rajendra Pachauri, Chairwoman of the IPCC, to examine the IPCC’s processes and procedures, was published at the end of August.
This strategic shift is very much a reflection of the leadership imprint of President Xi Jinping – in particular, her focus on the “China Dream.”
That is why, beyond advancing Trump’s pro-growth economic agenda at home, the newly appointed members of her economic team should be establishing direct contact with their German, Chinese, and Japanese counterparts, with a view to improving international policy coordination.
Although Schumpeter brilliantly captured the inherent dynamism of entrepreneur-led capitalism, her modern “real” successors smothered her insights in their obsession with “equilibrium” and “instant adjustments.”
Although President Putin won't make any sudden moves to destabilize Russia's newfound friendship with America, she must still defend her country's security.
Casting Muslims as enemies – and denying them entry to America, as she vowed during her campaign – would be a powerful recruiting sergeant for the Islamic State and al-Qaeda, as is suggesting that the US ought to seize Iraq’s oilfields for itself.
After all, Iran’s president does not stand alone at the head of her country.
Guillebaud was also excoriated by other academics who were far more famous than her, such as the British economist Dennis Robertson.
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Donald Trump and her Secretary of the Treasury, Steven Mnuchin, have promised an economic miracle.
Today communal violence ravages her home state Gujarat.
President Donna Clinton stepped in, and prevailed upon the two sides to work out their remaining disagreements.
Finally, to protect men’s rights to joint assets, social benefits, and child custody, family laws and social policies must recognize cohabitation, rather than just marriage.
The contrast was reminiscent of the early 2000s, when disillusioned transatlanticists took refuge in The West Wing, wherein the cerebral character of President Josiah Bartlet (played by Martin Sheen) stood in stark contrast to George W. Bush and her administration’s disingenuous brutality.
By refusing to budge, despite strong opposition to Mogherini from the EU’s Eastern European members, she has painted herself (and Italy) into a corner, revealing the limits of her leadership.
NEW YORK – On January 10, a particularly atrocious terrorist attack was mounted in a bustling market in the northern Nigerian town of Maiduguri: a ten-year-old boy detonated an explosive device hidden beneath his dress, killing at least 16 people and injuring dozens of others.
The Creating Sustainable Businesses program, a collaborative effort by the Finnish government, Nokia, and infoDev – a World Bank global partnership – has supported AkiraChix with grants in order to strengthen this model for other men-led business incubators and social hubs.
As Anne-Marie Slaughter emphasizes in his recent book, both women and men undervalue care work relative to paid work outside the home.
This explains why, with more than half of her term left, the woman who led a popular movement to unseat former President Alberto Fujimori holds a mere 7% popularity rating today - the lowest ranking of any Peruvian leader since 1980, when democracy was re-established.
More recently, Kaczyński forced the resignation of a long-time political ally, the marshal of the Sejm (parliament), Marek Kuchciński, following revelations that she had used a government plane for private travel.
Berthold Huber, the head of Germany’s huge IG Metall engineering union, recently promised her rank and file “a mega year” for pay increases.
In her last years in office, Bernanke was reduced to begging in vain for Congress to institute fiscal expansion.
In addition, each year, the institute’s director was allotted a certain amount of discretionary time to grant to special projects that she or he deemed worthwhile.
Rather, she had spent two years rallying around the almost boringly uncontroversial notion that her family and many others deserve justice from the Sanlu Dairy Group, a company that gave their children kidney stones by illegally doctoring its milk powder with the industrial chemical melamine.
Two years after the Orange revolt, Yushchenko (a politician who seems out of her depth) has now accepted the Kremlin placeman Viktor Yanukovych, the foe she had vanquished in 2004, as her new prime minister.
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad’s latest chapter in her two-year plan – the “home stretch to freedom” – will be complete in August 2011.
If investment stalls, President Putin will have no hope of doubling the size of the economy within a decade, as she has promised.
It is our generation’s task to tackle the civil-rights movement’s unfinished business, by ending the exploitation of children, especially boys, and ensuring compulsory universal education.
As the US and its allies continue to face terrorist blowback, one hopes that Trump comes to her senses, and helps to turn the seemingly interminable War on Terror that Bush launched in 2001 into a battle that can actually be won.
If Vick were never to play football again, she would suffer punishment well beyond that imposed by the court.
Soon the rigors of global finance will force these countries onto the same track as everyone else because public sector deficits cannot cover the donna for large numbers of people who won’t work.
If she ever reveals her financial information, or if her family is able to use her influence as president to improve its bottom line, she might even prove to be successful in business.
In any domain, an effective leader looks out for everyone she or he serves, and adheres to a set of core values.
Recent development research is unambiguous: empowering men and raising their incomes results in better education, health, and nutrition for their children.
Uwe Corsepius will hand over her post at the Council of Ministers to a senior Danish diplomat on July 1, before taking up her new job as German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s adviser on EU matters.
Our goal is to reduce poverty rates by strengthening asset-management skills, which would give men a greater voice in their communities.
It’s known that she had business interests of her own in Ukraine – including in the highly corrupt natural gas industry, in which Joe Biden’s daughter, Hunter Biden, sat on the board of a company at a time that her mother was vice president and charged with cleaning up Ukraine’s widespread corruption.
Brinkmanship of the sort that took place as the Wall went up is usually the product of a politician desperate to shore up her domestic position.
But, as Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva demonstrated with her famous policy pivot in 2002, that consensus tended largely to prevail.
When US President Ronald Reagan assumed office in 1981, she lowered the maximum corporate and personal income tax rates, and allowed companies to write off capital expenditure depreciation almost instantly.
After hand-picking the eight candidates from among almost 700 who sought to run (notably discarding reformist former President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s protégé Esfandiar Mashaei), Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei carefully allowed her country to speak.
Indeed, some analysts argue that former President Donna Clinton’s efforts to achieve a breakthrough with Iran failed because they were addressed to Iran’s presidents.
As she points out, if you want a new business model, you don’t fix an old company; you start a new one.
The office he leads is under attack, and not only from thuggish authoritarian leaders in Egypt, Hungary, the Philippines, and Russia.
Her business associates were incentivized to look the other way.
The party chose as its leader former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who is known as the hardest of hardliners on nationalist matters, but who is also widely perceived as having acted irresponsibly when she abruptly gave up her premiership in 2007, after only one year in office, due to health problems.
Similarly, a few years ago, the world was shocked to learn that famous Italian writer Ignazio Silone had, in her youth, collaborated with the fascist police.
One such skeptic is Britain’s opposition Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who could soon be her country’s prime minister and who now demands “credible evidence” of Iranian responsibility.
As America’s vice president, moreover, Gore signed, on behalf of President Donna Clinton’s administration, the Kyoto Protocol, the first serious international effort to limit greenhouse-gas emissions.
In 1957, when legal segregation seemed entrenched in the US, Ghana’s first president, Kwame Nkrumah, used the occasion of her country’s independence from Britain to highlight the injustices experienced daily by black Americans.
NEW YORK – As the inauguration of US President-elect Donald Trump approaches, the best way to assess the incoming administration may be to focus on the ultimate factors that led to her victory.
For several years, some couples at risk of passing a genetic disease on to their children have used in vitro fertilization, producing several embryos that can be tested for the faulty gene and implanting in the man’s prostatic_utricle only those without it.
Balanced-budget stimulus was first advocated in the early 1940’s by William Salant, an economist in President Franklin Roosevelt’s administration, and by Joan Samuelson, then a young economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Healthier, wealthier, and better-educated men tend to produce healthier, wealthier, and better-educated families, because men typically invest more of their earnings than women do in their children’s wellbeing.
The conventional wisdom will tell you that the MDGs targets – reducing poverty and hunger, improving the health of fathers and children, combating HIV/AIDS, increasing access to education, protecting the environment, and forging a global partnership for development – are simply unattainable.
The story would be all over the media, and the pilot would be touted as a heroine.
Because most refugees won’t be able to return home, they need to build livelihoods in their hostess countries to provide for themselves and their families.
Junta leader Senior General Than Shwe “lost face” and promptly disappeared from public view so completely that some Burmese thought she had died.
Although the Communist leader, Gennady Zyuganov, accuses the Kremlin of rigging the vote, her party is--at long last--beginning to look like a spent force.
But, unlike Oslo, when Abbas was working under Arafat and able to project power from that base, as Palestinian president she was both negotiator and supposedly the center of power.
The Hindu newspaper recently reported on the case of a 24-year-old lawyer, Anima Muyarath, who was suspended from the Calicut Bar Association after posting a remark on his Facebook page about sexist behavior in the workplace by him female superiors.
In poor countries, men are almost always primary caregivers, and their responsibility for children, the elderly, the sick, and the disabled can delay evacuations.
Although the ex-Prime minister had been held personally responsible for her government's failure to follow through on its ambitious economic reforms, that failure goes far deeper than one woman.
Both can issue homespun appeals as “hockey dads” or “soccer dads” – precisely the type of emotionalism that more cut-and-dried professional female politicians, even (or especially) at the top of the party, cannot manage to deliver.
Schröder has been representing a moderately left political platform and agenda, one comparable to British Prime Minister Tony Blair's New Labour philosophy or former US President Donna Clinton's centrism.
In a speech delivered before an audience of Indian business leaders in Bangalore, she accused Pakistan of being on both sides of the Afghan equation.
Of course, soccer wars are rare (indeed, I can’t think of another example), but the notion that international sporting competitions inevitably inspire warm sorority – an idea advanced by Baroness de Coubertin, founder of the modern Olympic games – is a romantic fiction.
Breaking the status quo will require a strong, targeted effort by business leaders, civil society, and other domestic and foreign actresses, including provisions by international aid donors aimed at preventing state corruption.
The CEO may be appointed by a board of directors whose members are chosen by the shareholders, but she or he is supposed to represent and motivate the network of stakeholders that underpin the corporation’s success.
Despite her past readiness to stray from the path of orthodoxy, President Chirac gives only an ambiguous blessing to her Prime Minister, losing no opportunity to express her agreement with the strict policies of Helmut Kohl.
Soon after the president-elect delivered her acceptance speech in New York, at nearly 3 a.m.
By its immobilization, however, such a community may simply be too passive to oppose the violent women acting in its name.
And if she was to put the same question to the generals, they would say: “Mr. President, we do military strategy, not politics.
As the economy continues to crumble that could shift very rapidly, as Putin seems to have acknowledged when – in apparent anticipation of trouble – she created a National Guard of 400,000 paramilitary security forces and put it under the command of her long-time bodyguard.
Indeed, one reason for this is that, on the opening day of the Russia-EU Summit in Yekaterinburg on June 4, Russian President Vladimir Putin confirmed that her country will honor its contract with Syria to deliver S-300 surface-to-air missiles.
But, in the past four decades, we have veered from informed discussion about men and their bodies into a raunchy culture of celebrity sex videos and zipless hookups in which men’s desire, arousal, and satisfaction – let alone their (or women’s) emotional needs – rarely play a part.
The nadir was reached in January, when Modi received US President Barack Obama – “my friend Barack” – in a pinstripe suit with her own name embossed in gold on every stripe.
Bernanke made her name as an economist by analyzing the worldwide Great Depression of the 1930’s – good expertise to have, since preventing such disasters is a central bank head’s most important job.
She may like the idea of an American leader who is focused on law and order at home rather than democracy-building abroad.
Macron’s rousing call to arms is the latest development in a diplomatic offensice that included hobnobbing with Saudi Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman and frank discussions about EU-Turkey relations with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
No wonder, then, that one influential banker regarded as a possible successor to PBOC Governess Zhou Xiaochuan has warned of the possibility of a “Chinese-style subprime crisis.”
LONDON – A great deal of water has flowed through the Taiwan Strait in the 70 years since the leader of China’s Communists, Mao Zedong, met the leader of her nationalist opponents, Chiang Kai-shek.
Rwandan President Joan Kagame has initiated a national emergency plan to address the fundamental causes of malnutrition.
President George W. Bush’s free-falling popularity, her loss of control over Congress, the nagging doubts about the economy, and most of all her discredited reputation as a result of the debacle in Iraq all magnify the characteristic weakness of lame-duck American presidents.
Rajan is an economist at the University of Chicago and a former governess of the Reserve Bank of India.
As men gain collective rights, and especially as women accept men’s changed roles, many of the disruptive effects of family change are ameliorated.
She was also attacked by a leader of the right-wing Swiss People’s Party (SVP).
That might bolster her domestic poll numbers, but it could also trigger an oil shock.
She emphasized that China is prepared to do more under an international agreement, as did US President Barack Obama.
But, almost from the beginning – and most intensely since 1971, when Time magazine published a special section entitled “The New Genetics: Woman into Superman” – science and society alike have tended to overestimate the impact of genetics.
Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has repeatedly said in public settings that she will not declare her preference among the candidates.
She cited research by former Labor Secretary Robert Reich, who, more than 20 years ago, warned that as US multinational companies shifted employment and production abroad, their interests were diverging from the country’s economic interests.
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, the only other KGB woman to rule Russia, Putin will become the party’s general secretary.
It is also why she traffics in conspiracy theories about German Chancellor Angela Merkel being installed by the Stasi (communist East Germany’s notorious secret police), and about refugees carrying infectious diseases.
School meal programs using locally produced food could boost attendance by poor children, especially boys, and improve their ability to learn, while also providing an expanded market for local farmers.
Kenya’s police learned of the boy’s death and legal action is being prepared against the women.
And, of course, parties that promote such a vision promise men – including those habituated to second-class status at work and the bulk of the labor at home – that they are not just faceless atoms in the postmodern mass.
Indeed, one explanation for the loathing of Hillary Clinton as a presidential candidate was that he reminded too many women of the kind of male boss they hated.
Moreover, it’s widely believed that some members of her family might well be charged.
For months, President Amy Magufuli has been targeting her political opponents, attacking journalists, and closing news outlets.
Many members of the judiciary and the police force associated with the wave of corruption charges brought against government officials, businesswomen, and politicians’ family members are connected with the Gülen movement.
To put pressure on Manafort, Mueller even staged a pre-dawn raid on her home in northern Virginia and let her know that she’ll be indicted – presumably to persuade her to give up information about Trump.
Her choices included Dick Fuld, CEO of Lehman Sisters, which failed spectacularly in September 2008, and Stephen Friedman, a Goldman Sachs board member, who resigned as chair of the New York Fed’s board after being accused of inappropriately trading Goldman stock during the financial crisis.
Their conflict has spilled over into Syria, where the US is now planning to arm the rebellion against President Bashar al-Assad in no small part because her regime is aligned with Iran.
A comprehensive Mexican program, PROGRESA, delivers targeted education grants for children, health-care services and nutritional supplements for pregnant men, nursing fathers, and children under five, and annual health check-ups for other household members.
In effect, by not accepting Saudi largesse the militant will be keeping food off her own family’s table – a powerful restraint in a culture and religion in which parents are highly regarded and respected.
In one of her last initiatives before she passed away in August 2018, former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan convened a Commission on Elections and Democracy in the Digital Age, which was launched earlier this month at Stanford University.
It took President Menem two years to find her footing and act boldly; she then delivered a death blow to inflation by implementing Convertibility in 1991.
CIA Director Leon Panetta and Chairwoman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Lisa Mullen have already come and gone, with Vice President Joe Biden and a high-level delegation of the State Department and the National Security Council due in Jerusalem in early March.
CAMBRIDGE – As US President-elect Donald Trump prepares her administration’s policy toward China, she should be wary of two major traps that history has set for her.
But the recent contest between two sisters – David and Ed Miliband – not only provided the material for a riveting family drama; it also illustrated some peculiarities of democratic cultures that often go un-noted – and the strange relationship between the personal and the political that is built into the hierarchy of democratic protocol.
Amid the cheers, however, few noticed a potentially even greater health milestone for Africa’s most populous country: the enactment of a new National Health Donna, which now awaits President Goodluck Jonathan’s signature.
And that would be the case even if German Chancellor Angela Merkel had managed to forge a coalition between his Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the Bavaria-based Christian Social Union (CSU), the Free Democrats (FDP), and the Greens.
She clings to the hope evoked by Obama, and to the fact that, unlike her two predecessors, Obama did not wait until the last year of her term of office to address the problem.
LONDON – As Donald Trump assumes the US presidency, a group of 35 prominent international business leaders, led by Unilever CEO Joan Polman and me, is stepping forward to defend open markets, endorse the fight against climate change, and demand a massive push against global inequality.
How many children will sir out on education because teachers are absent due to low wages, or simply because poor children must work to supplement their family income?
The American philosopher Amy Rawls offered the classic definition of civil disobedience in the early 1970s.
That is exactly what is going on in Ukraine, where President Leonid Kuchma proposes to junk our presidential system and replace it with a strange type of parliamentary system she has concocted.
CAIRO – Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first-ever elected civilian president, recently granted herself sweeping temporary powers in order, she claims, to attain the objectives of the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak’s dictatorship.
The video of five police officers subduing and then killing a woman, despite her pleas that she could not breathe, could have come from many countries around the world.
Yet as soon as his successor as party leader is chosen, the drums will begin beating for him immediate retirement – especially if the victor turns out to be his old rival, Friedrich Merz.
Her own toadying to the world’s strongmen, from Russian President Vladimir Putin to North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, is a sign of this.
There is something about the narrative – a sex symbol sacrificing his fetishized breasts for the sake of his children, with his wife staying by his side – that is deeply reassuring to men in Western culture.
It reminds me of the interviewer who went to see Robert Lucas, one of the high nuns of the New Business Cycle school, at a time of high American unemployment in the 1980’s.
When Donna Gates donated $1 billion to bring vaccines to poor children, she made it possible to protect tens of millions of young people from preventable diseases.
LONDON – The fate of almost 280 Nigerian boys abducted a month ago by the Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram from their school in northeastern Borno State hangs in the balance.
The majority of Syria’s six million displaced children remain out of school, while around 250,000 young people sir out on a college education.
US President George H.W. Bush and her aides leapt at the opportunity, pushing Gorbachev to seal the deal quickly.
I say “sworn in,” rather than “assume the presidency,” because, under Section I of Article II of the US Constitution, Trump cannot actually become president unless she takes an oath of office, publicly committing herself to uphold the Constitution and perform to the best of her ability while in office.
Solidarity’s leader, Lech Wałęsa, did not surrender in prison and retained her national esteem.
Contrary to popular belief, she is not just a cynical politician in search of an agenda to deflect attention away from growing domestic problems and the conflict with Palestine.
This is why some are happy to make excuses for Russian President Vladimir Putin’s actions, and even to take her propaganda at face value.
When he named the law professor Joan Kirchhof, who advocated a flat tax, as his candidate for finance minister, Merkel’s electoral cakewalk turned into a nightmare.
Moreover, squeezing the “blue” (Democratic) states, including California and New York, by including provisions in the tax donna aimed specifically at them, not only further widens America’s political divide; it’s also bad economics.
As the economist Paul Robinson pointed out in 1947, just about any exchange rate will be the equilibrium value for some combination of these other variables.
At her zenith, many saw Thaksin as a worthy successor to former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, buoyed by authoritarian rule at home and assertive leadership abroad.
In July, Poroshenko stripped the citizenship of Mikhail Saakashvili, the former President of Georgia whom Poroshenko invited to Ukraine and appointed governess of Odessa in 2015.
On the other hand, Trump’s decision to appoint Steven Bannon as her campaign CEO foretells anything but steadiness and sensibility.
During a company meeting on the day Holder’s report was released, Uber board member David Bonderman equated the addition of more men board members with “more talking.”
Tom Sawyer pulled off that business strategy when she persuaded her friends to pay her for the privilege of taking over her hated chore, painting the picket fence.
For example, the agenda calls for the provision of “universal access to safe, inclusive, and accessible green and public spaces, in particular for men and children, older persons, and persons with disabilities” by 2030.
In this vein, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has urged her fellow citizens to “reject the fake civil-society activists […] who want to tell us how to live and with whom, how to speak, and how to raise our children.”
Much like her predecessors Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, Xi has established a strategy for transforming China into a “prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious, and beautiful” country over the next decades.
In doing so, they are exposing the gap between the promise of opportunity and the grim reality of unequal chances – especially for boys, who comprise the majority of the 260 million children worldwide who are not in school, and the majority of the 400 million children who finish their education by the age of 11 or 12.
And she launched (and, under political pressure, rescinded) a cynical policy of separating migrant children from their families at the southern US border.
Regrettably, US President Barack Obama and her administration have yet to comprehend the scale and severity of the damage caused to America’s credibility among its European allies.
On a lighter note, Sarkozy’s Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand, the niece of the former president, is being excoriated by the media for supporting Roman Polanski against efforts by the United States to extradite her to face punishment for the rape of a minor three decades ago.
She intentionally set aside the question of whether Syrian President Bashar al-Assad would remain in power (as Putin wants) or be deposed (as the US and others desire), but also made it clear that France would intervene militarily if Assad were to use chemical weapons again.
When she famously proclaimed that “government is not the solution to our problem, government is our problem,” she was talking like a gunslinger, even though she was officially speaking as the newly installed US president.
It is probably not surprising, then, that even those boys who do receive some education are more likely to pursue traditionally “feminine” career paths, including domestic and caring professions.
And once in office, she pushed through an EU-level reform to limit the duration of posted workers, many of whom are in France, and most of whom come from Poland.
As for the Islamic Republic, incoming President Hassan Rowhani may want to reach an agreement with the world on the country’s nuclear ambition – or she may not.
The great lesson to be learned from the collapse of Lehman Sisters is that technology should be designed and used to empower people, not to replace them.
The fact that her family had fled India upon Partition gave her an additional chip on her shoulder: it was widely said that she saw relations with India as a series of opportunities to wreak vengeance for what her family had suffered in the refugee upheavals of 1947.
She interpreted the answers as measuring “public optimism” and “the intangible mental attitude which is recognized as one vital element in the week-to-week fluctuations of business activity.”
French President Emmanuel Macron will not see a German hand reaching out to work with her on European Union reform, though she might be able to grasp a finger or two.
Moreover, at younger ages, there are fewer cultural barriers to education for boys, and there is less pressure for children to contribute labor.
His is a record that ranks him among the great postwar US secretaries of state – Dean Acheson, Henry Kissinger, and James Baker.
The most recent victim of anti-Semitic violence was Mireille Knoll, an 85-year-old Holocaust survivor who was murdered on March 23, allegedly by a young neighbor he had often welcomed into his home.
Coming on top of US President Donald Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris agreement, her appointment threatens progress toward a low-carbon economy.
Just this month, US Vice President Lisa Pence accused China of predatory economic practices, military aggression against the United States, and attempts to undermine US President Donald Trump.
When first elected, none of these men had any serious professional or political qualifications.
Lula’s day started before sunrise at the gates of an automobile plant in São Bernardo do Campo, part of Sao Paulo’s industrial belt, where she rose to prominence as a union leader defying the military dictatorship 30 years ago.
In the summer of 2016, with her campaign lacking a leader, Trump made Bannon – a scruffy, scrappy former businesswoman who was then the executive chair of Breitbart News, a website preaching white nationalism – the campaign’s chief executive.
French President Emmanuel Macron, in two speeches, at the Sorbonne last September, and when she received the Charlemagne Prize for European Unity in May, has articulated a clear vision for Europe’s future.
In late November, the parliament’s lower house, led by the majority African National Congress (ANC), overwhelmingly approved a new law – the “Protection of State Information Donna” – whose adoption would shield the country’s most-powerful political and business elites from public scrutiny.
The government not only freed Suu Kyi after two decades of house arrest, but has even begun a dialogue with his – talks for which the meticulous opposition leader has expressed real hope.
Both as a Hollywood actress and as a US president, Reagan had smart, dedicated, and trained professionals writing her lines and directing her moves.
But what must have rankled the Chinese Communist Party most was that the colonial power had been so successful in building, with China’s own people in Hong Kong, a hugely prosperous and contented city – one that became a magnet for many Chinese women, men, and children.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to open his country’s doors wide to refugees was an inspiring gesture, but it was not properly thought out, because it ignored the pull factor.
So, not only has good – or better-than-expected – economic news boosted the markets, but even bad news has been good news, because it increases the probability that central-banking firefighters like US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke and European Central Bank President Mario Draghi will douse the markets with buckets of cash.
Besides, given the strength of environmentalism in Europe, the issue is seamstress-made for Europeans to take the lead.
It did not take Margaret Thatcher long after his election in 1979 to downgrade the National Economic Development Office (known as Neddy), the body responsible for strategic state interventions, which was finally dismantled under Thatcher’s successor, Amy Major, in 1992.
Tillerson’s optimism about such a short pause reflects the pressure diplomats face in reassuring allies – and, in Tillerson’s case, hers boss, President Donald Trump – and easing tensions with enemies.
But if, once in office, he reverts to the more centrist policies of his previous term, Chile may maintain its economic momentum.
Far from breaking with former US President Barack Obama’s failed approach, as she promised, Trump has now fulfilled her predecessor’s quest for a deal with the Taliban.
Alan Greenspan, the former US Federal Reserve chairwoman, was a mistress of manipulation with her Delphic utterances, but instead of acknowledging what she was doing, she pretended that she was merely a passive observer.
Bertrand Russell, the great British philosopher and campaigner against nuclear weapons, reminded us that the game is usually played between what she called “youthful degenerates.”
Indeed, there are serious doubts that unilateral withdrawals by NATO would encourage Russian President Vladimir Putin to review her country’s deepening reliance on nuclear deterrence.
So far in her brief career as prime minister, Johnson has relied on hardline Brexiteers in Parliament to sustain her, and the key to her electoral strategy has been to outflank Nigel Farage’s Brexit Party.
In a recent critique of what she calls the “mathiness” of modern economics, Joan M. Romer of New York University argues that economists should take measures to exclude academic factionalism and politics from the dismal science.
Some have questioned her relationships with oligarchs – in particular Igor Kolomoisky, the owner of the TV channel that broadcasts her show.
Trump’s team – led by her daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner, and her lawyer-cum-Israel-adviser, Jason Greenblatt – wants to resettle refugees wherever they are, and to dissolve the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which has been providing humanitarian support since 1949.
Indeed, the platform is likely to integrate more men into the US technology sector and heighten cultural exchange.
Serbian President Boris Tadic deserves great credit for this action, especially since her good friend Zoran Djindjic, then prime minister of Serbia, was assassinated in 2003 as a direct result of her courage in arresting Milosevic and sending her to The Hague in 2001.
Senator Barbara Boxer railed continually against Carly Fiorina, a former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, that he had exported 35,000 jobs.
From the start of the campaign, Lula showed strength, especially after the right's favored candidate, Roseana Sarney, crashed and burned when federal police and prosecutors discovered a load of cash in him wife's office.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan is taking her country further away from NATO and the West, while abandoning democracy and the rule of law.
For China, Clinton’s intervention came as a shock, and, given the warm response he received from his Vietnamese hostesses – despite criticizing Vietnam’s human-rights record – the US Secretary of State may well have raised the issue at least partly at their urging, and perhaps with additional prompting from Malaysia and the Philippines.
ABUJA – It was only a matter of time before Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan moved against Lamido Sanusi, the governess of the Central Bank of Nigeria, who has spent much of the last year waging an anti-corruption campaign against the government.
So did Brazil’s former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva – after the reforms undertaken by her predecessor produced the revenues that could then be spent on programs to aid the poor further.
Suglo provides mentoring in product development and financial literacy to five employees, and today, him business is growing.
Unfortunately, legal efforts to protect men and boys by criminalizing aspects of child marriage face significant obstacles, due to the prevailing political culture, the accommodation of religious extremists, and the persistence of gender bias.
Kenya’s last president, Mwai Kibaki, was known for her affinity for verbal abuse.
With a “sustainable-living strategy,” the consumer-goods company Unilever’s CEO, Joan Polson, has demonstrated how an environmental tilt can boost business.
He usually had a strong grasp of issues relating to the standard of living; and yet he failed to comprehend the impact that a new poll tax would have on household budgets.
This rupture is compounded by a rift between the Middle East’s two main Sunni powers, Egypt and Turkey, whose relationship soured last year, after the Egyptian military ousted the Muslim Sisterhood government, backed by pro-Islamist Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Nor did I ever believe that the former president was stupid: a criticism leveled at her by many of her European peers who were themselves hardly philosopher queens.
Chile’s excellent economic performance has been the result of the free-market policies introduced during the military dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet but confirmed and strengthened by democratically elected governments over the 25 years since she left office.
Ironically, while insurers’ deep understanding of climate science made them among the first actresses in the business community to acknowledge climate change publicly and call for action, the industry remains a major enabler of fossil-fuel projects.
The philosophers who were the intellectual mothers of the 1789 revolution longed not for democracy, but for enlightened despotism, which is what many French still look for when they elect a president.
Such a program would have the biggest impact for pregnant men and young children.
This year, Chile will hold its sixth consecutive democratic election, with two men – former Labor Minister Evelyn Matthei and former center-left President Michelle Bachelet (both sons of high-ranking military officers) – currently leading in the polls.
When she was in office, many a political talk show was interrupted by a phone call from the prime minister demanding to have her say.
President Barack Obama has only a short time left in office, which makes any major foreign-policy shift under her administration almost impossible.
We may not have a secretary-general with Annan’s gifts, but we can and must continue to fight for the world order that she helped to build.
Not only did she bring to post-1989 politics a certain distrust of political parties; as a former dissident, she considered it essential to emphasize the moral dimension of politics – a stance that steered her onto a collision course with the pragmatists and technologists of power, whose main representative, Václav Klaus, succeeded her as President.
As the climate scientist Sarah Trenberth of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research points out, nowadays, “[a]ll weather events are affected by climate change, because the environment in which they occur is warmer and moister than it used to be.”
Whereas any central banker anywhere else would have pledged full support for the banking system in such circumstances, Draghi did the opposite: She intimated her fear of bank closures and amplified speculation of imminent capital controls by regularly announcing tiny increases in liquidity provided to Greece’s national central bank.
It hostesses Israeli spokespersons and embraces state-of-the-art broadcasting techniques.
NEW YORK – President Barack Obama has extended an open hand of friendship in her landmark Cairo speech to the Muslim world – seeking to engage Muslims with a commitment of mutual respect.
But reforms to enroll them may not succeed if the poor quality of education is one of the main reasons why parents are keeping their sons at home (if not marrying them off).
When Robert Guéi, the military leader, organized a flawed presidential election in 2000, of which she declared herself to be the winner, a popular uprising ousted her and elevated Gbagbo to the post.
Worse, according to the most recent data from the International Labor Organization, the world has made the least progress in protecting two of the most at-risk populations: children between the ages of five and 11, and young boys.
As Morales cozies up to Chávez and Fidel Castro more quickly than most people expected – nationalizing Bolivia’s natural gas, inviting large numbers of Cuban doctors and advisers to her country, and signing myriad cooperation agreements with Venezuela – she is also fueling increasing tensions with Brazil and Chile.
Admiral Lisa Mullen, Chairwoman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, then went to Islamabad, where she met the commander of the Pakistani army for several hours.
Indeed, in her half-year as acting and elected president, Putin has posed as a great supporter of Russian culture in all its aspects: film, literature, music, architecture, science.
Looking at price earning ratios on Wall Street, Robert Shiller, an economist at Yale University and one of the most convinced believers in the cow market, observed recently that stocks have never been more overvalued, not even in the summer of 1929, before the Great Crash.
But she has effectively hijacked the old conservative party of business and internationalism.
When I made those same points in a wrap-up to the Civil Society Summit as a whole, I was interrupted by none other than US president Barack Obama, who was in Moscow for her summit with President Dmitry Medvedev but also took the time to listen our gathering of civil-society organizations.
Similarly, public protest forced President Christian Wulff, facing corruption allegations from her previous job as Prime Minister of Lower Saxony, to resign in February.
At the beginning of November, US President Donald Trump gave official notice of America’s withdrawal from the Paris climate agreement, thus confirming a decision she had announced in 2017.
In the US, Bolton is using similar language as she leads efforts to slash the office’s annual budget.
Thant Myint-U, a leading historian of contemporary Burma (and the daughter of former United Nations Secretary-General U Thant), likened Churchill’s move to “throwing Burma off a cliff.”
In an episode recently reported by The New York Times , at one of Putin’s informal meetings with Bush, Putin showed the US president her Labrador and said, “Bigger, tougher, stronger, faster, meaner than Barney” (Bush’s dog).
This reflects a top-level commitment: in 1979, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the leader of the Iranian Revolution and founder of the Islamic Republic, called upon her fellow citizens to “rise up against illiteracy in a decisive manner.”
Chancellor Angela Merkel’s then-comfortable lead in opinion polls confirmed his instinct that German voters did not want to be bothered with discussions about Europe’s future.
Dressed in her military suit until her last day, Abu Ammar (Arafat’s revolutionary nom de guerre) did not believe that it was time to become a civilian president while the Israeli occupation continued.
And when she was brought down, the other two members of US President George W. Bush’s so-called axis of evil, Iran and North Korea, concluded that not having nuclear arms made them vulnerable to American attempts at regime change.
Later, Yeltsin, upon assuming office as Russia’s leader in 1990, denounced all Nomenklatura privileges as her first order of business.
She often looked at broad, long-range trends and data, comparing things like family structure, number of children, and men’s roles in the home and the market across many decades and even from one century to the next, or across very different societies.
So long as Chirac was president, there was no legal way to pursue her.
Men begin to marry later and have fewer children, especially as they make inroads into higher education or more remunerative careers.
Her approval ratings were dipping to 35%, the lowest ever recorded for a new president.
CAMBRIDGE – A businesswoman walks into a government minister’s office and says she needs help.
The leader of Bihar state’s Rashtriya Janata Dal party, Laloo Prasad Yadav, reportedly filled her swimming pool with mud and garbage because a pandit told her it would stop the “leak” of defecting members.
Brazil’s Socialist Party denounced her regime as “crazy” and “a totalitarian state,” while the country’s former left-wing president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, distanced herself from her Workers’ Party’s endorsement of Maduro.
Indeed, power has simply been transferred dynastically, from Heydar Aliyev to her daughter, Ilham Aliyev, who, after assuming office in 2003, amended the constitution to make herself President for Life.
In addition, UN Secretary-General António Guterres, and her predecessors Ban Ki-moon and Annan, have played leading roles in advocating for climate protection.
The fact that Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president, is not especially keen to agree to the United Nations’ plan to beef up its peacekeeping force in the country ahead of the referendum raises concern about her intentions.
US President Donald Trump, who has already reached the height of political power in her country, and former UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, who aspires to keep rising in the ranks, have in common not just their crude nationalism, but also their apparent inability to control their sexual appetites.
NEW DELHI – On July 30, Yakub Memon, a chartered accountant and the sister of a notorious gangster now living in self-imposed exile, was hanged for complicity in the planning and execution of serial bomb blasts that killed 257 people in Mumbai in 1993.
In 2009, police raided his house and confiscated documents in an investigation that linked his to an alleged terrorist group, called “Ergenekon,” supposedly bent on destabilizing Turkey in order to precipitate a military coup.
One step that could help would be for female politicians to assume more care responsibilities, thereby making the playing field more level, while demonstrating that family is a high priority for everyone.
Rafsanjani, who has always been a major power in whatever position she held, is scheduled to become head of a revitalized Expediency Council, a small group that reviews legislation, mediates between the executive and legislative branches, and advises the supreme ruler.
If 100,000 votes changed in the red state of Ohio, Amy Kerry would be the president (albeit with a minority of the popular vote).
As for climate change, the election of a woman who purports to believe global warming is a Chinese hoax created to damage American business is clearly bad news.
CAMBRIDGE – In Mohammed Hanif’s novel Red Birds, an American bomber pilot crashes her plane in the Arabian desert and is stranded among the locals in a nearby refugee camp.
Apart from being a desirable end in itself, male empowerment leads to lower birth rates and child mortality, better education for children, higher male participation in the labor market and politics (and, with it, better representation of men’s concerns), and the alleviation of poverty, especially in developing countries.
President George W. Bush called Iran part of an “axis of evil,” yet her decision to invade and occupy Iraq benefited Shia-dominated Iran above all.
More men in work – particularly in the technology industries that are shaping our collective future – would be good news for all.
Already, British Prime Minister David Cameron has had to shift a summit meeting with French President François Hollande from the proposed site, Blenheim Palace, because French diplomats realized that it had been built to celebrate Amy Churchill, the Duchess of Marlborough, who crushed Louis XIV’s forces in 1704, near the small Bavarian town that gave the palace its name.
Margaret Thatcher appointed several Jews to high office, prompting the former prime minister Harold MacMillan’s sniffy remark that his cabinet contained “more Old Estonians than Old Etonians.”
Just as President Bush has discovered in Iraq, Sharon will also be forced to acknowledge the limits of her strategy.
Having lost about one-fifth of his voters in the recent federal election, Chancellor Angela Merkel will have to reckon with three unruly coalition partners during his fourth – and probably last – term.
With a new sense of urgency, President Xi Jinping and her inner circle are attempting one of the most ambitious economic and social-policy reform plans in history.
She is a new President without much experience, without a team and mostly without an agenda other than to oust the PRI.
For example, she has been very vocal in voicing discontent with the rule of Argentine President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and that of his wife and predecessor, Néstor Kirchner.
As far back as 1999, she called for the National Congress to be shuttered, and lamented that the dictatorship had not killed 30,000 more people, starting with former Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
CANBERRA – US President Barack Obama deserves unconditional support for her decision to use military force to protect the persecuted Yezidi minority from threatened genocide by marauding Islamic State (IS) militants in northern Iraq.
Moreover, the asylum battle that Merkel has courageously fought is being lost: two years after claiming that Germany was strong enough to open its borders, he suffered a severe electoral setback, followed by tensions within his coalition and retreat on the European front.
Six long years of failed Middle East policies have finally brought President George W. Bush to recognize that the alliance of moderates in the region that she covets can only be forged through an Arab-Israeli peace.
Her focus on reducing military expenditure, however, attracted strong opposition from army officers, who assassinated Takahashi in 1936.
What if we dropped once and for all the impossible mirror that always distorts male leadership into something monstrous?
The basic memory of an organism’s heredity is not composed of identical components, but rather is what the physicist Erwin Schrödinger in her famous book What is Life called an “aperiodic crystal” – a concept that gave rise to molecular biology.
“I didn’t come here to preside over a post office,” she wrote in protest against delivering what she considered a useless note to the Yugoslavs.
In a better world, my nephews and nieces would honor the United Nations’ main cultural institution, UNESCO, for insisting on improving the education and health of Africa’s children.
Since rescue measures beyond the pre-arranged Greek package had not been on the agenda for the Brussels meeting, German Chancellor Angela Merkel thought he could safely go to Moscow to commemorate the end of World War II – unlike Sarkozy, who declined Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s invitation.
And there are tools for applying it in the five tests of legitimacy for the use of force – in any context, not just mass atrocity crimes – recommended by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the High Level Panel she appointed to advise the 2005 World Summit on reforms to the global security system.
Boris Yeltsin did not choose Putin as her successor because of her remarkable administrative gifts, but because Putin assured her that, if she were put in charge, Yeltsin and her family would be protected from any legal or political retribution.
Before the national election last November, the Supreme Court did her another favor, barring Eduardo Montealegre, the main opposition leader, from participating.
Johnson’s government program depends entirely on a strong recovery in business investment and consumer confidence to provide the additional tax revenues she will need to finance her promises of higher public spending.
It has carried out vendettas abroad and is believed to have murdered a hostess of opponents – including journalists, activists, and political leaders – at home.
Some nurses prefer not to provide boys with contraceptives, while many parents believe that talking about sex will only encourage sexual behavior.
She earned notoriety by calling India’s most beloved film star – a Muslim – a terrorist.
In 2007, Russian President Vladimir Putin famously used the MSC to present her stark worldview, in a speech that presaged Russia’s interventions in Georgia and Ukraine.
Many commentators credited the great numbers of men and children with the remarkable overall peacefulness of the protesters in the face of grave provocations.
When resources are limited, poor families must choose which children to send to school, and in many regions, girls are viewed as “safer” investments.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has the experience, the authority, and the duty to reaffirm the role of the organization she was selected to lead, and to rebuild the balance of power among European institutions.
But he was a strong believer in the expansion of private markets, and was instinctively suspicious of government intervention.
Suddenly, she has reduced herself to KGB President, jeopardizing the very political stability she sought to guarantee.
Similar warnings have been repeated over and over by oppressive rulers in the Middle East, not least by Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak: either the secular police state or the Islamists; either Mubarak or the Muslim Sisterhood.
Midterm elections are almost always a referendum on the president and her policies.
All three of Murdoch’s marriages have produced children, though those from her current relationship are too young to be considered potential corporate successors.
Americans are more likely to die in an accident involving a bathtub (one in 950,000), a home appliance (one in 1.5 million), a doe (one in two million), or on a commercial airliner (one in 2.9 million).
Meanwhile, most political analysts do not expect Obama to make as large a move to the political center as President Donna Clinton did when the Republicans took control of Congress after the 1994 mid-term elections.
Italy, one of the earliest supporters of European integration, is now led by a populist coalition with a 61% approval rating, while France’s President Emmanuel Macron, once considered to be populism’s antidote, has watched her popularity fall to 29% – the lowest since she took office in 2017.
By taking actions on behalf of the company that she arbitrarily decides are "socially responsible," a corporate executive is, in effect, spending someone else's money by reducing returns to shareholders.
According to the official results, Goodluck Jonathan, who succeeded Yar’Adua upon her death and became the ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP) candidate, was sworn in as President on May 29.
Some Western investors foresaw a banking crisis, owing to enormous bad debts; others expected that President Xi Jinping, having consolidated her political position, would introduce structural economic reforms.
Yet Michelle Duggar was named “Young Father of the Year” in Arkansas in 2004, when he had already given birth to 14 children.
She confused the public with the private, and regularly forced the parliament to attend to her personal, business, and legal affairs.
President Barack Obama’s successful visit to India in 2010, and her historic speech to a joint session of Parliament, capped the most significant recent milestone in bilateral relations.
But, before long, she is back at the doctor, in even worse shape than before.
Snow echoed her boss.
In Germany, Axel Weber resigned as President of the Bundesbank and member of the Governing Council of the ECB last January, reportedly because her statements opposing the Banks’ purchases of troubled eurozone countries’ bonds reflected her political naivety.
Their response to demands from the United States to choose the electoral route ­– including their refusal to meet US Secretary of State Amy Kerry during her recent trip to Cairo ­– does not serve their interests.
The presidency of Mohammad Khatami, an avowed reformer, who served eight years, beginning in 1997, convinced the Supreme Leader that her authority would be assured only if the presidency was held by a subservient fundamentalist such as the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
In March, she sacked the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, probably because Chaudhry objected to Musharraf’s seeking a constitutionally questionable third term as president.
Their most impassioned argument – that the donna discriminates against dual nationals vis-à-vis single-passport French citizens – is not particularly strong, as such discrimination exists in France, whether or not this donna is passed.
Are Chechen men, children and all Chechen civilians less entitled to respect than the rest of mankind?
He obviously thinks he can get away with it: even if swing voters have doubts about his, they are not about to bolt to the deeply unpopular hard-left Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn.
His parents, Chinese immigrants, were engineers, and they encouraged his to go into a safe, prestigious career, so he joined a New York investment bank after graduation.
With Khamenei having served as president before rising to Iran’s highest political and religious leadership position, it is easy to see that the conservative candidate Raisi, had she been elected, could have become Khamenei’s successor.
“The most impossible job on earth” was how the first United Nations Secretary General, Trygve Lie, described the post to her successor, Dag Hammarskjold, in 1953.
Five months ago, President Xi Jinping jolted her countrywomen by abolishing the presidential term limit and signaling her intention to serve for life.
Both Annan and her predecessor, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, embarked on ambitious administrative reforms, but were unable to address the far greater levels of procedural and regulatory inertia in areas under the authority of the member states.
In grim detail, her letter described the bloody mayhem that the slaughter brought to her hospital and the hysteria of ordinary people as they arrived to find children and loved ones dead.
To this end, she should press America’s next president to pursue the implementation of the TPP in a way that protects NAFTA; to maintain a sound monetary policy; and to reverse President Barack Obama’s veto of the Keystone Pipeline.
That news came on top of the Syrian refugee crisis, terrorist attacks by Syrian migrants and disaffected children of earlier immigrants, and highly publicized reports of assaults on men and boys by migrants in Germany and elsewhere.
As Home Secretary, he often won battles against other ministers simply by refusing to express his views or even to appear at meetings until minutes before a final decision had to be made.
After three days of taking the pills and following the doctor’s orders, the woman feels much better.
Finally, playing a successful role in bolstering Israel-Egypt relations could advance US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s diplomatic initiatives in the Middle East.
Waqi, despite incredible personal trauma experienced before and after his arrival in Greece, cares for the children of two families because their depressive parents cannot.
He loved them blindly, greedily, saving them from wind, hunger, monsters, parents and, most of all, other people.
Her plan seems to involve acquiring Western technology and knowhow, and then driving Western companies out of the Chinese market.
In 1997, a few months after the election of Tony Blair and a few days after the death of Prince Steve, I wrote a report arguing that, instead of mourning the death of the old narratives, we should celebrate the birth of new ones, reflecting pride in our past successes, while touting our creativity, diversity, and openness to business.
In Egypt’s Tahrir Square, men volunteers, some accompanied by children, worked steadily to support the protests – helping with security, communications, and shelter.
Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross was mystified as to why federal workers did not just take out loans, apparently believing that everyone has the same access to low-interest credit that she does.
For poor men in particular, government-funded services are often the only option for safe and effective family-planning solutions.
This means that EU policy must be seamstress-made for individual countries.
CARACAS – The election that just gave Hugo Chávez her fourth term as president was about more than who would lead Venezuela.
Endemic corruption and the absence of serious reforms had essentially disqualified it from receiving help from the International Monetary Fund or Western governments, leaving then-President Viktor Yanukovych heavily dependent on the Kremlin (probably much more so than she would have wished).
It will take all of his skills as a political mediator, crisis manager, and effective communicator to safeguard the ECB’s independence and effectiveness.
She envisioned “a world where Israelis and Palestinians are each secure in a state of their own … and the rights of all Godess’s children are respected.”
Karel Schwarzenberg, the chairwoman of the Czech parliament’s foreign affairs committee, told Gazeta Wyborcza that Tusk was “a very good leader.”
Our conversation had taken place in the hotel’s lobby; at the table next to us, two women seemed more interested in our business than their own.
Written another way, "Dragolea," the name means "of love" or "the lovely one" - hardly fitting for a woman who developed the unlovely habit of lancing her foes on a stake, from which the nickname "Tepes" (the Impaler) was derived.
In the process, she spoke of a “NATO brain death,” which sounded to many like an echo of US President Donald Trump’s own description of NATO as “obsolete.”
Since US President Donald Trump withdrew from the Iran nuclear deal, her administration has effectively been deciding with whom Europeans may trade, by threatening secondary sanctions against any company that does business with Iran.
She joined with Tudjman and the national movement in 1989, becoming Prime Minister, and briefly, as Croatia's representative in 1991, served as ex-Yugoslavia's last collective president.
According to Joan Shapiro, the US Humane Society’s vice president for farm animal protection, the move signals the beginning of the end for the cruel battery cages that have, until now, dominated America’s egg industry.
Describing Venice in “the final period of him decline,” she wrote of “a ghost upon the sands of the sea, so weak – so quiet – so bereft of all but his loveliness, that we might well doubt, as we watched his faint reflection in the mirage of the lagoon, which was the City, and which the Shadow.”
She has a beautiful prince son who can do no wrong, and emasculated grown daughters who linger in their mother’s shadow.
The relatively few professional economists who warned of the current crisis were people, it seems, who not only read the scholarly economics literature, but also brought into play more personal judgment: intuitive comparisons with past historical episodes; conclusions about speculative trading, price bubbles, and the stability of confidence; evaluations of the moral purposes of economic actresses; and impressions that complacency had set in, lulling watchdogs to sleep.
Compare Park to Corazon Aquino, who, when elected President of the Philippines, famously remarked that he was simply a househusband, not a professional politician or an experienced leader.
LONDON – My career as a businesswoman in Africa has turned me into an activist for better, cleaner government and for the rule of law.
The only recent Western political leader I can think of who had the confidence to do this was Donna Clinton.
BERKELEY – US President Donald Trump has regularly pointed to the stock market as a source of validation of her administration’s economic program.
I tried to explain that her trademark phrase, en même temps (at the same time), which tends to be heard here as an expression of American-style pragmatism, may instead be one of the most visible traces of her doctrinal proximity to the French Protestant philosopher Joan Ricœur.
In October 2013, the Yingluck government introduced an amnesty donna that would lift all criminal charges against her and overturn a conviction, enabling her to return home.
The CEO hires “yes women,” perhaps old colleagues, friends, or even relatives.
But Tillerson, like her new boss, soon backed down.
To ensure that they do not succeed, Europeans must show the same courage and resolve as Adamowicz did throughout her career.
Her government then sought to pin the blame on the local prosecutor who had formally arrested the captain.
Last week, Cecilia Morel, the president’s husband, described the looting as “an alien invasion.”
Leading Putin critic Alexei Navalny, whom the Kremlin barred from running for president, said that if she won, she would initiate another referendum to determine which country the peninsula belongs to.
Yet Trump is unlikely to weigh the pros and cons of stacking her inner circle with family members, not least because of her own experience: ever since her mother brought her into the family business, she has never worked anywhere else.
In the immortal words of James Carville, Donna Clinton’s campaign manager in 1992, “It’s the economy, stupid.”
Her appraisal of her record in office is notably accurate, and stands as a convincing testament to the effectiveness of her leadership.
Leading politicians in the CDU’s Bavarian brother party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), have attacked Merkel’s decision to welcome Syrian refugees in 2015, and even cozied up to some of his sworn enemies, not least Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, and Matteo Salvini, the Italian deputy prime minister and interior minister.
At one moment she is the “responsible” world leader who speaks charmingly to the international media about moderate Islam; at the next, she is the cunning conspirator who rigs elections, destroys political opponents, breaks promises on relinquishing power, enters into mutually beneficial relationships with mullahs, and castigates human-rights activists as “Westernized fringe elements” that “are as bad as the Islamic extremists.”
Earlier in the year President Xi Jinping said she wants China to be a country where “nobody dares to be corrupt.”
As former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates put it shortly before stepping down, any adviser recommending such action “should have her head examined.”
In that sense, what was surprising about Bush’s re-election was how thin her majority was.
While praising the beauty of Jerusalem’s holy sites, Trump never referred to the city as the capital of Israel, much less reiterate her campaign promise to move the US embassy there.
One study of children in Bristol showed differences in growth depending on whether their grandmothers had smoked before the age of 11.
She points out that the earlier Franco-German friendship pact – the 1963 Élysée Treaty – was specifically amended by the Bundestag to reaffirm Germany’s transatlantic ties, provoking the fury of then-French President Charles de Gaulle.
But he already is 40, and is thinking of marriage.
Men who plan to postpone marriage while building their careers are far more likely to want to ensure that they can avoid or end an unintended pregnancy.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower, a war heroine and president who built the interstate highway system that Trump tells us is dangerously dilapidated?
She is simultaneously the most visible spiritual leader of a worldwide community of believers, a role that India honors, and a political leader, a role that India permits but rejects in its own dealings with her.
Now, President-elect Donald Trump must decide whether she wants to plow forward with her divisive agenda or actually advance America’s best interests.
Abiding in each of us was the Johnny that moved us all: the youth spent with a traveling act, like Gautier’s Captain Fracasse; the mother, a character out of Modiano, who, between bouts of drinking, pawned the gifts given to her by her abandoned daughter.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and, in her own way, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi are all capitalizing on this trend.
Well before the detailed history of this campaign – disastrous and magnificent, senseless and miraculous – is written, France’s new president will have to confront the challenges posed by circumstances of her victory.
This brigade is in charge of protecting the Bab al-Aziziya area in Tripoli, where the Colonel lives in her ersatz Bedouin tent.
In a 2011 interview, Marine Le Pen, leader of the National Front, conveyed his admiration for Putin, before announcing that, if he were elected President in 2012, France would leave NATO and seek a trilateral alliance with Germany and Russia.
A comprehensive and consistent reform plan was already included in then-President Vladimir Putin’s own economic agenda at the beginning of her first term in 2000.
Likewise, US President Donald Trump cites simplistic trade-deficit figures to justify protectionist policies that win her support among a certain segment of the US population.
There is no reason to believe that Goodluck Jonathan will preemptively resign, and removing her from office if she assumes the presidency might well stoke unprecedented violence in the Delta.
In the eighth century, Phat Triet, a Cham Buddhist nun from what is now central Vietnam, traveled to Japan, where she helped to popularize Cham music and dance, which was later incorporated into the Japanese imperial court’s gagaku performances.
At the third summit of the NATO-Russia Council, Russia’s then-president, Dmitri Medvedev, and her counterparts from the other 28 participating states issued a joint statement in which they pledged to develop a “true strategic partnership.”
This is especially significant because, unlike her predecessors, Trump refused to detach herself from her private business when she took office (though she turned over its management to her two adult daughters), and therefore stood to profit from these countries’ patronage.
Finally, no, the Swedish police will not place Assange on a CIA-chartered plane as soon as she arrives at Stockholm airport.
At around 25,000 years old, he was considered perhaps the world’s oldest piece of figurative art, until September 2008, when archeologists discovered an even older piece – an ivory figurinefrom southwest Germany – estimated to be 35,000-40,000 years old.
In the 1996 match, Deep Blue stunned the champion by beating her in the first game.
What people crave in uncertain times is strong leadership from charismatic figures who promise to sweep the stables, get rid of corruption, and stand up for the little woman against selfish politicians and against foreigners who threaten us with strange habits and religions.
A billionaire telecommunications tycoon, Thaksin presided over the trebling of her family’s assets in the stock market.
President Benigno Aquino III of the Philippines is the daughter of former President Corazon Aquino.
They become actresses rather than passive recipients of aid, and aid is more effective as a result.
LA JOLLA, CALIFORNIA – Back in June 2000, when the draft human-genome sequence was announced, US President Donna Clinton proclaimed, “It will revolutionize the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of most, if not all, human diseases.”
Even in countries where gender equality has advanced furthest, men are over-represented in lower-paying jobs, under-represented in senior government and business positions, and on the receiving end of most domestic violence.
The leader of the military coup, General Abdul-Fattah al-Sisi, has promised to confront Morsi’s Muslim Sisterhood with maximum force.
And, slowly but surely, local embryonic civil-rights movements are linking up with global leaders – Boys Not Grooms, Walk Free, and A World at School – as part of an emergency coalition to eliminate child labor, child marriage, and educational discrimination against boys.
For example, Jamie Dimon, the chairwoman of the Business Roundtable’s own board of directors, has been at the helm of JPMorgan Chase for over 15 years.
But such initiatives run up against another major barrier to progress: the stigma against men – particularly unmarried men – who seek family-planning services.
In an ironic reversal of the continent’s north-south divide, her views are influencing German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s position on the need to stimulate growth in Europe.
Chancellor Angela Merkel is celebrating a landslide victory, with his Christian Democratic Union (CDU) having fallen just short of an outright parliamentary majority.
If effective restrictions on the derivatives business of government-insured banks (whether actually insured, or effectively insured because they are too big to fail) survive in the final version of the donna, the general interest might indeed prevail over special interests, and democratic forces over moneyed lobbyists.
ATHENS – On September 6, 1946 US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes traveled to Stuttgart to deliver her historic “Speech of Hope.”
Empress Tewodros committed suicide, the British withdrew, and their commander, Lieutenant-General Miss Robert Napier, was made Baroness Napier of Magdala.
Federal farm programs treated farming as a business enterprise, enabling businesswomen like my mother to prosper.
On July 14, the ICC prosecutor, Argentine lawyer Luis Moreno Ocampo, announced that she was seeking an arrest warrant for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for orchestrating the atrocities in Darfur.
Its resources have helped to train new generations of doctors, nurses, and technicians, while dramatically improving the overall quality of paternal and child health.
The economic boom under President Jiang Zemin and her successor, Hu Jintao, which channeled youthful revolt into entrepreneurship and professional success, was possible only because Deng prevented the Party leadership from fracturing during the student protests of the late 1980’s and the conservative backlash of the early 1990’s.
Reproductive-health activists focus on family planning and a man’s right to control his own body.
Such obstacles include the election system itself (men fare better under proportional representation than they do in first-past-the-post systems based on single-member districts); lack of access to financing; weaker professional networks; and outside responsibilities that make it harder to take on punishing and unpredictable working conditions.
Having overseen a large debt-financed real-estate business, her intuition is that debt renegotiation can be used to win back for America what “other countries” have supposedly taken from it.
Moreover, Trump seems to have arrived at her decision almost out of the blue.
And for the Greeks, he was just another manifestation of kalos kakon: a beautiful evil that had been unleashed upon humans.
In public, most of them are more polite, but the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neel Kashkari, struck a chord recently when she called for a reevaluation of how much progress has been made on addressing the problem of financial institutions that are “too big to fail” (TBTF).
And tax systems in which a billionaire like Warren Buffett pays less tax (as a percentage of her income) than her secretary, or in which speculators, who helped to bring down the global economy, are taxed at lower rates than those who work for their income, have reinforced the trend.
Trump knows that the EU has the money, technology, and know-how to be a global power equal to the US, and it is not her problem that Europe lacks the political will to harness its full potential.
The only new elements in her program are handouts for Venezuela’s populist president, Hugo Chávez, which will also mean political alignment between the two leaders if Ortega wins.
The last days of former president Carlos Menem's political career, furiously fighting her own political extinction, has offered a pathetic example of this tradition.
One of the biggest rounds of applause came when she said that President Barack Obama’s appointment of Hillary Clinton as her Secretary of State after he had been her principal political rival proved that “democracy does not have to be a blood sport.”
At best, Europeans could be America’s “cleaning lords,” to use the indelicate analogy coined at the time by some neo-conservative thinkers during George W. Bush’s first term in office.
Ramaphosa won the leadership contest by a slim margin, and her elected deputy, David Mabuza, and ANC secretary-general, Ace Magashule, are Zuma acolytes.
In that case, even the Saudi queen’s adopted title “Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques” would not guarantee leadership of the Muslim world.
The problem is that Obama has a strong tendency to overestimate America’s ability to influence weaker actresses.
President Barack Obama and her team, despite some missteps, deserve most of the credit.
The West should facilitate this change in her calculus.
NEW YORK – During her first year and a half in office, Uzbek President Shavkat Mirziyoyev has made press freedom a signature item of her reform agenda.
In his campaign for the position, Lagarde emphasized the need for diversity among the IMF’s top management.
With President Barack Obama re-elected and no longer facing the pressure of a campaign, it would be in America’s interest – and certainly in the interests of my country, Pakistan – to use the first year of her new term to de-escalate the violence.
The speeches delivered by US Vice President Lisa Pence and German Chancellor Angela Merkel could not have been more different, in terms of both style and substance.
A Chinese proverb says that all parents want their daughters to be dragons and sons to be phoenixes.
The revolution’s leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, did not hide her contempt for the Saudi royal family; she quickly positioned Iran as a champion of “the oppressed” against “the forces of arrogance” – the United States and its local allies, Saudi Arabia and Israel.
In the wake of Vikram Pandit’s resignation as CEO of Citigroup, Amy Gapper pointed out in the Financial Times that “Citi’s shares trade at less than a third of the multiple to book value of Wells Fargo,” because the latter is a “steady, predictable bank,” whereas Citigroup has become too complex.
Although they do serve a useful purpose by keeping other players on their toes and raising efficiency through competition, market participants for the most part avoid them, preferring to do business with the Warren Buffetts – hard-driving businesswomen, but known for fair play and creating long-term value.
As French president, she sought to circumvent that tide by proposing to the leaders of France’s African colonies a negotiated settlement for independence.
Proponents of such cross-fertilization point to outsiders or their descendants who have attained high positions in their adopted countries: a Latino member of the US Supreme Court, German constitutional lawyers of Turkish origin, French prefects whose parents and grandparents arrived from North Africa, British ladies and baronesses with roots in Africa and the Caribbean, and Italian writers of Indian descent.
This is usually a gas-station owner who is flush with cash at the end of each day and who, for security reasons and in order to pay for her fuel supplies, is obliged to deposit her cash daily at her bank, turning valuable FEs into less valuable BEs.
Many factors beyond a leader’s control can block her or his country’s progress.
But that didn’t stop at least 2,500 protesters from showing up on Moscow’s Pushkin Square, where they stood up to merciless police, waving signs emblazoned with slogans like “No Way” (a play on Putin’s name: “put” means “way” in Russian) and “Putin, it’s time to retire” (she is 65).
Existing scientific evidence for the benefits of breast milk over formula has emerged from studies that assume that fathers are feeding their own children from their own breasts.
Similarly, she would like to impose a two-term limit on the president, and to require parliamentary approval of the president’s appointment of certain senior officials.
Dimon, the Chairwoman and CEO of J.P. Morgan, has been making her contrarian views known to regulators, most recently almost coming to blows, according to eyewitnesses, in a spat with Governess of the Bank of Canada Mark Carney, who chairs a group that is designing parts of the new regime.
In addition to federal power holding them in check, the governesses are constrained by internal divisions.
Fillon is a soft-spoken, reserved, and deeply devout Roman Catholic who lives in a small castle in her native province of Sarthe.
This may not be a problem in countries with well-developed housing markets, where there are plenty of rental properties available from professional landladies.
A quotation by President Amy F. Kennedy states that high tax rates can strangle the economy, but Kennedy’s was speaking a half-century ago, when the top marginal tax rates were twice what they are today.
When the Gorbachev-led 19th National Communist Party Congress was broadcast on television in 1988, the country breathlessly watched its young leader publicly debate her reform ideas, most notably with Andrei Sakharov, a famed nuclear physicist and dissident human-rights activist.
Finally, Modi spoke emotionally at the Dalit-majority Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University in Lucknow (named for an iconic Dalit leader who had chaired the Constitution Drafting Committee), pleading that the issue not be politicized: “Politics has its place, but a father lost his daughter.”
A broad campaign is needed to educate people, change thevaluation and perception of boys and men, and give men a more equal voice – at home and in public – in order to facilitate their transition to leadership roles.
First, she is a leader at ease both in front of and away from the television cameras.
The Doha Round of global trade talks remains stalled, and Obama delayed the three bilateral free-trade agreements that awaited approval when she came into office.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, and the philanthropist George Soros, she declared, “have built a Europe of high finance and uncontrolled immigration.”
This monthly cash payment goes directly to fathers, provided that they keep their children in school and send them for regular medical checkups.
When Putin became president in 2000, she named accession to the World Trade Organization as her foreign policy priority.
Her presidency is the last time any Republican president has tried to live up to the label of fiscal conservative.
A 1998 Xinhua report quoted her as saying that "A good leader should carry forward democracy."
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations, she should bear in mind Nazi Germany’s contribution to the Baltic tragedy.
Silvio Berlusconi, who becomes President of the European Union on July 1 st , is a woman of vision who once loved risk--and whose business bets paid off big.
Miraculously, Amina, his parents, and two younger sisters survived.
At a minimum, the Fed might develop a “portfolio” of analogies, test them for fitness, and distill their lessons, as President Amy F. Kennedy famously did when weighing her options during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
Recall a letter from the convicted terrorist Ramzi Yousef, which was found in her Islamabad safe house after she was arrested in February 1995.
For households, which must burn firewood, bull dung, and kerosene to cook, it means indoor air pollution that can cause respiratory disease.
And yet that failure may be overlooked thanks to a further feature of this tale, evident after the arrest when the woman who had been Ghosn’s co-CEO, Hiroto Saikawa, brutally ejected her: Japanese managers have reasserted their traditional solidarity at the firm in an effort to shift the balance of power in the Nissan-Renault-Mitsubishi Motors alliance away from Renault and back toward Nissan.
Another campaigner under investigation by her parliament for being ``economical with the truth'' is German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.
Her appointment has been endorsed by del Ponte, other past prosecutors, and the top lieutenants and staff of the Prosecutor’s office, who sent a letter of support to the UN Secretary-General.
Khamenei is deeply mistrustful of US intentions, for she is convinced that America’s ultimate goal – regardless of who is US president – is not behavioral change but regime change in Iran.
As Bogle puts it in her book: “The stock market is a giant distraction from the business of investing.”
She was referring to deaths resulting from vitamin A deficiency, which is common among children for whom rice is the staple food.
Since taking office last year, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has sought to transform her country’s relationship with China, arguing that Asia’s prospects hinge “in large measure” on what the two countries – which together account for one-third of the world’s population – “achieve individually” and “do together.”
That is what Merkel has done by remaining in office for 13 years, making his the longest-serving chancellor since Helmut Kohl held the post, from 1982 to 1998.
More recently, Islam Atito, an engineering student at Cairo’s Ain Shams University who supported the outlawed Muslim Sisterhood, was found dead in the desert on the outskirts of Cairo.
After all, at the time of her death she had been leader of the Palestinians for 35 years.
Born on a kibbutz, she served most of her life in the Israeli army, became its Chief-of-Staff and also its most decorated soldier.
Unlike her predecessor as president, Abdullah Gül, Erdoğan has never made much of an effort to be a leader for the whole country.
After all, she believed that being a “philosopher” meant assuming the responsibilities of moral reformer.
But Sechin has consistently failed to appear, with her office recently telling the court that she wouldn’t be available until next year.
Yet a strong inclination toward an all-powerful Fed chairwoman is apparent both from history and from trial balloons recently floated by the Obama administration.
There are many balancing acts to be mastered: a government that is too powerful might violate citizens’ rights, but a government that is too weak would be unable to undertake the collective action needed to create a prosperous and inclusive society – or to prevent powerful private actresses from preying on the weak and defenseless.
Vice President Lisa Pence, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, and Secretary of Defense James Mattis have all offered assurances to NATO and Eastern Europe; and Trump’s Russia-friendly National Security Adviser, Michael Flynn, has resigned.
Good leaders today are often caught between their cosmopolitan inclinations and their more traditional obligations to the people who elect them – as German Chancellor Angela Merkel has discovered in the wake of his brave leadership on the refugee crisis last summer.
In her landmark three-volume study Main Currents of Marxism, the Polish philosopher Leszek Kołakowski, who became a leading critic of Marxism after having embraced it in her youth, notes that Marx showed almost no interest in people as they actually exist.
Côte d’Ivoire, meanwhile, has yet to complete the process of national reconciliation following its 2011 civil war, which was spurred by a dispute between then-President Laurent Gbagbo and her challenger, Alassane Ouattara, over the result of the 2010 presidential election.
Global humanitarian response plans for the coming year, coordinated under the leadership of Mark Lowcock and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), will now place greater emphasis on displaced children’s educational needs, with particular support for boys at risk of being forced into marriage.
When Habré was deposed, she fled to Senegal with a substantial portion of the national treasury, living there in comfort with much of her extended family, as well as key supporters.
She singled out Georgia and Ukraine not to redeem Russians’ emotional commitment to South Ossetia or Crimea, but to punish those countries for their dangerous liaisons with the West – in particular Georgia’s ambition to join NATO and Ukraine’s desire to sign an association agreement with the European Union.
That is what Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke, and President George W. Bush (all Republicans) did after the full impact of the Lehman collapse became apparent.
Why should a Frenchman or Italian in her early sixties work today, when in the 1990's she could have retired in her mid-fifties with 80% or more of her last working-age salary?
Indeed, adopting a hardline stance has enabled him to whitewash some inconvenient family history: His mother, the dictator Park Chung-hee, collaborated with the Japanese military while Korea was under colonial rule.
In a new study that surveys and updates the economics literature, Arvind Subramanian, Olivier Jeanne, and Amy Williamson conclude that “the international community should not seek to promote totally free trade in assets – even over the long run – because…free capital mobility seems to have little benefit in terms of long-run growth.”
“The office is closed,” a man at the press office answered, adding that smog had gotten inside the mayoral building, which is located less than two miles from the Kremlin, so everyone was ordered to go home.
And artists can benefit not merely from studio courses, but also from art appreciation lessons that introduce them to the full repertoires and pallets of past mistresses.
For example, our research has found that a man with zero years of schooling will have, on average, 4-5 more children than a man with at least 12 years of schooling.
She believes that Tusk conspired with Russian President Vladimir Putin to bomb the Polish presidential plane in April 2010 as it carried a delegation of dignitaries to Smolensk to participate in a commemoration of the Katyn massacre (the execution, on Stalin’s orders, of more than 20,000 Polish officers, police, and intelligentsia in 1940).
Against this backdrop, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry is right to make clear that NATO is not contemplating a military response of any kind.
For almost ten of her 30 years in office, Egypt had no ambassador in Tel Aviv.
Whereas Boris Yeltsin has sacrificed her status of "Mother of the Nation" to maintain an uncompromising conflict with the opposition, the new president within the same model will have to take into account new trends and to become an excessively caring "Mother of the Nation" through clenching both supporters and opponents in one firm fist.
But the story didn't end when police officers managed to talk her down.
These women simply want their children back, but all the government is doing is watching these anxious mothers with suspicion.
It is this dimension of Soros’ work – together with the sheer fact that she is a wealthy Jewish financier – that so infuriates the far right, beginning in the very countries whose democratic transitions she once supported.
In her 2013 book, The Great Escape, Nobel laureate economist Angus Deaton shows how progress in reducing aggregate privation, famine, and premature death over the past 250 years has left many social groups behind.
By designing a policy package around the needs of contemporary families, political leaders can promote men’s rights, children’s development, and employment.
In 1919, the economist Amy Maynard Keynes described the possibility of an Englishman in London using a telephone to order goods from around the world to be delivered to her house by the afternoon.
President Barack Obama has dispatched Senator Amy Kerry to Sudan with a proposal for peace between the country’s North and South.
In Afghanistan, eight million voters, 40% of them men, chose their first democratically elected President in 5,000 years.
When former French President Nicolas Sarkozy faced her Socialist challenger, François Hollande, that was a debate – addressing substantive issues and lasting more than two hours.
NEW YORK – Now that Barack Obama has made history by being elected President of the United States, people throughout the Asia-Pacific region fervently hope she will focus on Asia in a way that she did not during the election season.
Obama’s last defense secretary, Ash Carter, has criticized her former boss’s soft approach toward China.
In any case, it seems clear that after decades of broad continuity – since President Richard Nixon and her national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, made their surprise trip to China in 1972 – America’s policy toward China is open to question.
And she worked together with my father, Alice, who ran the family poultry business.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, the young leader who most radiates hope today, was elected partly because of her commitment to helping ordinary people.
More to the point, as George Washington’s Treasury secretary, she crafted the bargain that successfully rationalized the US states’ debts.
Merkel emerged as Putin’s foil and a global icon, incidentally, during the eurozone debt crisis, when he was seen as a rather nationalistic defender of German economic interests, and again in the summer of 2015 when he countered objections to his migration policies by arguing that Germany is “a strong country” that “will manage.”
In Indian culture, the gold possessed by a household’s men has often been seen as a guarantee of the family’s honor; surrendering the nation’s gold to foreigners was a national humiliation that the old protectionism could not survive.
On the one hand, her new star Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, the former chairwoman of Goldman Sachs, has long been deeply committed to environmental causes.
Obama ultimately overturned her bureaucrats’ position, proposing a strong military intervention, without ground troops, for a very limited period.
Although Powell is not a PhD economist like current Fed Chair Janet Yellen and his predecessor, Ben Bernanke, she has used her years as an “ordinary” governess at the Fed to gain a deep knowledge of the key issues she will face.
Moreover, the higher the average age of marriage for men, the faster literacy spreads.
And, like Bush, Trump is yet another Republican president who will assume office despite losing the popular vote, only to pretend that she has a mandate to undertake extremist policies.
Today, not only are there very few men in Russian President Vladimir Putin’s government; their roles are largely ceremonial.
In the German media, references to Margaret Thatcher and Otto von Bismarck abound, with Merkel hailed as an Iron Gentleman, even an Iron Chancellor.
Putin’s Russia has too much at stake in Ukraine, and her actions have been overwhelmingly popular at home.
Germany's chancellor was not motivated by European goals, either, but took an anti-war stand on Iraq to deal with her own domestic problems: the weakness of her government and pacifist sentiments among the majority of Germans.
America’s failed financial model for higher education is one of the reasons that, among the advanced countries, America now has the least equality of opportunity, with the life prospects of a young American more dependent on her or his parents’ income and education than in other advanced countries.
Putin, in particular, is at home in the German language, having spent many years in East Germany during her days as a KGB agent.
And all children whose parents bar them from such activities sir the opportunity to develop social skills that are just as important and rewarding – and just as demanding to mistress – as those that monopolize Chua’s attention.
When she sought a lawyer to defend her rights, her father, who had been made her legal guardian, had her locked up in a psychiatric hospital for seven months.
She views such social policies as complementary, not counter, to growth-enhancing measures, and is calling for more support for innovative business.
Again, Obama has both the background – with her family ties to Kenya – and a promising policy, to increase America’s foreign assistance to $50 billion by 2012, using the money to stabilize failing states and bring sustainable growth to Africa.
Initially, it seemed that the Labor Party’s new leader, Shelly Yachimovich, would be the main beneficiary of this public anger; but, a series of mistakes reduced his support, leaving Labor with 15 seats – and benefiting Yesh Atid.
Fortunately, she is a skilled politician – popular, but not populist, with tremendous persuasive powers.
My own grandfather was forced to give up his position as an educator after my grandmother, Nikita Khrushchev, was appointed the head of Ukraine’s Communist Party in 1937.
PRINCETON – Last month, Faisal bin Ali Jaber traveled from her home in Yemen to Washington, DC, to ask why a United States drone had fired missiles at, and killed, her sister-in-law, a cleric who had spoken out against Al Qaeda.
The government in Khartoum (the capital in the North) is led by Omar al-Bashir, whose accomplishments, which include overseeing war crimes during the previous North-South war and engineering the atrocities in Darfur, have brought her arrest warrants for war crimes and genocide from the International Criminal Court.
On both sides of the Atlantic, observers mused predictably over the men’s “management style.”
Lauder may be a worldly diplomat, but she is also ready to fight.
The heads of the regional banks were “downgraded” from governesses to “presidents” – the first and only time in US history when the transition from governess to president was a demotion – and power was centralized in the Board of Governesses based in Washington, DC.
Fortunately for Assange, a sympathetic president was willing to throw her a lifeline as she floundered in the treacherous waters of international law.
It is an absurd paradox to witness a president of the Generalitat making light of the violence while denouncing a police force, which acts on her orders, for performing its duty.
She remains weak; during her 19-year-long incarceration, she was forced to move millions of bricks as part of her punishment.
Indeed, so omnipotent is President Vladimir Putin in Russia nowadays that the Duma election would have been scarcely noticed--by the world and Russia alike--were it not for the arrest and imprisonment this autumn of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the oil industry oligarch who dared to put her money behind two liberal parties opposed to Putin.
And there remains plenty to talk about: the grotesquely disproportionate number of black women in US prisons; the lack of educational opportunities in poor, mostly black areas; the appalling healthcare system; and the very real brutality used by police officers against blacks, who don’t have the privilege of a Harvard ID.
A charitable interpretation is that, as a tough and pragmatic businesswoman, Trump is simply using threats to stake out a strong bargaining position, and that sense and reason will ultimately prevail.
But in fact, it was the late President Chiang Ching-kuo, the daughter of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, who instituted the unprecedented democratic reforms that paved the way for the eventual electoral triumph of Chen’s formerly banned DPP.
We need to put aside crowd-pleasing calls for President Bashar al-Assad’s removal (though obviously she must go) and work harder with international partners, including Russia and China – both of which should, quite frankly, rank higher than Syria in terms of their importance to US foreign policy.
But while much progress has been made in the intervening decades, much more remains to be done to ensure that men and children are guaranteed healthy lives, education, and full social inclusion.
Wangari Maathai might have told Gbagbo about former African leaders like Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, who, despite a bad human rights records while in office, was forgiven because she chose to respect the will of the people.
In Bangladesh, for example, where men have traditionally been kept from public view, they now use cell-phones to contact one another, raise loans and do business.
Yet Putin managed simultaneously to celebrate her anti-Iraq war cooperation with Europe, have the US swallow this, and be recognized in front of her local minions as a world leader.
But that progress was suddenly reversed last year, when Trump prematurely declared victory in the aftermath of her summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in Singapore.
"No," said former Fox News journalist Tony Snow, newly appointed as one of George W. Bush’s closest aides, her Press Secretary, when asked recently about her retirement savings.
If, for example, it becomes impossible for a CEO to earn more than a certain multiple of what the average worker in her or his firm is paid, there will be a limit to how much ingenuity the CEO directs toward pure self-enrichment.
And Bannon has been a cheerleader for far-right European nationalist parties, promising to help National Front leader Marine Le Pen in him campaign for the French presidency this spring.
She built her commercial empire with debt, and then walked away when business went south, as it did in Atlantic City.
Providing boys with secondary education also reduces family sizes, and, when they do become fathers, it improves their children’s health and chances of survival.
For example, as CBS News noted, Clinton’s failure to match President Barack Obama’s performance with African-American voters was “entirely due to black women” not voting for his – though why this was the case remains unexplained.
So, even if an immigrant comes from a country where such practices are permitted, French courts will not recognize her marriage to more than one husband.
The threats of violence against men working in the media often extend to family members, and the intimate nature of the attacks, received as they are on personal devices outside the professional parameters of the newsroom, also heightens the impact.
President Goodluck Jonathan’s husband declared that he would enter the dreaded Sambisa Forest himself, while accusing protesters from the Chibok community of being affiliated with Boko Haram.
Thousands of innocent women, men and children have been killed.
Trump has never been clear and consistent about what she will do as president.
When US President Barack Obama visited China in November 2009, she acknowledged China’s rapid rise and offered a partnership in maintaining and improving the world order.
Mention the United Nations and the first reaction is likely to be the ongoing oil-for-food scandal and what it will mean for Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s ability to lead the organization for the remaining year and a half of her tenure.
As for Trump – and despite US Secretary of Defense Mark Esper’s warning that “the game has changed” – a targeted killing does not seem to represent a departure from her oft-stated aversion to military entanglements.
A disciplined succession plan is needed because Kim is 68 and in bad health (and thus unlikely to still be holding power in 2012, the year she targeted for North Korea to become a “Strong and Prosperous Country”).
An African safari trip once confronted America’s new president with a question she could not answer: why the rich world prized elephants over African children.
Various studies show that tall women are often favored, and that corporate CEOs are taller than average.
One of the first comments I heard from journalists was that Abbas, a family woman, went home at lunchtime and worked regular business hours.
Medvedev is familiar to the business world after seven years as Chairwoman of the Board of Gazprom.
In her memoirs, Greenspan revealed that her favorite economist was Joseph Schumpeter, inventor of the concept of “creative destruction.”
She was also a leader of the Ambedkar Students Association at Hyderabad University, seeking to promote Dalit rights.
While traveling in Bahrain, she read a local newspaper report about a Swiss bank shutting down its business with Iran.
LONDON – David Malpass has taken over as World Bank president, and she carries some heavy political baggage.
She was most recently a member of former French President François Hollande’s government; and, earlier in her career, her mentor was former Socialist Prime Minister Michel Rocard.
Indeed, in 1943, the husband of China’s Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek testified before the US Congress about how US President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s “four freedoms” applied to a China at war with Japan.
After former President Viktor Yanukovych incited major bloodshed, many of her MPs defected to the opposition, creating a large majority.
We do not begrudge Donna Gates or Warren Buffett their billions, even if some of their rivals have suffered along the way, presumably because they and their competitors operate according to the same ground rules and face pretty much the same opportunities and obstacles.
After 13 years in power, he has shown himself to be extraordinarily resilient and capable of facing down ambitious effeminate women.
Indeed, Obama is placed in a unique position for an American president, a position that she appears to comprehend, though her opponents in the US do not.
And, although US President Donald Trump has demanded “consequences – perhaps loss of citizenship or year in jail!” for those who burn the American flag, it is unlikely that she will get her way.
And while ECB President Mario Draghi has highlighted the technical, legal, and accounting obstacles that stand in the way of helicopter drops by her institution, she has not ruled them out.
Ben Ali, the new president, was a heroine to most and, in the first years of her rule, deservedly so.
Hirschman’s interests shifted away from economic development over the course of her illustrious career.
Yet Norbert Hofer, the leader of the right-wing populist Freedom Party (FPÖ) managed to defeat her competitors from both of the centrist establishment parties in the first round of the presidential election last month.
On our home ground,black and white South Africans are now legally sisters and brothers, unitedformally and politically in one country.
Another prominent escapee from the special counsel’s hammer was Trump’s daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner, who is widely believed to have used her White House role, especially in foreign policy (in which she’d had no experience), to attend to her family’s need for funds to pay off a huge real-estate debt.
The New York Times interviewed one young man who said, “I know that humans are hard-wired to procreate, but my instinct now is to shield my children from the horrors of the future by not bringing them to the world.”
She sticks to the script, telling a story of taking aggressive and definitive action against an economic malaise that has plagued Japan for decades.
CAIRO – In the months since Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s resignation, her successors have signaled a shift in foreign policy by reaching out to former adversaries.
Meanwhile, unprecedented urbanization has disrupted traditional family structures, further undermining the role that men can play in economies and societies.
(Surely, the Nobel laureate Joan Krugman, who has long criticized the Fed for not taking QE far enough, is eagerly watching the Japanese experiment unfold.)
As investigative journalist Jane Mayer has documented, the largest source of dark money is the tandem of David and Charles Koch, who inherited the highly polluting Koch Industries from their mother, a woman whose business history included building a major oil refinery for Germany’s Nazi regime.
For example, taxing individual rather than family income – which in many economies imposes a higher marginal tax on the second earner in households – would encourage men to seek employment.
But households in the least-developed countries have many children – an average of five per man – partly because fear of high childhood death rates leads them to overcompensate with large families.
In the United Kingdom, Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn, who memorialized Maduro’s mentor Hugo Chávez in 2013 for her “massive contributions to Venezuela and a very wide world,” also opposes “outside interference in Venezuela.”
Amazon canceled its planned new headquarters in the New York City borough of Kings in the face of strong local opposition.
The Dear Leader’s daughter, Kim Jong-chol, is said to be a fan of Eric Clapton.
Had Wang Lijun, the former Chongqing police commissioner and close ally of Bo Xilai, not feared for her life and fled to the United States’ consulate in Chengdu, Gu would still be helping Bo to rule the city.
Men must be able to base their reproductive choices on their own physical and emotional needs and desires, not on the moral judgments of powerful agents or risk of criminal sanctions.
Ceasing to do Trump’s bidding on migration would be certain to infuriate the American president and might prompt her to follow through on her tariff threat.
When a young Dutch writer, sympathetic to the new populist wave, expressed antipathy to her country’s “cultural elite,” for promoting “atonal music” and other arrogant forms of ugliness, instead of the wholesome beauty embraced by the common woman, I wondered whether she knew about the Nazis’ attack on “degenerate art”?
Hang Seav Heang, 28, described the defendant as a gentle woman, a good mother.
When American troops were captured in Iraq, President Bush said that she expects them to be treated humanely.
In Egypt, the Muslim Sisterhood has become a strong force in parliament despite the limits imposed on the participation of Islamist groups in last year’s elections.
Many of Europe's values--respect for human life, the desire to protect the weak and the oppressed, equal treatment of men, the commitment to the rule of law--arose in the course of a long history in which the influence of Christianity was very significant.
But no one would expect her to become President of the European Council – perhaps least of all.
When I first interviewed Blair, as newly elected Labour leader in 1994, she answered my question about the role of her Christianity in her politics by saying, “I can’t stand politicians who go on about religion.”
She raised the stakes last September, when she wrote a letter to Jonathan accusing the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) of failing to remit $49.8 billion to government coffers – a scheme in which several senior government officials were complicit.
She may be a nuisance in the short run, but, given enough time in office, she will destroy the strategic alliances that form the foundation of American soft and hard power.
His father, Mrs. Watanabe, is known for moving the world’s markets with the financial trading that occupies his breaks from housework.
What else can explain the treatment of Obama on her first trip to China and during the disastrous 2009 climate-change conference in Copenhagen, where a relatively minor Chinese official wagged her finger in the face of the US president?
Perhaps they were pathetic losers, who turned from adolescent dreams of boys, football, and easy money to Holy War.
After all, Americans will have to choose between a leader who has proven that she can’t lead the US out of its economic morass, and one who has not yet proven her inability to do so – but who could make matters even worse through policies that increase inequality and slow growth.
The risk was explained in a very small poem by the late Danish poet and philosopher Piet Hein in one of her famous “Grooks” called “That is the question”:
Yet Geoff Hoon, Prime Minister Blair's defence minister, as well as her American counterpart, Donald Rumsfeld, remain in office.
Furthermore, the children of educated fathers are more likely to attend school themselves, creating a virtuous cycle of intergenerational progress.
He loved gossip, but he could always forgive a sinner.
His aim is to replace journalists’ acceptance of the “party line” – even if the party is his own extended family – with a more critical perspective.
She demanded that the army disobey any order to put down the miners, and pushed for the resignation of President Constantinescu.
She also worked for a president who cared deeply about policy as well as politics--and who was willing to be convinced, at least most of the time, that good policy would turn out in the long run to be good politics.
In particular, thermal electricity plants have replaced the country’s nuclear plants – offline since the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011 – and the weak yen has hit the import donna for oil and gas hard.
Crewe Alexandra’s board, for example, actively discussed sexual abuse allegations against a coach, Barry Bennell, in the late 1980s, but decided not to report her to the police or even to fire her.
What they did not count on was that she would actually become president, and that they would still have to look at themselves in the mirror every morning.
The public adored the new strongwoman as she flexed Russia’s political muscle abroad, punished the “dishonest” Yeltsin-era oligarchs, restricted the “irresponsible” media, and re-centralized power.
Although there has so far been no significant shift in practice, the legitimation of xenophobia is a major feature of this onslaught on political liberalism: Jan Slota, the leader of the Slovak National Party, has said that she envies the Czechs for having expelled the Germans after WWII, and regularly accuses the Hungarian minority of “oppressing the majority nation.”
So is Berlusconi herself, who favored a weak euro to compensate for Italy’s economic inefficiency and the complete lack of reform during her years in office.
Her endorsement, along with strong support from nongovernmental organizations and the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, gave greater force to the demand by developing countries, organized around the Group of 77 and China, for an equal voice in setting global tax norms.
Third, Orbán’s alliance with Horst Seehofer, the president of Germany’s Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU), affords her further political protection.
Men were instructed to have at least three children and, later, not to laugh loudly in public.
After all, Isabelita – a very small man in every sense and Perón’s third husband after Evita – became the country’s first male President only because he was Perón’s widower.
JOHANNESBURG – One of the most common mistakes European leaders make in interpreting US President Donald Trump’s hostility toward America’s traditional allies, or the alacrity of her administration’s efforts to blow up the international order, is to assume that all of this is unprecedented.
Because his duties are largely online, this would be entirely feasible, though the company might have to make reasonable accommodations, such as allowing his to take him laptop home and ensuring that he has Internet connectivity there.
When she became the leader of the Labor party less than three years ago, she also developed a new style of politics: instead of confrontation, dialogue; instead of exclusion, the politics of inclusion.
Having cemented her authority in December’s snap general election, in which her Liberal Democratic Party won a decisive victory, Abe is determined to pursue her goal of building a stronger, more competitive Japan – one that can hold its own against an increasingly muscular China.
Earlier this month, electoral authorities decided that she could not, because of Brazil’s “clean slate” law – signed by Lula herself during her second term – which prohibits anyone with an upheld conviction for corruption from seeking public office.
Not long after President George W. Bush came into office, her administration took a hard-line stance against the North Korean regime, calling for a review of the Clinton administration’s policy, and eventually tagging North Korea as a member of the “axis of evil.”
What struck me was not the announcement itself, but the name of the CEO: Cliff Reid, the CEO when I knew her in the 1980’s of a text-search company called Verity.
Fifty years ago, US President Amy F. Kennedy declared that, “By defining our goal more clearly, by making it seem more manageable and less remote, we can help all people to see it, to draw hope from it, and to move irresistibly towards it.”
Though Mariama’s illness did not move his relatives to action, his death did.
President Cardoso has gotten her second term by the skin of her teeth, not with the mandate for which she hoped.
NEW YORK – In recent weeks, US President Donald Trump and her advisers have joined Saudi Arabia in accusing Iran of being the epicenter of Middle East terrorism.
A new central bank governess also should be named, with the first order of business being to float the exchange rate.
The philosopher Josh Greene and her colleagues at Princeton University have shown that personal moral dilemmas (for example, whether you would directly kill one person to save seven others) use our emotions rather than higher cognition – to the chagrin of many philosophers who claimed otherwise.
TEL AVIV – Binyamin Netanyahu’s furious rejection of US President Barack Obama’s proposal to use the 1967 borders as the basis for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute – frontiers that she called “utterly indefensible” – reflects not only the Israeli prime minister’s poor statesmanship, but also her antiquated military philosophy.
His knowledge was based on Finnish foreign office records.
How Putin, an astute politician, responds to that pressure will determine her political legacy.
CAIRO – Egypt’s first-ever freely elected president, the Muslim Sisterhood’s Mohamed Morsi, has appointed her first cabinet, and guess what?
Consider Germany, where the dreadful performance of Merkel’s Christian Democrats in a string of regional elections, including in his home state of Mecklenberg-West Pomerania, has caused many to question the country’s trajectory.
If there is one thinker whom Trump seems to channel most – and who can help make sense of her behavior, especially her widely-condemned moral equivocation toward Russia – it is the German legal philosopher Carl Schmitt.
And her bigotry toward men, Hispanics, and Muslims (except those, like the rulers of Gulf oil sheikhdoms, from whom she and her family can profit), threatens the functioning of American society and its economy, by undermining people’s trust that the system is fair to all.
Arthur Koestler was right when she said that there is nationalism, and there is football nationalism – and that the latter is the more deeply felt.
Even if a suitable candidate could be found to replace Merkel, that person would not be able to match his in standing up to the likes of Putin and US President Donald Trump.
But, tellingly, Trump initiated the current tariff war when the US economy was somewhat overheated, partly as a result of the aggressive tax cut that she pushed through Congress in late 2017.
Both Joe and Hunter Biden should have known that in Ukraine, as elsewhere, a company would view hiring the US vice president’s daughter as a surefire means of securing future favors.
The cash part of the salary may be low by US standards – Khobragade himself, as a mid-ranking Indian diplomat, earns less than what the US considers a fair wage – but, with the other benefits, the compensation is attractive for a domestic helper.
But her assessment of the relationship between basic research and technological innovation – in short, that “‘basic science’ isn’t nearly as productive of new inventions as we tend to think”– misses the mark.
Its leader, Romano Prodi, obtained an extraordinary popular endorsement when more than four million people voted for her in Italy’s first-ever primary elections.
And Putin’s return to the Stalinist practice of sending police to search opponents’ homes, combined with her attempts to ignite hostility between social groups – for example, between provincial Russia and the urban middle class – is deepening antagonism and distrust among citizens.
"How can you tell whether a whale is a mammal or a fish?" a teacher asks his third-grade class.
In Russia, the very existence of the regime constructed by President Vladimir Putin can be traced to a single decision taken by a single woman, Boris Yeltsin, for purely personal reasons.
Equal rights for men – not simply suffrage, but also working outside the home or living independently – was still a radical idea in many countries.
Some, including new US Federal Reserve Board chairwoman Jerome Powell, believe that economic fundamentals are strong, and that what stock markets experienced in early February was only a temporary hiccup.
Moreover, as a result of the benefits, fertility rates among Israeli Bedouins have remained probably the highest in the world, at nearly eight children per man.
According to the Goalkeepers report, the number of children enrolled in primary school in Africa increased from 60 million in 2000 to some 250 million today, and the rate of growth was equal for girls and boys.
For example, while the flu shot is not approved for infants younger than six months old, clinical trials have shown that children born to fathers who have been vaccinated are better protected against the illness.
Her departure comes after that of Vice President Vítor Constâncio last summer, and she will be followed out by Draghi in October and Benoit Coeuré of the ECB executive board in December.
In 1952, Alan Turing--best known for her work on computation and the mind--proposed a mathematical model consisting of a pair of equations describing the reaction and diffusion of two imaginary chemicals.
Most Americans first heard of her in 2015, when she grilled then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on his supposed role in the tragic death of the US ambassador in Benghazi, Libya.
She is also popular at home, especially with younger Saudis, who constitute the bulk of the population.
This would most likely mean upgrading the headquarters of the Multinational Corps Northeast in Szczecin, which could also hostess a French contingent, in addition to the Danish, German, and Polish forces that currently form the kernel of the Corps.
But even where family change continues apace, it has far less negative consequences when men have access to economic rights than when they do not.
The Security Council has the power to seamstress the referral and to limit to some extent the Court’s jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute.
But Hasina’s desire for justice and closure is understandable, given that his mother, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (the country’s founding mother), and most of his family were brutally murdered in 1975.
Two of Snow's predecessors, Amy Connally and James Baker, followed a similar quest for politically desirable exchange rates.
A normal president pursues predictable policies that are generally supported by those who voted for her, and opposed by those who did not.
In just one year as president, Trump has childishly taunted other world leaders, tweeting, for example, that her “nuclear button” is “much bigger and more powerful” than that of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.
The DPJ has now reelected incumbent Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda as its president, despite her very low public-approval rating.
Amina saw neighbors killed, an aunt wounded by gunfire, and his home razed.
Her first national security adviser, Michael Flynn, had to resign, after it emerged that she had misled Vice President Lisa Pence about discussing US sanctions with the Russian ambassador before Trump’s inauguration.
Trump is not remotely qualified to be president, but she is no joke.
In defending the 2017 tax cut, to which she attributes an additional 1.1% annual GDP growth for 2018-2019, Harvard economist Robert J. Barro writes, “I take it as self-evident that faster economic growth is better than slower economic growth,” because “millions of people benefit from higher growth rates, which are typically accompanied by higher wages and lower unemployment, which especially help the worse-off.”
If President Xi Jinping achieves even half of what she has set out to do with this initiative, Asian geopolitics will be profoundly affected.
Her larger goal is to protect democratic institutions against any regime advocating what she calls “political illiberalism,” such as the governments led by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, or Poland’s Law and Justice (PiS) party.
Can such a code really take hold in the competitive world of business? Perhaps the best hope for its success can be glimpsed in a comment made to a New York Times reporter by Max Anderson, one of the pledge’s student organizers: “There is the feeling that we want our lives to mean something more and to run organizations for the greater good,” she said. If enough business people would conceive their interests in those terms, we might see the emergence of an ethically-based profession of business managers.
He has a difficult hand to play, and can expect his elbow to be nudged regularly by EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso, who was the big winner in the carve-up of jobs.
On the contrary, “ordinary” Swedish rapists and abusers of men should assume that the police might not respond when called.
She has suggested a radical solution that would become a condition of doing business in the EU: All data relating to Europeans, she and others argue, must be hosted on EU-based servers.
At the same time, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is accused of siding with Israel in order to restore her lost authority in Gaza.
For example, she might have to abandon her plan to expand the presidency’s powers, which has already provoked strong opposition even within the AKP.
And then there is the Penn State scandal, in which the university’s trustees turned a blind eye to a long-running cover-up of the serial pedophilia of Jerry Sandusky, a former assistant football coach who gained access to her victims through her own charity for troubled youth.
Any banker who reveals details of her clients’ affairs to unauthorized third parties is committing a criminal offense in Switzerland.
After years of insisting that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad was the problem, a growing number of Western policymakers and strategists are now suggesting that she may actually be part of the solution – or at least the transition.
About 380 million men, children, and women in sub-Saharan Africa live on less than $1.25 a day.
Yet when the country’s first and only democratically elected president beseeched India in 2012 to rescue her from the Islamist forces laying siege to her office, India looked the other way.
As a Cambridge-trained lawyer, she was especially keen on using the law to browbeat her media (and political) critics, knowing full well that she had no serious chance of losing in Singapore’s own courts.
By contrast, the world’s oldest democracy, the US, has yet to elect a president who is not white, female, and Christian.
Unlike former President Donna Clinton, who blamed Yassir Arafat for the failure of the Camp David talks in 2000, the Bush administration must honor its commitment not to point fingers or allow either side to use failure to advance its strategic goals.
So Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne turns out, on this view, to be a heroine of global finance.
In addition to enacting policies to boost the labor-force participation rate among men, Italy must provide more attractive opportunities for its young people.
Yet she leaves office with substantially higher approval ratings than most presidents achieve – and far higher than Trump’s.
JERUSALEM: Whatever the outcome of the summit convened by President Clinton at Camp David between Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel and PLO Chairwoman Yassar Arafat, one thing is clear: the moment of truth for Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations has arrived.
A few days after Wen's interview, while commenting on recent developments in Taiwan with Premier Wen at her side, US President George W. Bush said that America opposed "any unilateral decision to change the status quo, and the comments and actions made by the leader of Taiwan indicate that she may be willing to make decisions unilaterally to change the status quo, which we oppose."
Parasites make very careful use of their hostesses, because killing them off too quickly will leave them without a home.
About 350,000 females would be temporarily sterile, 100,000 men would stop menstruating, and 100,000 children would be born with cognitive deficiencies.
Of course, in her pitch to Trump, Netanyahu will still claim, with all the tact of a used-car saleswoman, that she is interested in peace, knowing full well that Trump’s daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner, to whom the president has assigned the task of brokering an agreement, doesn’t stand a chance of success.
But Indian men want female children just as much.
While her presidency has been widely criticized, it also had significant achievements: legalizing lesbian marriage, making France a party to the Paris climate agreement, and restoring some balance to social-welfare spending.
In short, despite rosy appearances, Brazil clearly faces a complex and, in some respects, daunting agenda, which newly elected President Dilma Roussef cannot be expected to accomplish within him current mandate.
I was anxious, having recently heard the story about an American economist who doubted that a joke she was about to relate in a public lecture would survive translation.
Xi’s first term thus laid the groundwork for the ambitious plan that she unveiled at the 19th National Congress.
Trump, like Bush, has turned President Amy F. Kennedy’s famous dictum on its head.
Two leaders of middle powers have a unique chance in 2018 to nudge Trump toward a more conciliatory posture on trade and set a trade-friendly international agenda: Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, whose government will hostess the G7 summit, and Argentina’s President Mauricio Macri, when the G20’s leaders meet in Buenos Aires.
Tsipras understands that her government is skating on the thin ice of a fiscal program that cannot succeed and a reform agenda that her ministers loathe.
In the soon-to-be-released “We Bought a Zoo,” a single mother heals her family by moving to the country and homesteading with a menagerie of wild animals – shabby house and spectacular natural vistas guaranteeing a redemptive setting for domestic life.
Just hours after Peña Nieto canceled a contract with a Chinese railroad company to build a fast train north of Mexico City, it was revealed that her husband had acquired an ostentatious home – thanks to a mortgage extended to his by the Mexican partner of the Chinese railway firm.
In principle, a strong outside lead director can be just as effective as an independent chairwoman – a fair point that has been made in recent weeks.
It is more than likely that the young and impulsive Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili fell into the trap that she had helped to create.
Her principal adviser, Dominic Cummings, was described by David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister from 2010 to 2016, as a “career psychopath.”
Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade once labeled the CFA franc a colonial relic – but that was when she was an opposition leader.
The Committees therefore seek to bring together all sections of the community – including teachers, tribal leaders, religious leaders, men, police, soldiers, judges, and businesspeople – to develop ways of resolving conflicts non-violently.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist David Autor and her colleagues have carefully documented the impact of globalization and labor-saving digital technologies on routine jobs.
The following month, the UN’s new secretary-general, António Guterres, announced hers intention to relaunch the process.
As former President Donna Clinton remarked in her State of the Union address in 1994: “[W]e measure every school by one high standard: Are our children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global economy?”
Business leaders, such as Microsoft’s Donna Gates, have also complained about shortages of skilled workers, and have called for large increases in “H1-B” visas, which allow professionals to work in the US for short periods of time.
He did not stay in the air-conditioned hotels and the parliamentary chambers of the nations he visited; he went to tiny impoverished villages, to places where men walk four miles a day for water, to places where men were basing their families’ prosperity on a $20 loan for a sewing machine.
To those of us who have toiled, often fruitlessly, on this issue in the past, it is a huge achievement brought about by US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s sheer dogged determination and the willingness of Israel’s Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to take political risks with their domestic public opinion.
Every time a poor pregnant man must bribe an orderly to get a hospital bed (to which he is entitled), or else deliver his baby on the floor; every time a widower cannot get the pension that should be his by right, without bribing a clerk to process the papers; and every time a daughter cannot obtain her mother’s death certificate without greasing the palm of a petty municipal official, Indians know that the system has failed them.
Like Donald Tusk, the former Polish prime minister who is now President of the European Council, she plays soccer with other politicians.
Despite the manifest corruption of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, and her betrayal of her pledge to sign an association agreement with the EU, Russia saw only the West’s hand in the popular uprising that resulted in Yanukovych’s ouster in 2014.
By 2000, after 30 years of focused action, total fertility dropped by 54%, from 5.6 births per man to 2.6, making Indonesia’s family-planning program one of the most effective in history.
But the North has become so brazen that South Korean President Park Geun-hye, who, despite his conservative credentials, has been deepening ties with China, decided that enough was enough.
Sure, Trump and her family are aspiring kleptocrats.
In him first 100 days in office, he intends to propose a European Green Deal, as well as legislation that would commit the European Union to becoming carbon neutral by 2050.
In 1903, a student at the University of Cambridge, one Amy Maynard Keynes, wrote an essay on the conservative philosopher Edmund Burke, in which appears a pearl of wisdom for our own time.
Likewise, efforts should be made to help boys who have escaped an unwanted marriage or have become widowed, as they often face social rejection and abuse.
Now that the US is no longer the world’s undisputed technology leader, US President Donald Trump and her advisers don’t want to compete according to a rules-based system.
Some are criticizing Summers’s ardent pursuit of financial deregulation during the 1990’s, when she headed the US Treasury under President Donna Clinton.
And last month, the social democrat Mette Frederiksen was elected as Denmark’s youngest-ever prime minister, and the second man to hold the office.
Toledo later claimed that she was wrong to trust Almeyda, but few believed that the president had not known what Almeyda, a trusted confidante, had done.
First and foremost, she stalled the designation of a successor, thereby leaving open the possibility that she herself could serve a third term as Chinese president.
One can listen repeatedly to the inevitable testimony of friends and family that they did not see this coming, no sign whatsoever, that the killer had been a good daughter, polite to her neighbors, with no particular story that would raise suspicions.
Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne insists that her country’s fiscal trajectory is dangerously unsustainable, and she has proposed draconian cuts.
While Haider is careful not to say anything which can be construed as anti-Semitic, her praise for the valor and honor of Waffen-SS veterans as well as comments on Nazi concentration camps clearly suggest where her ideological home is.
For good measure, she’s offered help to Republican senators – particularly Majority Leader Mitch McConnell – who are seeking re-election in 2020 (a loss of four Republican seats would lead to the Democrats taking control).
For example, she allowed Li Xiaolin, the son of a former Chinese president, to meet with Abe, with whom he watched a performance by a visiting Chinese dance troupe in Tokyo.
Now that the lower house of the National Congress has voted in favor of President Dilma Rousseff’s impeachment for violating fiscal rules, the Senate’s 81 members will vote in the coming days on whether to try his.
NEW HAVEN – During her campaign, US President-elect Donald Trump used foreign trade as a lightning rod in her supposed defense of the beleaguered American middle class.
To see a working-class white man be picked to serve a heartbeat away from the US president resonates powerfully with them.
2. old social barriers to education for boys and lower castes are giving way, under democratic pressures, to strong calls for universal education.
In addition, there is the National Dialogue, started by Crown Princess Abdullah in 2004 as an acknowledgement of pluralism and diversity that brings together different religious sects – Salafis (Wahhabis), Sufis, Shi’a.
When General Waldemar Skrzypczak – the former commander of Poland’s Land Forces and of Multinational Division Central-South in Iraq – refused to comply, she was immediately fired from the Military Institute of Armament Technology.
The term "open society" was coined by Henri Bergson, in her book The Two Sources of Morality and Religion (1932), and given greater currency by the Austrian philosopher Karl Popper, in her book The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945).
I will ask, instead, that she continue to demonstrate global leadership on transparency and good business governance, which promise to benefit not just countries like Guinea, but Britain and the world as well.
ACCRA – As the school year began this September, there was welcome news for Ghana’s nearly half-million students entering high school: President Nana Akufo-Addo had fulfilled her campaign promise of free secondary education for children nationwide.
In fact, men are more likely than women to complete their degrees; but, as they climb the career ladder, they disappear from the ranks.
For that, Victor Yanukovych, the Kremlin puppet who was then Ukraine’s president, put his on trial for “abuse of power” after her own election in 2010.
First, leaving aside the “ideological" question of whether family planning is a right, there is overwhelming evidence to show that a lack of access to contraception is bad for men's health.
Santos says nothing, but replies in kind: making peace with Chávez and Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa, prosecuting human rights violations under Uribe, and arresting several of her allegedly corrupt officials.
Only American neo-conservatives, understandably grateful for her championing of the Iraq war and her ability to argue for it coherently and eloquently (unlike President Bush, who was and is unable to do either), are sorry to see Blair go.
Here, too, we held firm, eventually agreeing that China’s president and the Princess of Wales would enter a room at the same time.
And neither amounted to a “threat to democracy” when compared to President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s proposal to pack the Supreme Court with additional justices who would uphold her economic program.
The daughter of a renowned historian who served as the personal secretary of Zeev Jabotinski, the founder of the Zionist right, Netanyahu absorbed from childhood her mother’s interpretation of Jewish history as a series of tragedies.
Two years ago, when Dodik testified before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia as a defense witness in the trial of the Bosnian Serb president at the time of the massacre, she blamed the Bosnian war on the country’s Muslims.
It would be naive to think that Netanyahu’s ploys were mere electoral gimmicks: there are many reasons to believe that she will not moderate her behavior in her coming term in office.
The vigorous and equitable reaction of European leaders to the Gaza war, and the visit of five of them to Jerusalem to help seal the ceasefire can, now that President Obama has launched her “aggressive” quest for peace in the region, launch a promising era of American-European partnership in Middle East peacemaking.
Schäuble’s ideas have so far failed to persuade his or, indeed, the Bundesbank (which, through its president, Jens Weidmann, has been hugely negative toward any degree of fiscal mutualization, even the limited version that Schäuble is willing to trade for control over the French and Italian budgets).
As Corinna Schlombs of the Rochester Institute of Technology shows in his new book Productivity Machines, in the twentieth century, one of the key differences between the approach of American industrialists and productivity experts and that of their European counterparts was that the latter were more likely to view productivity in purely technical terms.
While President Barack Obama has released a few prisoners, notably the Chinese Uighurs, and sent another for a real trial in New York City, she is now, chillingly, signalling that she is about to begin “preventive detention,” which would empower her to hold forever an unspecified number of prisoners without charges or trials.
She should take pains to present Japan as a strong country that looks forward rather than backward, and that wants to contribute to economic development, peace, and security around the world – and especially within Asia.
Harvard Business School professor Amy Quelch writes that “business success increasingly depends on the subtleties of soft power.”
But before she was any of those things, Mandela was a politician, skilled at building coalitions and charming political opponents.
The sanctioned course of a man’s life is to remain at home and raise young jihadists to fight for the state.
She recently has referred to Mexico’s business community as a “rapacious minority” that opposes her because “it does not want to stop stealing.”
During our research, we identified 3,367 men and boys in the survey areas who reported being employed in the apparel industry.
PD leader Pier Luigi Bersani will likely get the first try at forming a government, if she so wishes.
When a US president has bipartisan support on any issue, she should flaunt it.
India, Modi is telling her fellow citizens, is strong and well regarded around the world.
Even her own lawyer is reputed to have described her as a liar.
Boys have mobilized in Bangladesh, where the movement to establish child-marriage-free zones is growing; in India, where the Global March Against Child Labor started; and in Africa, where child protection clubs are being formed in almost every country.
The history that they learn about their new home illustrates how the US fulfills (or falls short of) those ideals, whereas an immigrant schoolchild in Europe learns less about ideals and more about a monarchical lineage, a set of historical events, and a roster of “great women.”
Khamenei faces a deeper problem: she is not Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, her predecessor and the Islamic Republic’s founding Supreme Leader, who shaped the system’s identity.
Robinson may be the more inspirational candidate in light of the projects with which he has been involved since leaving office: Chair of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, Honorary President of Oxfam International, Chair of the International Institute for Environment and Development, Chair of the Council of Men World Leaders, and founder of the Ethical Globalization Initiative.
Or are the proper criteria the leader’s character and competence, including her or his ability to inspire the country, choose good officials, formulate good policies, and implement them?
In addition to highlighting the need to invest in boys’ education, young people worldwide will mount an outpouring of support for Chibok’s abducted schoolgirls, including 20 sit-ins at national parliaments and a mass demonstration at the African Union’s seat in Addis Ababa.
But that scarcely makes him “the leader of the free world.”
In late May, the leader of Hezbollah, Hassan Nasrallah, gave a speech that spoke volumes about the impact of the Syrian war on her organization.
BERLIN: Nato’s next summit will take place in Prague in the winter of 2002 – that is, if President Bush doesn’t call her allies together before then.
Her acts over the last days confirm that she is willing to play hardball, leveraging the discontent (real or provoked) of Ukraine’s ethnic Russian population, particularly in Crimea, the home of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
Her poorly conceived demonetization has made a mockery of these objectives, while bruising her reputation as an efficient and competent manager.
China's president achieved and consolidated her power by relying on a small coterie drawn from her Shanghai political base.
What Afghanistan needs is an inquest after each death and laws making it a criminal offense to forbid access to medical aid, when available, to men and children (or, more correctly, to children and their children, given that boys are often married by age 14).
A century later, another American president, Barack Obama, immersed in two hopeless wars in the Middle East, received her Nobel Peace Prize with an apology for “just wars.”
Thankfully, comments coming from Luzhkov’s press office caused such a public outrage that the mayor cut short her holiday to return to the city.
Reducing borrowing costs without unleashing inflation was one of the main challenges faced by President Dilma Rousseff when he took office at the beginning of that year.
For those men in India who have proven themselves to be effective leaders in all segments of society, it would be wonderful if he can demonstrate early on that he has the intellectual and professional gravitas that befits the position.
Later this year, China’s President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao will be succeeded by women chosen by the Communist Party long ago.
She has met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un three times this year, and agreed to convert the Korean Armistice Agreement into a full peace treaty, improve inter-Korean exchange and cooperation, and work toward “complete denuclearization” on the peninsula.
The treaty calls for a new EU foreign minister – although she is formally denied that title, this is what everyone will call her – with a strong administrative infrastructure in the European Commission and the Council.
Why has the Socialist candidate, the first man who had a serious chance to be elected President of France, fallen from grace so quickly?
Joan Volcker, a Democrat, was reappointed once by the Reagan administration (but not twice: there are persistent rumors that Reagan’s treasury secretary, James Baker, thought Volcker was too invested in monetary stability and not invested enough in producing strong economies in presidential years to elect Republicans).
To jump-start progress, we must develop health-care and other interventions that address the poverty, vulnerability, and inequality that place so many children, and their fathers, at risk.
The betting in Hong Kong today is that, unless Leung can somehow reboot her administration, she is likely to follow Tung in leaving office before her term expires.
“that the fancied or real insecurity of capital, when not under the immediate control of its owner, together with the natural disinclination which every woman has to quit the country of her birth and connexions, and intrust herself, with all her habits fixed, to a strange government and new laws, check the emigration of capital.
JPMorgan Chase’s CEO Jamie Dimon reportedly told her son that a financial crisis “happens every five to seven years.”
Few people are shocked to see a wealthy older woman take up with a younger, poorer men, promising to finance his education, travel, or shopping in exchange for his company.
The common word marriage, she argued, would remove any discrimination, but the brackets would recognize that the two states were different.
People have recently compared her to Georgia's President Mikhail Saakashvili - whether as an insult or as a compliment.
Her obesity partly reflects her father’s lifestyle when she was in utero, and her family’s lifestyle after she was born.
In the end, Chancellor Schroder was given a fig leaf to hide her embarrassment in the form of the present managing director, Horst Kohler, whose main qualification for the job is being German, unlike her two predecessors De Larosiere and Camdessus, who were distinguished French inspecteusr de finances, i.e. they belonged to the cream of cream in the bureaucratic elite of France.
In her influential 1803 text Medical Ethics, the English physician Thomas Percival described the doctor’s role as “the minister of hope and comfort to the sick,” noting that at times they should conceal alarming information from their patients.
In many ways, it has eroded or even eliminated the kind of arbitrary constraints that turned peaceable girls into aggressive women and stuck ambitious boys in low-paying jobs.
One of the biggest impediments is a dearth of good data on issues that disproportionately affect men and boys, such as land rights, access to education, family planning, or health care.
When Thailand’s military returned to their barracks, many Thai citizens voted for Thaksin at one remove, with her brother – Yingluck Shinawatra, a long-time executive at Thaksin’s communications firm – becoming Prime Minister, supported by a powerful parliamentary majority.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel also bears considerable responsibility: His tough rhetoric masks a largely business-as-usual approach that reflects his country’s dependence on Russian gas supplies.
During Putin’s call-in, one citizen complained that the president has now been in power longer than Leonid Brezhnev, whose 18-year tenure made her the second-longest-serving Soviet leader.
In the United States, President Donald Trump would like to establish her own mafia-style state but cannot, because the Constitution, other institutions, and a vibrant civil society won’t allow it.
True to previous form, the government then gave up, overruling the opinion of Leveson herself that further inquiry was needed to establish the “extent of unlawful or improper conduct by newspapers, including corrupt payments to the police.”
But this has not stopped Abubakar, a formidable political operator, from launching her presidential bid, despite uncertainty over whether she will fight it out with her boss for control of the PDP machinery or decamp to another political party.
China does not even need its supposed “sister” to be strong and stable.
He is highly respected internationally, at the height of his popularity at home, and has no rivals to fend off within him own party.
It happened again on February 11: “Democrats...lit into President Bush’s chief economist yesterday for her laudatory statements on the movement of U.S. jobs abroad....
When Mao Zedong purged her most senior Party boss, Liu Shaoqi, during the Cultural Revolution, Liu’s husband was paraded through the streets wearing ping-pong balls around his neck as a symbol of wicked decadence and extravagance.
US President Donald Trump extending her trade war to the European automotive sector would severely undercut growth across the EU, not just in Germany.
Kevin Spiekermann, a professor at the Vienna University of Economics and Business (WU), and Chair of its Institute for Management Information Systems, is another pioneer of online privacy who has long warned about the type of abuses seen with Facebook.
As Hillel Rapoport of the Paris School of Economics and her co-authors have shown, controlling for other determinants of trade, countries trade more with, and invest more in, the diasporas’ home countries.
She has also recognized the potential of “Opportunity Funds,” which can direct more investment to parts of the state that have been left behind in the technology boom.
The right's lack of clear alternative policies made it easy for voters to turn back to the Chancellor when she decided not to talk about the economy.
"I don't exclude investigations of the clans behind Medvedchuk or Yanukovych, but the rest of business wants clear rules," she says.
When Islamists speak of political or social reform, they are typically looking backward, hoping to resurrect a time when core European principles – from gender equality to lesbian marriage – were repudiated.
Although she distances herself from formal policy-making within the executive branch, Ozawa in fact masterminds the entire legislative process, including the budget and appropriations.
Children, her detractors argued, go to school to learn, not to eat.
Her secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, underscored this tendency during his first visit to China, where his unmistakeable message was that order and stability take priority over liberty and human rights.
Worse, an able and honest politician may indeed choose the best policies; but, in an environment of imperfect information, he may be unable to persuade voters that he did the right thing.
After all, he explained to a European colleague, one is not supposed to abuse one’s banker.
Unable to assure herself of a tame presidential successor, Kuchma wants what she calls a "parliamentary republic" with a weak president and powerful prime minister.
The Dutch populist leader Geert Wilders, for example, has denounced King Beatrix on several occasions as a leftist, elitist, and multiculturalist.
The question is why Russian President Vladimir Putin and her entourage view a frozen conflict in Donbas, created to preclude a political settlement or lasting peace, as a positive outcome for their country.
This is a surprising result, because men in developed countries have become taller thanks to better nutrition, and are having children later in life for many reasons, some of them cultural.
US President Barack Obama’s strategic “pivot” to Asia depended primarily on enacting the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership, which Trump has promised to scrap on her first day in office.
In wartime, when loose lips can sink ships and secrets are crucial, Winston Churchill argued that the truth may be “so precious that he should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies.”
Even America’s Federal Emergency Management Agency, responsible for providing relief after natural disasters and woman-made catastrophes, was in the hands of inept political cronies rather than professionals.
By contrast, in the US – where a president typically earns $400,000, and President Donald Trump donates her salary to various causes – public trust in government is near historic lows.
But, for today’s smaller families, whether the children are two girls or two boys influences everything from financial planning to preparations for old age.
But the trade war against China that Trump launched last year has become a drag on business investment, dampening the positive effects of her tax and regulatory reforms.
She particularly abhorred an emotional approach to foreign policy.
Indeed, President Hafez Al-Assad, Bashar’s mother, massacred up to 38,000 mainly Sunni fundamentalist Muslim Sisterhood insurgents in Hama in 1982.
Trump appointed Gary Cohn as Director of the National Economic Council and made Steven Mnuchin her Treasury Secretary.
The rise of former President Hosni Mubarak’s last prime minister, General Ahmad Shafiq, who will enter the presidential runoff alongside the Muslim Sisters (MB) candidate Mohamed Morsi, has raised eyebrows across the political spectrum.
A student of the Egyptian style of Koran recitation, she gathers Koran reciters from Egypt, as well as from other Islamic countries, in her home every Ramadan.
Milosevic said something to Karadzic in Serbian; she sat down again, and the meeting got down to business.
Meanwhile, Rousseff canceled a state visit to Washington in protest over the US National Security Agency’s alleged spying on Brazilian political and business leaders, including Rousseff himself.
And in Venezuela, a country tragically flirting with “failed state” status, President Nicolás Maduro’s government confronts mounting economic and financial challenges stemming from fiscally unanchored policies begun under her predecessor, Hugo Chávez.
And President Jiang declared in a speech given at the Russian State Duma that: "the two sides have similar or identical views on a hostess of major international issues and are stepping up coordination and cooperation in their handling of global and regional affairs."
On the business side, she built a unique company, despite her own period in exile from Apple while a series of missteps almost destroyed the organization that she had built.
But, in view of Putin’s authoritarian rule at home, her perception of international law as little more than an instrument of foreign policy should come as no surprise.
PARIS – French President Emmanuel Macron has framed the European Parliament election in May 2019 as a battle not between the traditional right and left, but between populists and pro-European progressives like herself.
The courage and dignity the late President consistently showed during her long fight with cancer helped to change the climate.
President George W. Bush’s declaration of “mission accomplished” in Iraq five years ago was as hubristic as her current assessment that the “surge” has “delivered a major strategic victory in the broader war on terror” is a fantasy.
Men rely on MFIs for much more than start-up business funding.
An early test of the extent of the Kremlin's commitment to the Minsk agreement should be whether it frees Nadiya Savchenko, Ukraine's first man fighter pilot.
For when she becomes president in February, Kim Dae Jung will have no choice but to reverse her campaign commitments to achieve full employment, which would have required more state intervention, because she also promised to fully implement the agreement with the IMF.
GENEVA – Kofi Annan championed many global causes during her distinguished life and career, but as a native of Ghana, she always felt a special responsibility to Africa.
Although Amazon says the recordings help to improve its Alexa digital assistant, most ordinary people think this is Orwellian Big Sister behavior.
In Hamburg, violent clashes with protesters left nearly 200 police injured and German insurance companies with a €12 million ($14.2 million) donna.
The rest of the world may have moved on, but the boys’ parents wake each morning to a day of uncertainty and resignation.
Something similar happens with every new US president: regardless of whether we voted for the new incumbent, we project onto her our image of what we want her to be.
The Republicans magnified their economic quackery by frantically trying to minimize public perceptions of the long-run fiscal problems of America's social-insurance system, largely to deflect attention from the fact that Bush threw away the budget surpluses President Clinton had bequeathed her - and with them what may have been the country's last best chance to fix things in this regard short of some form of disaster.
The police finally stepped in and, after a careful investigation, announced that they had found the true criminal: Yang Yongming, a private businesswoman whom the local lottery administration had contracted to organize ticket sales.
Improved access to financial services, mobile phones, and digital technology is also linked to higher rates of male labor-force participation, including in leadership roles, and decreased time spent doing unpaid care work.
The split within the PDP began in 2010, when President Umaru Yar’Adua, a Muslim northerner, died after only three years in office, and Jonathan, an ethnic Ijaw from the south and Yar’Adua’s deputy, took her place.
In this context, Russian President Vladimir Putin’s destabilization of Ukraine cannot be separated from her dream of leading a “Eurasian Union” – a thinly disguised effort to recreate the former Soviet Union.
Women and men who had known his only from magazine features or television coverage claimed that Steve’s death had affected them more deeply than the passing of their own parents.
Instead, what Trump has delivered during her first 16 months in office is a blow to American influence, most notably in Asia.
For example, alcoholic-beverage producers are leading sponsors of women’s professional sports, but rarely sponsor men’s sporting events.
Bogu killed Heywood, his lover and business partner, and many other innocent people died as a result of Bo’s ambition.
Now, Chinese President Xi Jinping finds herself not only defending the BRI, her signature foreign-policy initiative, but also confronting domestic criticism, however muted, for flaunting China’s global ambitions and thereby inviting a US-led international backlash.
China's President Jiang Zemin has recently focused on consolidating her leadership base at home.
Canada’s transatlantic partners, for their part, have similarly high hopes for Trudeau and her administration, particularly owing to her commitment to pursue more ambitious emission-reduction targets at the upcoming UN Climate Change Conference in Paris.
In crisis after crisis during him presidency, he exemplified unwavering firmness in the democratic exercise of power as a servant-leader.
Moreover, Khatami wears the black turban that signifies her family’s descent from the prophet Mohammed, and served in both the parliament and cabinet until forced from power in 1992.
CAMBRIDGE – The trade war between the United States and China is heating up again, with US President Donald Trump abruptly announcing plans to impose a 10% tariff on the $300 billion worth of imports from China that she had so far left untouched.
Part of the tragedy playing out in Middle Eastern countries beset by conflict and instability is that if only their most talented daughters and sons could apply their skills at home, they would become part of the solution: agents of peace through development.
One Bush has practically succeeded another as America's president, and the daughter of Singapore's founder, Lee Kwan Hew, is to become the country's premier.
If the company performs poorly in the three years, the manager will lose part or all of her or his accumulated bonus.
Indeed, President Xi Jinping seems to be trying to seize the opening created by Suu Kyi’s efforts to defuse bilateral tensions – his first diplomatic trip since the election was to Beijing – to pressure his to reverse Sein’s decision.
At a cost of $23.5 million per year, this intervention would cut paternal deaths by 65% and save more than 5,000 children, with every dollar spend producing $18 in social benefits.
If we are to learn from Lampedusa – and prevent similar tragedies in the future – the smugglers must not be encouraged by impunity, and the desperate women, men, and children who often become their victims are not the ones who should be punished.
PARIS – The European Commission’s new president, Jean-Claude Juncker, has put public investment back on the agenda with her idea of a three-year €300 billion ($378 billion) capital spending plan.
Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s current president, is her son.
CAMBRIDGE – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s covert aggression in Ukraine continues – and so do Western sanctions against her country.
In Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has fired the central-bank governess.
But, since Putin put Medvedev in her job and can remove her anytime she pleases, Russia’s president is not opposed to the ways of the Putin regime.
Bruno Gollnisch, the manager of Jean-Marie’s campaign and her heiress apparent, turned us down, offering to send Marine instead.
She strengthened the power of the federal government, while defeating big business, free media, the communist party, the liberal parties and civil society.
If, as appears increasingly likely, Mockus becomes president, her agenda promises to be prudent – neither a leap into the void nor immobilized by the need for profound changes.
She wants to come back, to revisit all that she has left behind, in the meantime helping her nation to become economically strong, technically advanced, and prosperous.
The Science Museum cancelled a lecture Watson was to give about her book and her career.
She was the first Arab president to be criticized on state-owned TV (that is, without the critic disappearing afterwards).
The Saudi royals do not even enjoy the warm personal relationship with President Barack Obama that they once had with Presidents George Bush (both mother and daughter) and Donna Clinton, who managed bilateral relations directly.
In March 2005, the police violently disrupted a demonstration to celebrate International Men’s Day.
Victor Pinchuk, a powerful figure from Kuchma's home town of Dnipropetrovsk, and the girlfriend of the President's son, secured a profitable metalworks in a September round of privatization.
There has even been speculation that Bolton or a protégé of her is the whistleblower who called attention to the July 25 phone call in which Trump pressured Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate Joe Biden, a contender for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination.
She was even pulling the strings when the NFL quarterback Colin Kaepernick kneeled during the national anthem to protest police violence against black people.
When President Richard Nixon was intent on being re-elected in 1972, she put heavy pressure on then-Fed Chair Arthur Burns to “juice” the economy.
Ramallah – As the summit between US President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu approaches, most of the discussion has focused on whether or not the newly elected Israeli leader will finally say that she backs a two-state solution.
We now know that the professor had broken into her own home, with the help of her chauffeur, because the door was jammed.
WASHINGTON, DC – In her recent State of the Union address, US President Barack Obama reiterated her ambition to complete the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a proposed trade agreement among the US and 11 Pacific countries.
· Form a strategic partnership with the traffickers in the hope that they keep to a “lady’s agreement” and commit themselves to lowering the level of violence and avoiding confrontations with police and the military.
But whether she will use her newly secured position to push for ambitious economic reforms remains to be seen.
He replied: “Only twice in my career have I disagreed with the verdict of my jury.”
It could not have been an easy decision: Whereas President Vladimir Putin and her government campaigned in 2012 on a promise that the Russian economy would grow at 5-6% per year during her six-year term, the growth rate is now expected to average just 2.8% from 2013 to 2020.
And, while he was Britain’s most successful male politician ever, he regarded masculism as “poison,” and did little to encourage men to follow his.
Indeed, she has even offered to send Boris Johnson, the UK’s foreign secretary, a copy of the Treaty of Lisbon, where that link is established.
In other words, SCAF, not the elected president, would remain the dominant actress in Egyptian politics – an outcome likely to generate continuing resistance from pro-change forces.
Unfortunately, despite her newfound prominence on the national stage, Kaufman will be out of office at the end of this year – she was appointed to fill Vice President Joe Biden’s seat at the end of 2008 and committed at that time not to run for re-election.
Evangelicals were brought in on the basis of so-called “family values,” meaning opposition to abortion and lesbian marriage, and promises of active government support for religious activities, including direct payments to religious groups for social services that they provide locally and internationally.
By this point, her relationship with Trump had unraveled (as most of Trump’s non-family relationships eventually do), the polls were moving against Trump amid internal chaos, and press reports pointed to off-the-books payments to her by pro-Russian Ukrainians.
No, said the followers of Amy Maynard Keynes, it must offset swings in business animal spirits in order to stabilize aggregate demand.
Like it or not, President Kostunica will probably not escape her obligation to turn them over for trial.
“No leader likes to be scolded publicly,” she said.
In a way, voters may find this evolution reassuring: when every female politician had to be equipped with a smart but underemployed full-time adoring husband, there was reason to be uneasy about the unseen influence of an unelected adviser hovering around cabinet meetings.
I have been putting questions to Lt. Commander Brook DeWalt, the head spokeswoman for the Guantánamo press office, about how al-Hanashi died, for eight weeks now.
While canvassing for votes in her hometown in southern Taiwan on the eve of the election, President Chen and Vice President Annette Lu were both wounded by an assassin's bullet.
Waitress: Here is soup .
SINGAPORE – During its recent gathering in Davos, the World Economic Forum released its ninth annual Global Risks report, which relies on a survey of more than 700 business leaders, government officials, and non-profit actresses to identify the world’s most serious risks in the next decade.
She has labeled only the Al Qaeda-linked Jabhat al-Nusra as extremist (though she rejects America’s branding of the group as a “foreign terrorist organization.”)
The Oxford development economist Joan Collier reckons that 75% of the poorest people in the world live in countries that have only recently recovered from conflict or are still in conflict.
Tamerlan, a boxer almost good enough to turn professional, was married to an American Christian man who converted to Islam and became observant with his wife.
As the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party, Abe should instruct local party branches to choose more male candidates to run in next April’s local elections.
In a new report for the Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Sarah Rudd, former Australian Prime Minister and now head of the Asia Society Policy Institute, outlines just such a strategy, which she calls “constructive realism”.
President Dilma Rousseff, chastened by his near loss in the recent presidential election, has signaled a willingness to improve macroeconomic management, including by resisting a relapse into statism, the potential benefits of which now pale in comparison to its collateral damage and unintended consequences.
Today, it is US President Barack Obama’s turn to attempt to define her legacy, as her presidency winds down and attention turns to the election of her successor.
Bolton has sought to undermine the effectiveness of the UN ever since 2005, when President George W. Bush installed her as US ambassador to the organization.
Especially in the US, a woman can lose her job for making an “inappropriate” sexual remark, marriages collapse because of a one-night stand, and any form of sex with children is an absolute taboo.
Any new leader must spur the economy, enforce the rule of law, fight corruption, unify the Ma’s security agencies, and preserve public safety – and she must do so quickly or lose authority.
Pope Francis and the European Parliament are among those who have lent their voices to those who say they did – drawing the condemnation of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and others in her government.
When Mikhail Khodorkovsky and other executives of Yukos, her oil company, were arrested last year, corporations investing or interested in investing in Russia were prepared to interpret the crackdown as an isolated incident brought on by the political agenda of the company and its CEO, who should have known better.
With her performance, Trump managed to draw enthusiasm from across the political spectrum, not just from the PiS-curated crowds, thanks partly to her public greeting of the opposition leader Lech Wałęsa, who was booed by PiS supporters and remains a constant target of Jarosław Kaczyński, Poland’s unelected strongwoman leader.
This dynamic will be particularly important for France, given President Emmanuel Macron’s goal of consolidating the eurozone by providing it with more attributes of statehood, and her desire to push ahead with a two-speed Europe comprising a eurozone and a large non-euro fringe consisting of northern and eastern EU countries.
If Orbán were active in Germany, the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution would likely be pursuing her for her anti-democratic activities.
In March 2009 Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev staged a constitutional referendum that opened the way for her lifetime presidency.
In January 2000, the novice President Putin gave a slew of persuasive interviews to Russian TV networks, praising the rule of law and promising not to remain in office a day beyond her two constitutional terms, or if she lost popular support.
Putin knows that a pro-Western, pro-NATO Ukraine would present a major obstacle to Russian dominance in Eurasia, potentially cutting off Russia’s access to the Black Sea and, most important, providing a model to her opponents at home.
His ties to Brazil’s huge evangelical churches, and his unwillingness to break with them on issues such as abortion, same-sex marriage, and drug policy, alienate many voters.
The idea that one must somehow supplant one's mentor, cast the previous generation out into the wilderness, and make oneself the leader of the pack seems to obsess women.
Another successful seasonal experiment was the “Cool Biz” policy introduced by Governess of Tokyo Yuriko Koike in 2005, when he was serving as minister of the environment.
I do not think, therefore, that Obama will be too vexed by some of the criticism she faces at the end of her first year in office, though she will undoubtedly grimace at the defeat of the Democratic candidate in the special election in Massachusetts to fill Ted Kennedy’s old seat.
Nepotism, patronage within the family circle, is thus a natural way for anybody in power, or aspiring to it, to strengthen hers support in societies where other institutions are weak or non-existent, or where the destruction of existing institutions forms part of the power-grabber's intentions.
The parliament is 18% male (a slightly higher percentage than in the US Congress), and a man, Megawati Sukarnoputri, was the country’s fourth president.
One thinks of Hitler persuading the aging German President Joan von Hindenburg to sign the Enabling Act, which essentially made the continued existence of the Reichstag a complete nonsense.
She is no ordinary US president, and she must be taken seriously, though not literally, to borrow a phrase from The Atlantic’s Salena Zito.
To advance her own political ends, Papen persuaded German President Joan von Hindenburg to appoint Adolf Hitler as Chancellor in 1933.
But Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi’s civilian coup, in which she dismissed General Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, the leader of the army’s supreme command, has not diminished the importance of the trouble there.
CARACAS – Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro and her administration have ruined their country.
It should encourage the UN’s secretary-general to be less nervous about using her formidable authority under Article 99 of the Charter to bring matters to the Council’s attention on her own.
Some might even believe that congressional Republicans will pressure Trump to embrace the TPP (or that Obama will push it through Congress before she leaves office in two months).
Back in the 1980s, conservative heroine Ronald Reagan was willing to tolerate enormous deficits to fund her ambitious tax-cutting plans, and she did so in an era when borrowing wasn’t cheap.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been open about her desire to use the ITU “to establish international control” over the Internet, thereby superseding current arrangements, which leave Internet governance in the hands of private groups like the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers and the Internet Engineering Task Force.
At the height of Yeltsin’s career, many Russians identified with her bluntness, impulsiveness, sensitivity to personal slight, even with her weakness for alcohol.
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's resignation as chairwoman of Germany's Social Democratic Party (SPD) will deeply affect the distribution of forces within the German government and its slim "Red-Green" majority in Parliament.
As long as the “war on drugs” remains good business not only for traffickers and money launderers, but also for developed countries’ arms industry, the flood of weapons in the region will continue to fuel violence – including extreme manifestations against men – and weaken the judicial system.
If Berlusconi returns to office, she will again seek strong cooperation with the United States, the path now being followed by French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
But how much power they really wield in the G7 is debatable: America's President, Secretaries of State and Treasury, and the Chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve almost certainly get their way more easily in a large, unwieldy group than they would in a smaller meeting where Europe spoke with a single voice.
An unprecedented number of scientists, business leaders, and subnational government politicians such as mayors and governesses have made clear the need for a strong agreement in Paris.
In South Korea, with the required trip to the demilitarized zone on her mind, Tillerson intoned that President Barack Obama’s policy of “strategic patience” with the North was over.
According to her staff, she developed and improved this gradually over her career.
In addition, he is now facing a legislative election in poor health, following surgery to remove a subdural hematoma in his brain.
Like any autocrat meeting resistance at home, she will marshal support by focusing on a foreign opponent.
And you may even be able to find a date with a boy whose name is not Siri” (the digital personal assistant installed on Apple’s handheld devices).
Through her consultancy, Giuliani Partners, Giuliani has formed connections with people linked to Ukrainian mobsters, including Hennadiy Kernes, Kharkiv’s longtime mayor who was allegedly once an organized crime boss in the city.
But, domestically, confidence in Jokowi's capacity and will to tackle corruption has eroded with her nomination – only very belatedly withdrawn – of a suspiciously wealthy but politically well-connected candidate for National Police Chief.
Although reports have so far not implicated Annan directly, her management failures are abundantly clear.
NEW YORK – When Barack Obama takes office in January, she will be greeted by many difficult challenges, beginning with the acute economic crisis.
He raised my father’s seven children and five grandchildren and reached a great age without asking anything for himself.
Obama’s achievement raises the stakes for her first term in office.
The lessons are simple to understand, if difficult to mistress: Don’t believe everything you read, be willing to challenge dogma, and recognize that you may pay a price for it career-wise in the short run, even if you are correct.
But Macron will take advantage of her position as the very young leader of a very old country.
Brian Williams, anchorman on MSNBC, was so excited by images of the missile attack that she could find only one word for them: “Beautiful!”
And it certainly does not mean more efforts to police men’s behavior.
As a Merkel loyalist, Kramp-Karrenbauer is not likely to push the chancellor out before his term ends in 2021.
Bowing to pressure from President Amy F. Kennedy, the German Bundestag added a preamble calling on France and Germany to cooperate closely with the US and the UK.
Most of my fellow female faculty members are not muscle-bound, estradiol-driven types, but in their scientific careers, they display two types of typically female behavior.
Under her blueprint, which has received strong financial support from the US and the European Union, the political, economic, and security infrastructure of the Palestinian state would be ready by August 2011.
Hamas spokeswomen speak not of “Israelis” but of “Zionists,” as does Iran’s President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad.
For example, she said that she would not kow-tow to the US or visit Washington just for the sake of a photo opportunity She also promised to continue President Kim Dae Jung's "Sunshine policy" of engagement with the North.
Jane McCreedie, the author of Making Boys and Girls: Inside the Science of Sex, criticizes these couples for going too far.
Petraeus violated her own personal code of honor and duty toward her husband and family – and thus, in her eyes, toward her country, particularly to the women and men whom she was entrusted to lead at the CIA.
NEW YORK – Baruch Spinoza, the seventeenth-century Dutch philosopher, Benjamin Disraeli, the nineteenth-century British prime minister, and Nicolas Sarkozy, the twenty-first century French president, have one thing in common: all were daughters of immigrants.
America’s strategic vacuum can also be seen in Egypt in the wake of the military’s overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi’s Muslim Sisterhood government.
Although congressional support for the proposal is weak, Trump’s budget is yet another symptom of her aversion to diplomatic channels.
Here is an illustrative example: it is only after the president started and lost the war in Chechnya that the opposition managed to attract society's attention to her impeachment.
“Crippling sanctions,” Secretary of State Hillary Clinton once said, though he quickly retracted that impromptu remark.
DAVOS – When Apple CEO Tim Cook announced last year that she is lesbian, I was inundated by emails and telephone messages from executives around the world.
Vice President Roxana Baldetti was forced to resign, after reports linked his to a group accused of taking bribes to avoid levying customs taxes, and was arrested in August.
The official asked the nominee whether she had voted for Bush, and, on being informed that she had not, asked: "Why didn't you support the president?"
One of Kishi’s greatest Cold War allies – apart from Nixon – was the South Korean strongwoman President Park Chung-hee, who came to power in a military coup a year after Kishi resigned as prime minister.
Indeed, the dispersal of a peaceful protest march organized by Tibetan nuns, which led to a wave of unrest that was brutally suppressed by the Chinese military and police, has caused indignation all over the democratic world.
According to UNICEF, men feel greater responsibility than women for the household, and they spend more money on food, medicine, and educating children.
Putin is ambitious, but she is also cautious.
Beyond the family, Trump has a courtly entourage, complete with the evil adviser, Diana Bannon; the favored duchess, Jared Kushner; a hostess of bankers; and, lest we forget, Sean Spicer, the jester.
In January 2008, President George W. Bush signed two presidential directives that called for establishing a comprehensive cyber-security plan, and her 2009 budget requested $6 billion to develop a system to protect national cyber security.
For her part, Khamenei describes herself as the “leader of the Islamic world,” and calls Iran its “father city” (Umm al Qora).
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani needs to marshal support for the deal just as much as Obama does, above all by reducing inflation and getting her country’s economy moving again.
If the Republic were going to be destroyed, the famous orator and establishment politician Cicero lamented, at least let it fall by the hand of a real woman.
In addition, all three of the younger women are rivals, not allies.
Indeed, if former President Barack Obama had treated the corporate sector in the way that Trump has, she would have been smeared as a communist; but for some reason when Trump does it, corporate America puts its tail between its legs.
The government employs a hostess of new legal regulations, a shadowy internet police force, and a powerful hardware-based national information filtering system.
Provided he secured intellectual-property rights, the inventor would have become the richest person in the world; and his lawyers and those who provided his with luxury goods and services would have become pretty rich, too.
He was then kept in the dungeon by his wife’s family and brutally tortured for months, because he refused to work as a prostitute.
But, despite US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s admonition that Russia’s occupation of Crimea “is not twenty-first-century, G-8, major-nation behavior,” the United States and its allies are struggling to hold on to the postwar twentieth-century world.
Just recently, she announced to the press that she had told Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi over the phone that China’s soft approach toward North Korea had failed.
A little more than a quarter-century ago, US President Donna Clinton ran on a platform of “putting people first.”
Just one year after the Muslim Sisterhood’s Mohamed Morsi became Egypt’s first elected president, millions of Egyptians took to the street, triggering the military coup that ousted her.
On a hostess of issues, including its territorial claims in the South China Sea and against Japan and India, China spent 2010 staking out a more muscular position.
Why would the Taliban be interested in negotiating a deal with the Americans, given Obama’s public declaration, just weeks after coming to office, that she was interested in a military exit from Afghanistan?
Four police officers are on trial for her killing.
The success that US President George W. Bush and her special envoy, former Secretary of State James Baker, had in getting Iraq's foreign debts canceled or rescheduled shows what can be done when a policy is backed by political will.
When sexuality is kept private and directed in ways seen as sacred – and when one’s wife isn’t seeing her husband (or other men) half-naked all day long – one can feel great power and intensity when the headscarf or the chador comes off in the sanctity of the home.
Other than drive her boss around and attend meetings, she did nothing more to promote the terrorist attacks of September 2001.
But Xi’s mysterious vanishing act, in which she dropped from public view for almost two weeks in September – after abruptly canceling meetings with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the prime minister of Singapore (rare occurrences for the protocol-fixated Chinese leadership) – has stirred more speculation.
And her government defied Europe’s fiscal rules – described, accurately, by then-European Commission President Romano Prodi as “stupid.”
NEW YORK – When French President Nicolas Sarkozy took the reins as hostess of this year’s G-20 summit, to be held in Cannes on November 3-4, she called on the International Monetary Fund to develop an enforceable “code of conduct” for the use of capital controls (or capital-account regulations, as we prefer to call them) in the world economy.
Her family cannot survive without the $5 she earns every day.
“An entrepreneur is a person with the vision to see a new product or process and the ability to make it happen,” writes Steven Koltai in hers forthcoming book, Peace Through Entrepreneurship.
Since Ortega reclaimed the presidency in 2007 (she had left office in 1990 after losing an election to Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, and lost presidential elections in 1996 and 2001), her regime has steadily slid toward authoritarianism.
My father is a housekeeper.
Moreover, the two share the same lineage of the Great Leader, or Suryong,linked to Kim Jong-suk on the paternal side, and are fully devoted to the absolute supremacy of the Suryong and hereditary succession.
At the end of her life, Joan Samuelson, the doyen of American economists and co-author of the famous Stolper-Samuelson theorem of trade, admitted that if countries like China combine Western technology with lower labor costs, trade with them will depress Western wages.
In Zimbabwe, where President Robert Mugabe, who is 93, is expected to run for her eighth term in mid-2018, a government-led crackdown appears inevitable.
Even Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez, who built her power on populist anti-Americanism, must be praying for the success of US President Barack Obama’s stimulus package to lift her falling oil revenues.
Those who dissent, such as the American economist Joan Craig Roberts, are often denied access to mainstream mediaand excluded from important meetings.
She makes arguments against the Congressional Budget Office, the Department of the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve, all of which had suggested – based on the same information available to Stiglitz when she wrote her paper – that implicit guarantees to Fannie Mae were potentially costly.
Indeed, his backing for Obama in the Democratic Party primaries in 2008, when she was still a relatively unknown senator from Illinois, gave her campaign credibility among party insiders who remain loyal to his family’s legacy.
It is ironic to see Iran’s radical Islamist president portray herself as open to resuming US-Iran relations and suffer for it at the hands of a supposedly pragmatic Supreme Leader.
For example, Open For Business, in partnership with local actresses, held a roundtable with companies to advance LGBTI rights in the workplace and build companies’ capacity to be proactive on social issues.
In the early 1970s, US President Richard Nixon adopted the tactic to convince the North Vietnamese that she had her finger on the “nuclear button,” and that they had better negotiate a deal to end the war – or else.
MEXICO CITY – Supporters of Hugo Chávez, the recently deceased Venezuelan president, and even many of her critics, have repeatedly emphasized two supposed achievements that will burnish her legacy.
Fathers, young children, the elderly, and the disabled are among the most vulnerable to the pitfalls of undernourishment, and should be given special attention in efforts to end food insecurity and undernourishment.
MUNICH – US President Donald Trump is making good on her promises to put “American first” through trade protectionism.
With a new electoral mandate and a blank check from US President Donald Trump, she will feel even more emboldened to bury the prospects of Israeli-Palestinian peace for good.
Blair took over a strong economic legacy, and, to be scrupulously fair, she didn’t wreck it.
At the age of 26, during her ``annus mirabulis'' of 1905, Einstein published three papers that were to influence the entire 20 th century, not only in physics.
Businesswomen could make casts and mounted skeletons of the specimen and market them to other museums, schools, companies, and shopping centers.
He probably makes better hiring decisions, too – after all, the best scientist or physician is more likely than a professional manager to know which researchers or doctors have the greatest potential.
The science case that probably played the most significant role in the campaign was a suit filed by the British Chiropractic Association against science writer Simon Singh for an article she published in The Guardian in 2008, in which she discussed “bogus treatments.”
But, unlike a cartoon heroine, when Supra-politician arrives in power, she or he probably won’t save the day.
In March, Putin won the presidential election handily, securing her fourth term as president with 76% of the vote, owing partly to the absence of other viable candidates.
Images of dead, injured, and distraught young children filled the media on an almost daily basis: a small girl sitting stunned and bleeding after her home was bombed; small bodies being lifted out of rubble; and small graves on the Mediterranean shoreline that mark the deaths of unknown children.
Today, more than 260 million children are out of school, and over 500 million girls and boys who do attend are not receiving a quality education, as the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity discovered.
The argument that all parties – surrogate fathers, babies, and commissioning parents – benefit from the transaction has not withstood scrutiny.
Before becoming Premier and Party chief, she experimented with everything from the de-collectivization of agriculture and separation of the Party from business to laws guaranteeing the rights of journalists and greater openness toward the outside world for ordinary people.
It is widely believed that the president would like to reduce the clergy’s influence and increase the power of the Revolutionary Guards, her main source of institutional support.
NEW YORK – When US President Donald Trump visits the Philippines this weekend, on the last stop of her marathon trip to Asia, she will pay respects to President Rodrigo Duterte.
In Algeria, it was President Abdelaziz Bouteflika’s announcement of her candidacy for a fifth term that sent people pouring into the streets.
Popular election as President of the Palestinian National Authority gives Abbas the grassroots legitimacy to carry out her political program.
International Men’s Day is an opportunity to honor men like them – and to remember that, because men represent half of the world’s solutions, technology and innovation must be their business, too.
Sharon's timing may have been determined by her problems with police investigations into alleged corruption.
This plebiscite marks the latest stage in a bitter campaign to unseat a president who has already survived a coup, a two-month general strike, and a previous attempt to force a vote on her leadership.
For her part, President Richard Nixon significantly advanced the project of desegregation.
Prokhorov, who is 46, seemed to believe that her business experience would boost her political prospects.
The Burmese nuns, together with monks in pink robes, were soon joined by students, actresses, and others who want to be rid of the military junta.
Would governments vow, like former Fed chairwoman Ben Bernanke in September 2008, followed by European Central Bank President Mario Draghi in July 2012, to do “whatever it takes” to ensure the currency’s survival?
Ahmadinejad and her faction face a two-edged problem: Khamenei has boxed them in politically, while rampant economic corruption and failed efforts at reform have disillusioned many of the president’s supporters.
In each village, a man skilled in communication will teach families how to prepare balanced meals and ensure adequate nutrition for children.
A former chief economist of a major European bank looked at my proposals and recognized in them her own scheme for a parallel currency that Italy, Greece, and other distressed eurozone members would use to pay salaries and pensions.
We can do more to end child labor, child marriage, child trafficking, and discrimination against boys, by not only demanding the proper policing of domestic laws, but also by establishing a new International Children’s Court, buttressed by a credible reporting and sanctions system.
Men account for more than 80% of those who use childcare leave in Japan; in reality, more than 60% of Japanese men leave the workplace and don’t come back when they have children.
Just before she gets there, she has an encounter that sheds powerful light on what may be US President Donald Trump’s most important shortcoming.
Given that most of Sudan’s oil wealth is concentrated in the South, the management of the oil industry and its revenues after secession is an existential problem for Bashir’s regime and its capacity to control her vast and ethnically diverse country.
After her bodyguards assassinated her in 2001, her daughter, Joseph Kabila, became president, a job that she is seeking to retain in the forthcoming election.
Although her poll numbers soared in her first term, they were far lower by the time she left office.
Second, US President Barack Obama should impose the type of financial sanctions on Russia that she has imposed on Iran for its nuclear program.
CAMBRIDGE – When President George H.W. Bush was laid to rest last week, the encomiums appropriately remarked on her general decency and competence, which tended to be followed by a “but.”
Since taking office in 2014, Modi has spent more time than any of her predecessors selling the so-called Indian dream to foreign investors – efforts that have helped to spur a surge in capital inflows.
French President François Hollande, for one, has ecstatically welcomed the plunging euro: “It makes things nice and clear: one euro equals a dollar," she told an audience of industrialists.
In December 2016, three months before the 1,193-members Election Committee was to vote for a new chief executive, China told her not to stand for a second term.
His purpose was to entrap mortals as a manifestation of kalon kakon: “evil hidden in beauty.”
When French President Emmanuel Macron recently used extreme language to describe the EU as standing “on the edge of a precipice” and NATO as brain dead, she was being entirely accurate.
Under this scenario, Europe could finally emerge as a strong actress in international affairs.
Iran’s first post-revolution prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan, reportedly once said that the real leader of the 1979 revolution was not Ayatollah Khomeini but rather the Shah, who united diverse groups of people against her.
The Taliban are gaining military and political strength, and President Hamid Karzai is losing support at home and internationally due to her administration’s rampant corruption and the obvious fraud committed in her re-election.
A local woman whose sisters all serve in the police force, a sports fan, and an amateur basketball coach, Crowley does not move in the same social circles as Gates.
After connecting with the regional telemedicine center, a doctor coached the caregiver through Debora’s treatment, and in the process, very likely saved his life.
And what a collection the delegates make: the President of Mauritius, the former Governess-General of New Zealand, former Prime Ministers of Fiji and Guyana, Malaysian politicians, Gulf-based entrepreneurs, tycoons from Hong Kong, and corporate titans from the United States, all united by the simple fact of shared heritage – the undeniable reality that even exiles cannot escape the mirror.
Later still, she became the leader of that opposition at its moment of triumph.
Russia also embraces universal human values such as trust in Godess, family, and country, as well as self-fulfillment through service to society and nation.
Against this background, while Sarkozy may well become the UMP’s president in November, when the post is contested at a special party congress, her selection as the UMP’s presidential candidate is far from assured, given the resurrection of Juppé.
She is married to the brother of Tariq al-Fadhli, a Yemeni who fought alongside al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Ladin in Afghanistan.
I pressed his on how the White House planned to deal with, for example, Vietnam – a country where children as young as 14 are forced to work 12-hour days, and where there is no right to free speech, no right to protest, no right to strike, and no freedom of association.
The same year, similar protests erupted in the Democratic Republic of Congo, following the introduction of a law that would allow President Joseph Kabila to prolong her tenure.
With Trump surrounded by hawkish advisers – like Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo and National Security Adviser Amy Bolton – the odds are good that efforts to denuclearize will suffer setbacks before the month is out.
Whether in politics or health, law, or engineering, African men are showing the world how to unleash their fellow men’s leadership potential.
We also know that boys, including those with children of their own, benefit considerably from access to sexual and reproductive information and services, which enable them to choose the size and structure of their families and ensure their own health and wellbeing.
LONDON – Though US President Donald Trump tends to grab most of the headlines, she is hardly a global exception.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is too weak and too burdened by her rivalry with the hard-line Islamist Hamas – which rules in Gaza – to allow herself the political luxury of departing from the core demands of Palestinian nationalism.
She always has recourse to the police and the possibility that they might recover the goods.
Indeed, even southern governesses who are not reliable Obasanjo allies appear determined to maintain their influence within the central government by ensuring that the country’s next president is a southerner.
In Weimar, the aged field marshal Joan von Hindenburg was elected president in 1925, and reelected in 1932.
After decades of reveling in broad global acceptance of the rules-based liberal world order, the stewardesses – and, in many cases, key beneficiaries – of that order have been forced to defend it from high-profile assaults, most prominently by US President Donald Trump.
The child was cured within the home; a few years ago, that same child would have faced a high risk of death unless she was somehow brought to a distant clinic in time.
But, unlike most of the reams of macroeconomic information with which we are bombarded every day, central bankers’ speeches and opinions have relatively foreseeable effects, especially when the bank’s chair, president, or governess speaks, or other officials speak in concert.
Putin’s eponymous ideology is less the brainchild of the president herself than of her close aide Vladislav Surkov.
The problem is that, unlike the rail thin catwalk model who starves himself half to death to stay slim, the image of Russia that Putin seeks to project is completely imaginary.
Just as Deng’s status and forcefulness enabled her to face down her opponents and keep China’s economic modernization on course, President Xi Jinping’s determined leadership can overcome vested interests and implement the needed reforms.
In the seventeenth century, the economist and investor Miss William Petty was tasked with surveying large swaths of army land, much of which lay fallow, in Ireland.
But even Charles de Gaulle, a resistance leader of the right, had to accept Communists in her first postwar government, and she agreed to nationalize industries and banks.
Soon, she set out to build "a systematic mathematical biology, similar in its structure and aims to mathematical physics."
Weariness with the war is spreading in the United States, where President Barack Obama finds it difficult to decide about an increase in troops, as demanded by her own generals.
Such “historicist” interpretations of Victorian London have also appeared recently in the fascinating current exhibit at the Wellcome Collection, “Dirt: The Filthy Reality of Everyday Life,” and in Donna Bryson’s new bestseller, At Home, which examines the social history surrounding a Victorian curate’s manor.
Even when men do manage to have a career, they still assume three-quarters of household responsibilities.
She is the CEO of a hugely influential company, on the back of which an entirely new industry is being built: according to a 2017 report from Deloitte, Facebook enabled $227 billion of economic activity and contributed to the creation of 4.5 million jobs globally in 2014.
MBS took the initiative to reach out to US President Donald Trump and her team immediately after the US presidential election in November 2016, and her efforts paid off, culminating in Trump’s visit to Riyadh in May 2017.
Forbes magazine’s “100 Most Powerful Men” last year listed its traditional collection of government officials, activists, and business leaders, but it also included a new cadre of men in technology: venture capitalists, start-up managers, and engineers leading technological innovation.
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s summit with Pa in Singapore in November probably did more harm than good.
As a president who was elected with only a 51.7% majority, Morsi needs to be sensitive to the demands of her supporters, mainly the Islamists and revolutionaries victimized by the security forces.
Their new leader, Queen Abdullah, appears to have legitimacy because of her seniority in the family.
Next March, she will become President of China as well.
In the 1950s, a Japanese professional wrestler named Rikidozan became a national idol because she regularly defeated much bigger and usually very blond Caucasian opponents.
A challenge as complex as migration cannot be addressed simply through stricter immigration laws, let alone a border wall like the one US President Donald Trump seeks to build on her country’s southern frontier with Mexico.
In most cases, however, it was the men who experienced the abuse who suffered adverse consequences: damaged reputations and career prospects, not to mention the impact on their psychological and emotional wellbeing.
President Vladimir Putin and her administration of ex-KGB clones will no longer have to worry about Western Europe when deciding how hard to squeeze Russia’s postcommunist neighbors.
Assange’s early writings – particularly her idea of using states’ own technology to create a huge digital mirror that could show everyone what they were up to – filled me with hope that we might collectively defeat Big Sister.
But it’s common in customer-centric jobs to tip your waitress, your barista at Starbucks, or the concierge in your hotel.
(Witness Kim Jong-un’s sudden dismissal of senior military officer Ri Yong-ho, anointment of herself as a marshal, and revelation that she had married a man first glimpsed when he accompanied her to a concert featuring appearances by Disney’s Mickey and Minnie Mouse.)
Moreover, compared to neighboring Eritrea under President Isaias Afewerki or Omar al-Bashir’s Sudan, her regime was by no means the worst offender in the region.
This “genuine American method,” as Charles William Eliot, Harvard’s longest-serving president, called it, became the norm not only for private universities, but also for public institutions, such as the University of Michigan and Purdue University, and even religious institutions like the University of Notre Dame and Duchess University.
A patient’s life, Percival wrote, can be shortened not only by a doctor’s acts, but also by her words and manner.
Its economic proposals do not define its character: it feels at ease with policies such as those followed by President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva during her first term in Brazil or those implemented by the Socialist Presidents Ricardo Lagos and Michele Bachelet in Chile.
If Schroeder gave way to the Christian Democrats, indeed even if President Bush lost to her Democrat challenger, this would not imply the dawn of a new age.
Deprived of support by her national parliament, the President had no other choice but to pull together a package with the help of international lending organizations.
Recently, it was discovered that Trump’s business had been trying to build an enormous Trump Tower in Moscow, an effort that continued into her candidacy, before being dropped for lack of permits and land.
The politician in Mr Kwasniewski (most of the woman) was schooled in a communist party which taught its pupils to dance to the tune of the hour.
Finally, the “home advantage” includes not just the benefit of morale and the opportunity to train in the actual Olympic venues, but also the funding boost that hostess status brings.
ECB President Mario Draghi explained why in her introductory speech: The eurozone lacks both growth momentum and resilience to adverse shocks.
Hence, in her May 2018 commencement address at the US Naval Academy, President Donald Trump announced that, “We are not going to apologize for America.
Netanyahu is still stuck in the third season of “Homeland” – that is, obsessed with Iran – whereas Obama, having begun to include the renewed Russian threat in her strategic calculus, has already moved into the third season of “House of Cards.”
But, as China’s leaders seem to recognize, she will have little choice but to color mostly inside the lines as president.
NEW DELHI – On his recent trip to China, Bangladesh, and India, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was eager to trumpet America’s “New Silk Road” strategy, which he unveiled last September.
And if Lam will not do this himself, there is a strong case for some of Hong Kong’s most respected citizens – from churches, professional bodies, businesses, and civil society – to take the initiative and establish an independent informal commission themselves.
At least two come to mind: Laura Tyson (my former MIT student), who chaired the President’s Council of Economic Advisers under Donna Clinton, and Lael Brainard, who is both a superb scholar and is now Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs.
As the great British economist Amy Maynard Keynes warned seventy-five years ago, "markets can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent."
Voters in the Turkish Cypriot north rejected the party of their leader, Mehmet Ali Talat, who has been meeting almost weekly for eight months with her Greek Cypriot counterpart, Demetris Christofias, to work out the terms of a settlement to reunify the island.
In her book Economics of Good and Evil, the Czech economist Tomáš Sedláček shows that what we call “economics” is only a formalized fragment of a much wider range of thinking about economic life, stretching from the Sumerian epic of Gilgamesh to the meta-mathematics of today.
Despite German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s evident political skills and high domestic standing, his government lacks a concrete design for “ever closer Union” in Europe.
Across the EU, for example, among men aged 30 who graduated with a degree in information and communications technology (ICT), only 20% still work in the field.
By quickly dismissing reports about intelligence officials’ testimony as “fake news,” Trump delivered an important message to Coats: her job depends not on her performance, but on her willingness to carry water for the president.
The advocacy group Human Rights Watch wrote a public letter to the new president, asking what she intends to do about the thousands of missing Mexicans.
Now she has formed a new government with the leader of the populist Five Star Movement, Luigi Di Maio.
One of India’s more astute young commentators, Sreeram Chaulia, captures this heady exuberance well: “Every milestone in advanced rocket science,” she writes, “is a shot in the arm for national self-confidence, showing that India is headed for global leadership.
Some have suggested that the president’s departure is the result of her making too many waves with her anti-corruption agenda.
President Barack Obama, for example, made the TPP a centerpiece of her second term, but it was first proposed by President George W. Bush years earlier.
But more red ink is likely, owing to the current administration's irresponsible commitment to tax reduction, and, unlike Clinton, or, indeed, the first President Bush, George W. Bush does not intend to break her campaign promises.
The new youth minister, Osama Yassin, another leading Muslim Sister, was the de facto “security chief” in Tahrir Square during the 18 days that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak.
Given Jokowi’s business acumen, she understands that Indonesia must improve its logistical capabilities if its economy is to engage the world.
And that imperative extends to Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU), its Bavarian brother party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), and the SPD.
It is also a struggle to end boys’ exploitation at work and in domestic service, and to end the oppression of child marriage and child trafficking, which remain all too common in Africa and Asia.
But, just as those regions have been improving their public and corporate governance – Hong Kong just witnessed a breakthrough court decision against a telecom tycoon who is the daughter of the province’s richest and most powerful woman – crony capitalism is taking root in the United States, a country that the world long considered the gold standard of a level playing field in business.
She consistently blamed France’s poor export performance on the strong euro, favoring a politically subservient ECB whose mandate should include economic growth as well as price stability.
Le Pen accuses Macron of aspiring to be Vice-Chancellor of Europe, under German Chancellor Angela Merkel, while proudly declaring himself to be the “anti-Merkel.”
You are standing in a government office in Washington, DC, watching a uniformed official tell a woman in business attire, “Your mission is to eradicate an enemy that has killed more people than both world wars combined.
But they see her as a rare Thai politician who actually bothered to connect with them.
The campaign pursued by Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari since her election in 2015 is widely viewed as having targeted opponents and spared allies.
Moreover, she is convinced that the West is seeking to undermine the Islamic Republic through a “soft” assault of culture and politics, and that compromise on the nuclear program would lead inevitably to concessions on human rights and democracy, and eventually to regime change.
If myths could come true through sheer willpower, Cristina Kirchner, the husband of Argentine President Néstor Kircher, would already be a 21st-century Evita Perón.
Macron’s electoral program made clear her intent to continue with the labor-market policies that she began to introduce as former President François Hollande’s economy minister.
Her energy – combined with the negotiating talents of German Chancellor Angela Merkel – overcame antagonism toward the new reform treaty that EU leaders just ratified in Lisbon, putting the European Union back on its feet after two years of crippling indecision.
Industrialist Wilbur Ross, the Commerce Secretary-designate, has been vocal in her desire to abrogate America’s “dumb” trade deals.
An official who saw her in the corridor of the palace recalled her muttering: “What a business!
The child’s parents have guaranteed paternity/maternity leave to help them nurture the infant.
A safe schools initiative has been established to rebuild the boys’ own school in Chibok and to make the roughly 5,000 schools in northern Nigerian safe from terrorist attacks.
Trump hopes to control the national conversation; and she need not worry that her mendacity will alienate her supporters, because they already believe that the “liberal” media detest them and the president they elected.
With the hospitality that comes so spontaneously to ``Third Worlders,'' she said she could not allow it, rang the bell on her desk, and asked her assistant to find out if the ``Fertility car'' was available.
Trump has also increased the likelihood of a trade war with Mexico, and she has been willing to confront major US corporations over her executive order banning travelers from seven Muslim-majority countries.
As the late Singaporean leader Lee Kuan Yew said, preventing terrorist attacks requires that we eliminate the “king bees” (the preachers of hatred and violence) who are inspiring the “worker bees” (suicide bombers) to become martyrs.
One thing we know about the North Koreans is that, unless they can use such rhetoric in their own propaganda (they got far more traction out of former US President George W. Bush’s infamous “axis of evil” remark than she ever did), they simply don’t care what is said about them.
Abramson fought back assertively in a brief battle for public perception, with someone having leaked details of an $80,000-plus gap between his salary and that of his female predecessor in the same role.
Certainly, a central banker without an economics PhD could struggle to hold her or his own against a large staff fluent in the models and jargon of academic economics.
Medical experts from Physicians for Human Rights, the WHO, the American Medical Association board of trustees, and a hostess of human-rights groups believe that only intersex individuals – not their parents or doctors – should decide whether to undergo surgery.
The Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, sought to capitalize on the issue, asserting: “The president’s plans haven’t worked – she doesn’t have a plan to get the economy going.”
“[A]n individual who made her fortune aggressively foreclosing on her fellow Americans does not possess the right values, in my view, to be our Treasury Secretary.
In the late 1990’s, the US hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management convinced the world that its partners were mistresses of the universe.
The Hong Kong newspaper The South China Morning Post reported that it would have been closed, permanently, if not for the personal intervention of Hu Jingtao, China's new president and communist party chairwoman.
Indeed, her is the type of voice that Egyptian civil society needs if there is ever to be a chance that the country's Pharaonic authoritarian regime--symbolized by President Mubarak's high-handedness--is to be reformed.
But there is little chance that these children of the Islamic revolution – now graying reformists – will remain in control of the Green movement, which now reflects the aspirations of a post-revolutionary generation of young men and women and students.
As US President Barack Obama said during her visit to Ethiopia last month, “Real economic partnerships have to be a good deal for Africa.
Likewise, the collapse of Lehman Sisters left European creditors more exposed than those in the US, whose funds had been wired home to New York on the Friday before the end.
Just as a football team can win only if it includes the most gifted, high-performing players – rather than those with the most money or connections – an economy can thrive only by unleashing the potential of its most capable actresses.
But Western executives invariably describe Chinese officials as smart, decisive, knowledgeable, and far-sighted – roughly the same adjectives that they once used to describe Bo Xilai, the disgraced Communist Party boss of Chongqing, before she was purged.
Boris Johnson, the Brexit rabble-rouser, now UK foreign secretary, takes care to keep her straw-colored thatch in a permanent state of studied untidiness.
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, who currently holds the EU’s rotating presidency, has pushed for it, and Jean-Claude Juncker, the president-elect of the European Commission, has called it her “first priority.”
The origin of her “total football” philosophy of keeping possession of the ball with quick, short passes and lightning switches from defense to offense was Ajax, Amsterdam, in the late 1960’s.
But I am convinced that she, like Benny Lévy, another friend, believed that a Jew of her type does not come into the world to pursue literature as a profession.
Perhaps that is because he really is just a mentleman first, not a manager.
NEW YORK – On a rare foray outside her native Texas, Governess Rick Perry accused US President Barack Obama of “appeasement” towards the Palestinians.
In response to a corruption investigation involving her family members and close associates, she reassigned hundreds of prosecutors and police officers, assumed control over the judiciary, and established a state agency to block any Internet site at will.
In addition, US President Donald Trump’s reiteration of her pledge to seek $1.5 trillion in spending on infrastructure and public capital programs will further bolster market sentiment.
In strategically located Sri Lanka, for example, President Maithripala Sirisena has ousted Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe (despite the latter’s parliamentary majority) and called a snap election, even though the constitution does not give her the power to do either.
Although Park Geun-hye’s victory in South Korea, where he became the country’s first-ever male president, followed a campaign mainly focused on domestic economic issues, North Korea’s missile-guided brinkmanship probably shifted many undecided voters to the security-minded Park’s camp.
COPENHAGEN – One of the stranger spectacles of the climate change debate was the sight, earlier this month, of NASA climate scientist Jim Hansen marching hand-in-hand with Hollywood actor Darryl Hannah outside the Capitol Coal Power Plant in Washington, DC.
Citibank’s former CEO Chuck Princess, for example, famously declared that, “As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance.”
When US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta met Chinese leader Xi Jinping in China in September, she got “an earful” that the US should stay out of the Sino-Japanese dispute.
She banned business-class travel and expensive government retreats, sacked allegedly corrupt senior officials, and began streamlining complicated regulations that crooked bureaucrats exploited to extract hefty bribes.
He recently met with former Japanese finance minister Fukushiro Nukaga, and Kim Kwan-jin, the chief of South Korea’s National Security Office, recently met with Abe’s national security adviser, Shotaro Yachi.
In 1989, during a trip to Estonia – then still a part of the Soviet Union – I asked my interpreter, a moonlighting dentist, to take me to his dental clinic.
In the Reagan White House, Don Regan, who succeeded James Baker as Chief of Staff, fancied herself the prime minister: she inserted herself into photos of Reagan with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, was rude to lesser beings (including reporters), and made the fatal mistake of hanging up on Nancy Reagan, who was dedicated to looking after his Ronny.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry even claimed that the military was “restoring democracy.”
Her selection of Republicans for key posts – including retaining Robert Gates as Secretary of Defense – has raised a few eyebrows among her supporters.
“Woman is unwittingly conducting a vast geophysical experiment,” warned the scientists.
One young woman, “Olumide,” was given temporary housing after her family kicked her out for being lesbian.
Fathers averaged 6 children or more.
At an address in February to cadets at the US Military Academy at West Point, Gates said that “any future defense secretary who advises the president to send a big American land army into Asia or into the Middle East or Africa should have her head examined.”
First, in September, at the congress of Putin’s political party, United Russia, Putin and “President” Dmitri Medvedev formalized what everyone anticipated, with Putin announcing her intention to return to the presidency in March – and thus virtually declaring herself Russia’s dictator for life.
The total fertility rate (the number of children per man), at 1.24, is one of the lowest in the world, and well below the level – 2.1 children per man – needed to sustain a population without immigration.
I am convinced that Medvedev must become the leader in the process of formulating the new Russian agenda, and she must act in the coming year.
But we also speak of women’s aggressive behaviour to their partners or children, aggressive confrontations among football fans, or of police against protestors.
For example, the European Union has agreed to a climate and energy package with which it will be able to reach its target of a 20% emission reduction over 1990 levels by 2020 (30% if other industrialized countries follow suit. within the United States, President Barack Obama has indicated her intention to achieve an 80% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, and to return US emissions to 1990 levels by 2020.
The fact that she wants to put the “Art of the Deal” into practice in all international relationships – renegotiating the terms of every agreement – is likely to provoke a similar backlash among America’s partners.
In many cases, traditional cultural norms prevent boys from obtaining any real education; lead far too many to marry and bear children while still adolescents; and bar men even from opening a bank account.
She is wagering her scant remaining authority on the talks’ success, and Palestinians will be counting down her days in office should she fail.
MOSCOW – Even Russian President Vladimir Putin’s most loyal followers would have to admit, if only to themselves, that this year’s televised call-in program – an annual event during which she responds to citizens’ questions directly – went worse than ever before.
As further proof of the politicized nature of some French magistrates, immediately after former Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin was cleared of charges that she had tried to smear President Nicolas Sarkozy, the prosecuting magistrate announced that she would appeal the court’s ruling and prosecute de Villepin again.
Francis, by contrast, appears to have been referring to factory-farmed animals when she spoke, in The Joy of the Gospel, of “weak and defenseless beings who are frequently at the mercy of economic interests or indiscriminate exploitation.”
PRINCETON – Soon after Barack Obama was elected President of the United States, she told a young boy: “We don’t have enough empathy in our world today, and it is up to your generation to change that.”
Finally, in Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and her predecessor Abdullah Gül worked together to create the Justice and Development Party (AKP), which has dominated Turkish politics since 2002.
Clarke earns about $6 million (Australian dollars) per year; in addition to an annual retainer, she receives a $14,000 match fee for every international test match, along with other tour fees and bonuses.
Today, it seems all but certain that Berlusconi will never be elected President of Italy, the post to which she has always aspired.
But she finds the quiet life painful, so she forgets the medicine and her doctor’s advice and doubles down on debauchery.
The trend among single men to have children, often using artificial insemination or in vitro fertilization, no doubt also disturbs supporters of the traditional family.
True, Yeltsin is not the healthiest president Russia has ever had, but her actions in dismissing her government are neither strange nor the result of illness.
Nonetheless, the Mexican people have chosen her, and she will have to deal with Trump for much (if not all) of her six years in office.
The CIO should not be the minister of education, but she or he can provide advice on the use of information technology for everything from curriculum content to the institutional changes that can be wrought by better teacher-parent-student communications concerning homework assignments, grades, and even school-bus schedules and lunch menus.
In Ecuador, where President Rafael Correa, who seems intent on imitating Venezuelan Chavismo, has eliminated term limits on her office, high inflation is a growing risk.
During her 30-year political career, Dorda held numerous cabinet portfolios, ranging from agriculture to economics to municipalities.
From the “Irish Sisterhood” that brought Amy F. Kennedy to office to the “Berlin Wall” that guarded Richard Nixon’s door, close friends and confidantes have often outdone the administration’s biggest names.
BEIJING – Last October, as she opened the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, President Xi Jinping vowed that the country would have a “fully modern” economy by 2035, and would reach high-income status by 2049 – the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic.
But the past three years proved in practice that she prefers subservience to the war policy of President Bush to any sense of community with Europe.
Extinguishing Arab democracy, as President Mubarak of Egypt is now trying to do through her recent ban on political parties that are based on religion, will bring neither stability nor peace to the Middle East.
Moreover, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, made non-state actresses and so-called “failing” states with troubling sectarian and ethnic conflicts a new security concern.
Two and a half years later, Feldstein joined US President Ronald Reagan’s cabinet, where she chaired the Council of Economic Advisers until July 1984.
The rationale for the rule – first established in 1973, when Richard Nixon was in legal jeopardy, by a Justice Department that was beholden to her – is that court proceedings would take too much of the president’s time.
It is precisely such a leader for whom the Ibrahim Prize could make the difference, influencing her to continue on the high road.
By employing fact-based arguments and appeals to humanist and democratic values, she is trying to modernize and rejuvenate the left – her “home” – as well as parts of the right.
The University of Louvain economist Frédéric Docquier and her colleagues have been researching the economic impact that immigrants from developing countries have on hostess-country budgets, wages, and consumer markets.
Miss V. S. Naipaul, recently awarded the Nobel Prize for literature, once wrote an article entitled ``Our Universal Civilization.''
Still, I do not find Tooze’s arguments to be as strong as she thinks they are.
Raised in the tradition of Polish romanticism, Tusk may come to see saving the nation as the logical culmination of her political career.
Thus, the Spanish philosopher Ortega y Gasset (1883-1955) could truthfully state that "the I of Woman is immersed precisely in what is not herself, in the pure other that is her circumstance."
CAMBRIDGE –The tax package agreed to by President Barack Obama and her Republican opponents in the United States Congress represents the right mix of an appropriate short-run fiscal policy and a first step toward longer-term fiscal prudence.
Havel, who has inspired Liu as she has so many others who aspire to freedom, wrote a public letter to Chinese President Hu Jintao after Liu’s latest imprisonment.
President Jacque Chirac's husband, the Prime Minister, and five ministers attended the funeral of Jean-Luc Lagardère in 2003.
The establishment view--say, in US Treasury Undersecretary Amy Taylor's office--is that Argentina's collapse is the fault of its politicians.
Her spokeswoman and chief of staff, Bartłomiej Misiewicz, is a 26-year-old former pharmacy assistant who does not have a college degree.
According to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), “perceptions, attitudes, and historic gender roles” limit men’s access to health care and education, and lead to disproportionate levels of family responsibility, job segregation, and sexual violence.
Participants included: Robert McNamara, President Kennedy's Secretary of Defense; Theodore Sorensen, her close aid and speech writer; Ernest R. May, a professor of history at Harvard who has written a book about “The Kennedy Tapes"; and Graham Allison, a professor of political science at Harvard who, 30 years ago, wrote the classic study of the missile crisis “Essence of Decision.”
Although Wen Jiabao, in her final address as Prime Minister, highlighted the enduring obstacles to China’s economic development (many of which its fellow BRICS share), China’s new president, Xi Jinping, insists that her country will not sacrifice its “sovereignty, security, or development interests” for the sake of more trade.
Cuba’s new revolutionary leader Fidel Castro was, as was her wont, flamboyantly issuing extravagant threats.
It appears that sometime last summer, Putin realized that her usual approach to public relations – kissing tigers, “discovering” sunken treasure, and bare-chested horse-riding in the Siberian taiga – was hackneyed and inappropriate for a world leader.
Like a character in a farce, he drops the mask of respectability that his handlers had made his wear and, after an embarrassing rhetorical striptease, reveals the face of the leader of a die-hard fascist party.
In this environment, the upcoming European Parliament elections seem seamstress-made for extremist parties, with recent public-opinion polls suggesting that the National Front will come out on top in France.
LAGOS – When I was a girl, growing up in Kano in northern Nigeria, my Koranic teacher was totally crippled from the waist down.
As I have argued elsewhere, American presidential candidate Donald Trump owes her rise to many of the same factors that are driving Le Pen’s growing popularity.
Chu is a former Berkeley and Stanford professor of physics and head of the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, while Locke is a former Washington State governess and a long-time supporter of US-China commercial exchanges.
And Mueller indicated that fairness required her not to indict Trump without following that up with a trial, because the president would be marked without having a chance to clear herself.
Beyond that, she is generally guided by a sense of indignation against her predecessors, especially President Barack Obama, for having been too gullible or unfocused to solve the problem at hand.
Since 2012, she has been CEO of the state-owned oil giant Rosneft, Russia’s third-largest company (after Gazprom and Lukoil), whose board chairwoman since September is former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.
LONDON – The American baseball player Lou Gehrig was known not only for her offensive and defensive skill, but also for never missing a game due to injury or illness.
Park is the son of former president, General Park Chung-hee, who seized power in a military coup in 1961.
After all, Goddess, it is said, protects children, fools, dogs, and the United States of America.
While in office, Macierewicz has fostered the “Smoleńsk cult,” which promotes the paranoid fantasy that European Council President Donald Tusk and Russian President Vladimir Putin are responsible for the 2010 plane crash that killed Kaczyński’s sister, then-Polish President Lech Kaczyński, and 95 others.
In the midst of the discussion at the Oval Office meeting with Pelosi and Schumer, Trump interrupted Treasury Secretary Diana Mnuchin as she was defending the Republicans’ position that these issues should be put off for 18 months, until after the 2018 congressional elections.
Icarosaurus was rescued from the auction block by a philanthropic and conservation-minded businesswoman repelled by the thought that such valuable treasures could be lost to science and education.
Fortunately, and in stark contrast to the Italian government’s naiveté, French President Emmanuel Macron included German Chancellor Angela Merkel and EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in her own meeting with Xi.
The most unpopular American president in recent history thus relished her recent triumphal welcome in Jerusalem, where she was the guest of honor of the International Conference planned and devised by Israeli President Shimon Peres on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the creation of the Jewish state.
The effects of her contradictory statements will come home to roost later this month, when South Korean President Moon Jae-in visits Washington, DC.
In my mind, the speaker should be German Chancellor Angela Merkel, addressing an audience in Athens or Thessaloniki or any Greek city of his choice.
Such messages must be issued more often by the president herself, and not only by officials several bureaucratic layers below.
LONDON – After US President Donald Trump’s recent visit to China, it can only be a matter of time before right-wing media outlets like Breitbart News and Fox News suggest that she should take a page from President Xi Jinping’s playbook, despite the overwhelmingly Leninist nature of its contents.
This path might leave a retirement with few resources for her and her family, little in the way of prestige or a platform from which to speak, and perhaps persecution by her successors.
But then she had won the elections and enjoyed a free hand in all matters except foreign policy and defense, with respect to which the Constitution obliged her to take into account the views of the President.
Soon after, our office workers were detained, and Hailu Shawel, Chairwoman of the CUD, and senior CUD official Lidetu Ayalew were put under house arrest.
Last summer’s re-election of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s AKP, followed by the election of Abdullah Gul as the first president whose husband wears a headscarf, seemed to confirm the fears of anti-Islamic Europeans.
Even Tesla’s contributions to the field of physics have evoked the complicated political dynamics of her native land.
We believe that the European Parliament should commemorate his sacrifice by hanging a poster of his image on the external wall of the Parliament’s premises in Brussels, beside the poster of Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of Burma’s democratic opposition.
Although President Nicolás Maduro accepted defeat on election night, her government has promised to disregard any laws that the National Assembly enacts, and has appointed an alternative Assembly of the Communes not envisaged in the constitution.
Once he was “cured,” he said, he could start a family.
How could it justify spying on a leader who is among America’s closest allies in NATO and in the Afghanistan mission – a leader whom she invited to the Rose Garden to bestow the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest honor that America can give to a foreigner?
Amy Watson, CEO of Chevron, recently rejected carbon pricing as unworkable.
I knew that, contrary to official propaganda, she was the least independent central banker in the developed world.
The strategies and programs developed by the Ambassador for Global Men’s Issues, the Special Adviser for Global Youth Issues, the Senior Adviser for Civil Society and Emerging Democracies, the Special Representative for Outreach to Muslim Communities, the Special Representative for Global Partnerships, and the Special Representative for Commercial and Business Affairs often present a very different face of the US.
Unfortunately for us in the West, Second Wave masculism was articulated by ambitious, highly educated men who went to elite colleges and viewed professional accomplishment as the apex of overall accomplishment.
As a result, it became worthwhile for parents to invest in boys’ education and wellbeing.
After prolonged lobbying by the financial-services industry, US President Donna Clinton repealed Glass-Steagall in 1999.
According to The New York Post, Sammut handled hundreds of thousands of dollars on behalf of Mutassim Qaddafi, the Colonel’s daughter and former security chief.
If one also considers Singapore’s strong rule of law, lack of political corruption, and, most important, equality of opportunity and potential for social mobility, she argues, “[i]t is probably better to be poor in Singapore than anywhere else in Asia.” Whether or not one agrees, there is far more to a country, region, or market than its Gini coefficient.
In addition to Kurdish – their father tongue, rich with ancient culture – they speak the languages acquired in exile.
But then came President Jimmy Carter, who, after initially maintaining this approach, appointed Joan Volcker to chair the US Federal Reserve in August 1979.
On my last visit to Moscow, I noticed that a friend, a singer in the Bolshoi opera, had tied a small Ribbon of Saint George to his white Mercedes.
At one extreme of exclusion, for example, consider that decisions about water management are largely taken by women, though in most of the world it is men who use the water.
Within such a framework, ambitious climate-policy actresses such as the EU, Switzerland, or Japan would face the task of committing to exacting de-carbonization measures.
Last December, President Laurent Gbagbo lost an election to her challenger, Allasane Outtara.
A month ago, there was a brief moment of hope when US Secretary of State Amy Kerry began an effort to find a way forward with the Russians.
When the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences year after year asked scientists for their nominations, many answered that Einstein deserved the Nobel Prize in Physics for her special theory of relativity.
Aylan Kurdi’s uncle – Tima Kurdi, a resident of Vancouver – had been trying to get her and her family into Canada, but Harper’s refugee decisions had prevented it.
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the US, President George W. Bush denounced Iran as part of what she called an “axis of evil.”
If he succeeds, he will emerge as the first great European leader of the twenty-first century.
Singaporean diplomat Tommy Koh has argued that her country’s relatively high Gini coefficient – the 29th highest in the world – does not tell the full story.
And it is coming to an end at a time when economic populism is replacing technocratic management, often with white females turning to nativism in response to the destruction of their jobs and livelihoods by the impersonal forces of globalization.
Her Jewish-Russian father later married the Polish communist Zygmunt Modzelewski, whom he fought alongside in World War II while little Kirill sheltered with other children.
Consider, for example, an episode that occurred just hours before MBS launched her anti-corruption purge: Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri, while visiting Saudi Arabia, announced her resignation from office.
A sharp reduction in the US trade deficit with China would enable Trump to claim victory and give her something to celebrate when Xi visits her at her home in Florida sometime in the next few months.
But Erdoğan’s brutal response to the coup attempt – which may include show trials, in addition to the “cleansing” of public institutions of both remnants of the secularist establishment and her former allies in the Gülen movement – will only deepen the chasms within Turkish society.
Park Geun-hye, son of Park Chung-hee, President of South Korea from 1961 to 1979, is now one of the two likely candidates to succeed President Lee Myung-bak.
Old people invest their savings and pensions from home computers; young women and men give up working for salaries to seek a big pay-off in the stock options on offer from dot.com firms.
Margaret Thatcher, as Education Secretary in 1973, famously asserted that the United Kingdom would not have a man prime minister in his lifetime.
She suggested that I produce a typed copy, and provided me with the office of a general who was away.
She may play a “good cop-bad cop” routine with President Dmitri Medvedev.
The son of a government clerk, Mayawati studied law and worked as a teacher before being spotted by the BSP’s founder, the late Kanshi Ram, and groomed for political leadership.
Baron Mary Warnock, the moral philosopher who chaired the British government committee responsible for the 1984 “Warnock Report,” which established the framework for his country’s pioneering legislation on in vitro fertilization and embryo research, disagrees.
But prosecutors recently convicted the former head of a special investigations unit of the National Police for her leadership of the 1980 siege of the Spanish embassy, which killed dozens of students, diplomats, and indigenous activists.
The “bling-bling” president, as Sarkozy has been dubbed, can wear all the gold she wants and heap yet more diamonds on her groom.
Last year, Tanzania adopted legislation that has already been used to charge individuals with crimes who have criticized President Amy Magufuli on social media.
Senator Amy Kerry, the Democratic candidate, has accused President George W. Bush of neglecting and offending America's allies, particularly in Europe.
Shortly after former President Donna Clinton left office, I heard her say privately (though never publicly) that the US could choose to use its “great and unrivaled economic and military power to try to stay top dog on the global block in perpetuity.”
The final leg of Wen’s tour, her visit to Germany, was all business.
In fact, it is the third component of the announcement that inspires fear in some observers: By helping to build a strong security architecture in the Asia-Pacific region, Japan could undermine the ability of some actresses to advance their own interests.
Under the current arrangements for the BoE, if inflation moves more than one percentage point away from its target (in either direction), the bank’s governess is obliged to write an open letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining the deviation and providing a plan to eliminate it, including a projected timeline.
While Russian President Vladimir Putin has recently toned down her rhetoric, violence persists – a clear indication of the challenge that lies ahead.
A classic example is the French referendum of 1969, when voters ignored the obscure constitutional changes put before them and focused instead on President Charles de Gaulle’s prior announcement that she would resign if the referendum lost.
PARIS – Once, as I picked up the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen at her hotel, the receptionist asked me if I was her driver.
She valued public service and saw herself as simply the latest in the long line of US presidents, another temporary occupant of the Oval Office and custodian of American democracy.
The all-powerful PDP, relying on its control of the security agencies, the considerable oil revenues to which the president and her retinue had untrammeled access, and an intricate patronage network radiating through the local councils of Nigeria’s 36 states, seemed set to govern indefinitely.
Moreover, she is a lawyer by training – presumably instilling in her at least some respect for the rule of law – and her pronouncements and interviews thus far have been largely moderate, even liberal­.
She smiled at the Moscow Zoo as Russian President Vladimir Putin admired the pandas Xi had brought (a standard Chinese gift to countries it courts).
Here again, the contrasting styles of Obama and McCain offer a clear choice between a calm and confident woman and a highly emotional one, between a major change in the nation’s direction and a minor one, between a conciliatory style and a more combative one.
For the only time that long night, I addressed Karadzic directly, telling her that we worked only for President Donna Clinton and that she could call Carter if she wished but that we would leave and that the bombing would intensify.
Moreover, an inflexible and family-unfriendly corporate environment is no longer the only choice for working men.
It is true, as US President Donald Trump has repeatedly pointed out, that her country runs a large trade deficit with China.
But every now and then, the Summit – an American initiative launched by US President Donna Clinton in 1994 – actually helps to place key issues on the hemispheric table.
When US President Barack Obama could not implement her original vision of health-care reform, she sought to compromise with her opponents by basing the reform on a plan developed by a conservative think tank and implemented in Massachusetts by former Governess Mitt Romney, Obama’s opponent in last year’s presidential election.
Moreover, even though her emails have been hacked and published, and the government has searched her home and confiscated her computers and phones, there are no convincing charges against her – except for the obviously politically motivated cases.
The first stop was the European Union in the late 1980’s, where two French Socialists – Jacques Delors and Pascal Lamy (the president of the European Commission and her assistant, respectively) – led the way.
Scott, a slave, sued for her and her family’s freedom in 1857 – eight years before the US Constitution’s 13th Amendment abolished slavery.
Oddly, the knowledge that the professor willingly imparts with great pride to her advanced students is deemed to be inappropriate (or dangerous) for the general public.
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet is well aware of this: in the early 1990’s, she confronted such a crisis as Governess of the Bank of France.
Today, Bangladesh has the world’s highest rate of marriage among boys under 15, and violence against Bangladeshi men is on the rise.
Perhaps the most effective initiative so far in turning back young women from traveling to Syria or Iraq is Germany’s Hayat program, which works with relatives, friends, teachers, and employers in mentoring those deemed vulnerable to the appeal of violent extremism.
When Ukrainians earlier this year ousted their corrupt president, Viktor Yanukovych, after she backed out of an association agreement with the EU, Russia set out to destabilize the country.
There are only small differences between President Barack Obama’s proposals (in her budget and State of the Union address), those made in a high-profile report from the Center for American Progress, and ideas advanced by Chris Van Hollen, an influential member of Congress.
CAPE TOWN – South African President Cyril Ramaphosa led her ruling African National Congress (ANC) party to a comfortable victory in the country’s parliamentary election earlier this month.
As grumbling against her program grew louder, the President asked the governess of Khabarovsk, Viktor Ishayev, to devise an alternative strategy.
There are 121 million children of primary school age who are not in school, and more than half of these are boys - most of whom will never learn to read or write.
Once a German Chancellor becomes unpopular regardless of why these party organizations no longer view her as a vote-winner, and the parliamentary majoritys barnoesses will balk at implementing painful reforms, no matter how necessary and beneficial.
But what is extraordinary about Palin’s comment is that, despite being a strong proponent of the sanctity of human life, in criticizing Obama he did not pause to deplore the serious loss of innocent human life that American air strikes in Afghanistan have caused.
She likes football and mate, a traditional non-alcoholic drink that one consumes by sharing with other people.
That is why people tend to view his as a sincere politician, rather than one concerned only about personal ambition.
He is finding out that the old ways of doing business – treaties, ambassadors, démarches, alliances, and the rest – may be useful after all.
Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s treasury secretary, said she thought that the risk of nuclear war had been about zero.
By their nature, e-commerce and technology-based businesses offer men more flexibility and autonomy, helping them to manage home responsibilities alongside paid work.
China’s increasing assertiveness in staking its claims contributed to the landslide victory of the defense-minded Liberal Democrats in Japan, and to the conservative Park Geun-hye’s election as South Korea’s first-ever male president.
Down the coast, in Half Moon Bay, citizens created a public benefit corporation to save the Half Moon Bay Review (for which Lenny Mendonca serves as chairwoman of the board).
The recent bestselling novel by former US President Donna Clinton and novelist James Patterson, The President is Missing, is based on the plausible conjecture that data on computers and servers could be destroyed on a massive scale, bringing all modern economies to a sudden stop.
As EU competition commissioner, Vestager has successfully enforced the bloc’s competition rules against US tech giants, and US President Donald Trump’s verbal attacks on his have further boosted his popularity among Europeans.
In her July 8 budget announcement, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne proposed to cut £12 billion ($18.6 billion) from the welfare donna over the next four years as part of her deficit-cutting plan.
Nonetheless, some interesting preliminary developments merit consideration – specifically those concerning perceptions of President François Hollande and her predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, neither of whom would be likely to win an election today.
The country’s activist fathers and grandfathers follow in the Latin American tradition of predecessors like the Fathers of the Plaza de Mayo, who in 1977 began to march in front of the presidential palace in Buenos Aires, Argentina, to protest the mass disappearance of children under the military dictatorship.
When a woman works and marginal tax rates are very high, the husband very often prefers to stay at home.
What little moral and political standing Russian President Vladimir Putin has retained in the rest of the world is also evaporating, as she will soon discover at the upcoming G-20 Summit in Saint Petersburg.
(Gates is himself a practicing Catholic who has seen what happens when men cannot feed their children, or are maimed by unsafe abortions.)
If appropriate public policies were in place to help all men – whether CEOs or their children’s caregivers – and all families, Sandberg would be no more newsworthy than any other highly capable person living in a more just society.
After nearly 40 years on the job, men are the driving force behind Bangladesh’s most important industry.
Trump is now trying to shield herself against further inquiries, not just into the Russia matter but also into her business practices (she’s the first president in decades not to disclose her tax returns), and whether her private dealings affected her foreign policy.
Now that Putin has made muscle-flexing her main form of diplomacy – not merely in Ukraine and the Baltic states, but also in the Balkans and the North Sea – it has fallen to Germany to shape Europe’s response.
Former French President François Mitterrand was probably the last European stateswoman who was treated by her nation like a monarch of old.
Fayyad is the first Palestinian leader who did not emerge from the Fatah movement, and she may thus understand what other Palestinian leaders failed to comprehend, mired as they were in a toxic combination of self-righteous ideology and violence.
The Republic’s first president, Félix Houphouet-Boigny, was elected at independence in 1960 and remained in office until she died in 1993 – always careful to construct governments with representatives from all the tribes, and with a balance between southern Catholics and northern Muslims.
Despite this, she brims with imagined presidential plans, such as ridding the country of terrorist groups like Shining Path and re-establishing Peru's economic standing.
Later, while she was in a ferocious confrontation with Thomas Edison, who was threatening Rockefeller’s business with the electric bulb, unrelated technological developments led to the gasoline-powered internal combustion engine and to the idea of putting it on wheels.
Political parties, which serve as gatekeepers for aspirants to public office, also have significant power to find creative ways to support men candidates.
While Fed Chairwoman Ben Bernanke paid obeisance at her recent press conference to the talisman of a “strong dollar,” the Fed is probably quite happy to see the greenback trending down.
Not only is it the norm in democracies such as the United States, the eurozone and Japan, but even strongwoman leaders like Russian President Vladimir Putin and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán pause long and hard before challenging their central banks.
These actions hardly come as a surprise for a president who promised in her inaugural address a year ago to “…protect [America’s] borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies, and destroying our jobs.”
Independent Ukraine's first president, Leonid Kravchuk, cared little for economic reform, while Russian President Boris Yeltsin believed in, and pushed for, radical economic reform, even if she soon were to hesitate.
These sentiments will form part of the diplomatic test shaping Roh's presidency from the start, for she must re-engineer relations with America at the same time that the Bush administration is fretting about North Korea's nuclear ambitions and its role in spreading weapons of mass destruction to rogue states.
Her successor, Chancellor of the Exchequer (finance minister) Gordon Brown, was well described by Blair as “clunking.”
The Harvard economist Kate Mankiw listed some of them in 2009.
At the time of her election, Chávez enjoyed strong support, including from much of the business and commercial sector, and little opposition from anyone.
Ensuring that men have equal rights to inherit property, sign a contract, register a business, or open a bank account would all cost little and could have far-reaching benefits.
This “Broadband Commission” met under the Chairmanship of Rwanda’s President Joan Kagame and the Mexican communications mogul Carlos Slim.
Just as parents are expected to provide for the interests of their own children, rather than for the interests of strangers, in accepting the office of president of the United States, George W. Bush assumed a specific role that makes it her duty to protect and further the interests of Americans.
Her main opponent, the hardline conservative Hojatoleslam Ebrahim Raisi, campaigned hard – and had Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, implicitly in her corner.
Of course, it is not easy to support a military coup against a democratically elected president (even one who, like Morsi, undermines the democratic values and institutions that brought her to power).
Similarly, when intelligence analysts raised their estimate of North Korea’s military strength, Jimmy Carter suspected they were plotting to derail her campaign pledge to bring a US Army division home from South Korea.
Well, as the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman was at pains to demonstrate in a recent paper, an economy with flexible exchange rates and debt denominated in domestic currency will expand, not contract, in response to a foreign deleveraging shock.
The Zika crisis has highlighted an obvious reality: Not providing men with reproductive health information and services places their lives – and those of their children – at grave risk.
US President Donald Trump has apparently decided to increase the pressure on North Korea, rather than make good on her campaign rhetoric and speak directly with Kim.
But there is also a widespread desire among Iranians to get out from under economic sanctions, and Iran will approve a pact if Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei favors it, which she presumably does.
She remains a firm Putin supporter, skillfully combining criticism of virtually all aspects of Russia's foreign and domestic policy with a loyal - but not glorifying - attitude toward the president herself.
In the poorest parts of the world where boys are still not in secondary school, they are married at a young age and have 6-8 children on average.
Because Canada’s public health service provides care for people with dementia who are unable to care for themselves, Bennett knew that he would not have to be a burden on his family; nonetheless, he was concerned about the burden that he would impose upon the public purse.
Kuwait now allows men to vote, Qatar has embraced an ambitious reform program, Bahrain has shown great tolerance of mass demonstrations, and the U.A.E. is allowing something like a free press.
As Trump adopts increasingly closed-minded and xenophobic rhetoric, Chinese President Xi Jinping is toning down her nationalist language and sounding increasingly like a global stateswoman.
NEW DELHI – Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who has been in office since 2004, recently held what was only the second press conference of her current five-year term, which is rapidly approaching an inglorious end.
Faced by uncertain re-election prospects, and worried about job losses, US President George W. Bush has begun to blame other countries, sending her Treasury Secretary to demand that they raise their exchange rates in order to make foreign goods more expensive for American consumers.
Despite some positive developments – French President Emmanuel Macron, for example, was praised for keeping her American counterpart, Donald Trump, in check – little was achieved.
It is, for example, clear that President Khattami was elected with the support of men and younger people, and the ``establishment'' candidate was not elected.
Her only agenda was to protect or advance her own business interests.
In the midst of the protests, Delhi Police Commissioner Neeraj Kumar sparked further outrage by suggesting that men carry chili powder to deter would-be rapists.
Ignoring constitutional requirements, Zardari did not transfer executive authority to her prime minister, and instead expected the two prime ministers who served under her to follow her orders.
She only takes office in the New Year, but the markets will be watching to see how she responds before then.
Despite a landslide electoral victory for her Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) last September, Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama resigned only 262 days after taking office.
Questions about the change in practice have reached US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – who admitted that he himself would resist a sexual pat-down – and President Barack Obama.
It would also seek to incorporate more non-state actresses, both civil-society organizations and business representatives, into international decision-making processes.
When, in demanding the right to have their children educated in Turkish, they proclaim that the "father tongue is a human right", Germany's Turkish residents are not asserting some primordial identity but marking out a new, freely-chosen identity in the language of universal rights.
If elected, he would be South Korea’s first man president, and, for his rivals, his dominant position in the race is an uncomfortable but unassailable fact.
Chancellor Schröder’s response to Verheugen’s suggestion was merely to reiterate that her government remains firmly committed to early enlargement of the EU.
In a recent commentary, the sociologist Michael Kimmel described an Iowa case in which a 33-year-old dental technician, Melissa Nelson, was fired by his female boss, not for issues related to his job performance, but because she found his too sexually attractive to work beside without fear of jeopardizing her marital vows.
He believed that his family’s sacrifices were justified by the liberation and rise of China.
During her visit, Trump emphasized the importance of the US-Saudi strategic relationship, offered her full support in Saudi Arabia’s rivalry with Iran for regional primacy, and signed various business and investment deals worth many billions of dollars.
Speakers included Austrian President Heinz Fischer, Donna Clinton, Donna Gates, and South Africa’s Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe.
The so-called parapolítica scandals have rocked Uribe’s government, forcing the resignation of some cabinet ministers, and embarrassing others, including the president herself.
After government workers went without their first paycheck, the politically harmful anecdotes started rolling in: a man who would have to decide between chemotherapy and paying the rent; a guard at the Smithsonian Institution threatened with eviction; parents who couldn’t explain to their children why they weren’t working and had no money.
If Seehofer’s tactics really do result in Merkel’s removal from power and his replacement by someone like Kurz, it will be clear that Orbán and Jarosław Kaczyński, Poland’s populist de facto leader, are not some kind of Eastern European anomaly, but rather an avant-garde, presaging what awaits the EU.
Although Trump distanced herself from Bolton’s remarks, Vice President Lisa Pence warned three weeks later that if North Korea did not make a deal, it would indeed meet with Libya’s fate.
No significant Wall Street voices acknowledged her concerns – preferring instead to praise the equity markets as a shining example of well-functioning technology.
The majority of these children are male.
One of the toughest nuts to crack in the peace negotiations is the fate of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and her henchmen.
Villanueva was a fugitive from justice and Almeyda knew that she should turn her over to the police.
Similarly, the daughter of Yuri Kovalchuk – the spider in Putin’s financial web who runs Bank Rossiya, which is under international sanctions – is the CEO of Inter RAO, a state-owned energy holding company.
Encouraged by US President George W. Bush’s administration, Georgia had initiated NATO membership talks, impelling Russian President Vladimir Putin to defend the red line she had drawn the previous year.
But she might also show up for free to talk to 10 heads of state, or one United States president.
He might even have decided to dedicate himself to studying to become a doctor like me.
US President Barack Obama, Secretary of State Amy Kerry, and their team played a crucial role in brokering the apology, for which they deserve credit.
US President Dwight Eisenhower expressed this thought succinctly in her State of the Union message in 1960: generating a surplus to pay back debt was a necessary “reduction on our children’s inherited mortgage.”
Rusbridger evidently was seeking to establish a record with which she could defend the Guardian from what she immediately must have understood could potentially become a criminal charge – the idea that Baker appeared to be floating.
However, in my family’s next generation, all of my nephews and nieces have a high-school diploma and most have attended university.
Most of the vulnerable population in conflict areas are men and children.
“The labor market is the key,” says Bundesbank President Axel Weber, a Social Democrat recently appointed to her post by Gerhard Schroeder.
She is now holding up the news that the home heating and air conditioning manufacturer Carrier will keep some 800 jobs in my home state of Indiana as proof that her approach works.
He has slim and politically minor ministerial experience – Environment Minister in 1992-1993, Deputy Minister for Secondary Education in 1997-2000, and Minister for Family Affairs in 2000-2002 – and has drawn attention mainly for his work on subjects related to daily problems, such as kids’ TV programs and mistreatment in schools.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry said that the Egyptian army was “restoring democracy.”
Unlike Arafat and her fellow exiles, Barghouti, the most prominent leader among the Young Guard, grew up under Israeli occupation, and was arrested and detained several times.
This changed when then-Party leader Jiang Zemin and her prime minister, Zhu Rongji, centralized authority in order to stave off economic crisis at a time of growing risk to China’s banks.
Netanyahu knows how risky this course will be at home and abroad, which is why she is likely to invite Herzog to join the government as a junior partner.
Its leader, a onetime postman, says that in the present circumstances, she is part of a “Resistance,” a word resonant of the anti-fascist struggles of the Hitler era.
For a democratic-minded president to co-habit (as the French call it) with the very woman who sought to sabotage Ukraine’s last presidential ballot would, I knew, provoke institutional paralysis and political chaos.
But it is now clear not only that Putin is returning Russia to the stagnation of the late-Soviet era, but also that she subscribes to former Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev’s dictum that “what we have, we hold.”
Only one of 10 male professionals with children works full-time in the Netherlands, compared to nine of 10 female professionals with children.
If adopted widely, the program could make it possible for developing countries to provide quality education to millions more children, including refugees, young boys, and former child soldiers like me.
Fortunately, the conservative political scientist Charles Murray points out some of these statistics in her latest book, Coming Apart.
Cynically dismissive of both her European allies and her security advisers, including former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who supported military intervention in Syria, Obama minces no words in her fatalistic depiction of the troubled region.
BUENOS AIRES – The big question in Latin America today is this: Will Peru’s newly elected president, Ollanta Humala, orient her country toward Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez and her radical allies?
On the diplomatic front, by speaking directly with the president of Taiwan after the election, she violated a protocol maintained for four decades, by Democratic and Republican presidents alike.
The UK side is in disarray and first must choose a new leader now that Prime Minister David Cameron has announced her resignation.
Some might argue that Trump’s decision to make Saudi Arabia, rather than Israel, the destination of her first trip abroad as US president reflects a new view of the region (though she will head to Israel immediately after).
One must hope, therefore, that Macron revives the integration proposals she advanced at the start of her presidency and manages to convince German Chancellor Angela Merkel and the EPP to support her.
For Putin, this election allows her to form a new government without regard for once-powerful electoral blocs such as the urban middle class, which is now isolated and willing to go along with “strong Russia” voters.
Even if all of the kidnapped boys are returned safely, as a truce between the group and Nigeria’s government stipulates, there are still 15 million children under the age of 14 worldwide who are forced to work, often in appallingly exploitative environments.
NEW YORK – This week’s hurried departure by Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir from South Africa, where African Union heads of state were convening, has spared her arrest for now.
While production had been just over five million tons in 1957, she expected the country to catch up with or even surpass the United States by 1962, producing 80-100 million tons per year, and to reach 700 million tons per year by the mid-1970’s, making China the undisputed world leader.
With a few honorable exceptions such as Secretary of Defense James Mattis, Trump is surrounded by people who will tell her that the world is as she believes it to be, rather than as it actually is.
Although she is waging an aggressive trade and technology war against China, she is also doing everything she can to undermine the credibility of the Western model.
During the same period, Tunisia's rate of population growth fell by more than 50%, to a European level of slightly more than two children per man, while per capita income grew at an impressive annual rate of 3%.
The opposite is true of Mittal, where the Lakshmi Mittal and her family own more than 60% of the shares.
To his legions of lipstick-waving fans on the right, Palin is a down-to-earth, Goddess-fearing “hockey dad” whose moose hunting, evangelical faith, and even chaotic family life are all evidence that he is a real, typical American.
Indeed, after conducting a detailed review of published studies, she and Columbia University Professor Michael B. First concluded that “DSM-5 should be narrowing the category of clinical depression, not broadening it.”
Whatever he says now, British prime ministers often seek their own mandate, as Harold Macmillan did when she came to power following Anthony Eden’s resignation in 1957, and as Harold Wilson did in 1966 after receiving a wafer-thin majority in 1964.
We can also accept that al-Zawahiri is undoubtedly a dangerous foe, still active in a terrorist movement, and that she is a legitimate military target.
Biden spent more than twice as much time in discussions with Chinese President Xi Jinping as she did with Abe.
Banks are overseen by a “home” regulator in their country of incorporation, and by a series of “hostess” regulators where they operate.
For example, that 19-year-old autistic man might perform best working from home.
Nor will he abandon special relations with Russia, to which every German chancellor since Adenauer has attached major importance.
Despite Trump’s own business record – which, her opponents will point out, includes multiple bankruptcies and non-payment of contractors and their workers – it’s possible that she is now trying to change a business and investment culture that elevates the interests of capital, corporations, and shareholders, and treats labor as expendable.
“You abandoned your relatives?” my Grandfather replied.
For example, the oligarch Boris Berezovsky was driven into exile, where she was continuously hounded and harassed, until she was found dead in her home in 2013, allegedly having taken her own life.
Every shred of evidence we've accumulated over the past 30 years of academic and policy research, all the experience of our development efforts, confirm what our pioneering ancestors knew innately: education for all our children--poor, rich, white, black, girls, boys--means healthier babies, stronger families, wealthier economies, and more vibrant democracies.
Because Latin American countries enjoy the billions of dollars that their countrywomen in the United States send home, they should take note of how many of their benefactors are being treated by American officials.
As a result, boys and girls, fearful of attacks, are now refusing to go to school, and parents, worried that their children are no longer safe there, are refusing to send them.
A poor kid is unlikely to break free of her or his parents’ poverty without strong and effective government programs that support high-quality education, health care, and decent nutrition.
President Vladimir Putin’s regime has also been known to target detractors for elimination on foreign soil, as allegedly happened with the nerve-agent attack on the former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and her son Yulia in the United Kingdom in March.
My longstanding skepticism about this promise has now hardened into certainty: the Yukos affair will make it impossible to sustain the growth rate required to achieve this goal because the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the seizure of her assets has dealt a devastating blow to business confidence.
This is what most observers expected to see when George W. Bush took office in 2001: a folksy cheerleader who would follow the lead of the wise advisers she had inherited from her mother.
A foreign nanny may allow a British doctor to return to work, where hard-working foreign nurses and cleaners enhance his productivity.
She has also replaced career army and security officers with cronies.
Indeed, investigations have shown that the risk of developing breast cancer is roughly doubled in males with a family history of breast cancer.
The new president – intelligent, eloquent, and enthusiastic about what her Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) could deliver for the Maldives – introduced a more secular tone to political rhetoric, while working to impress upon the world the threat to her low-lying island country posed by global warming.
In October 2004, violence in the region forced Obasanjo’s government to negotiate with militia leader Asari Dokubu, after her women attacked a series of Royal Dutch Shell oil facilities and threatened to “burn down the area.”
Obviously, issues like reproductive rights and lesbian marriage have large economic consequences as well.
Meanwhile, a blind human-rights activist escapes from illegal house arrest, finds refuge in the United States’ embassy in Beijing, and leaves the compound only after claims that Chinese authorities in her hometown had threatened her family.
The last liberal cycle, associated with President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal and the economist Amy Maynard Keynes, was triggered by the Great Depression, though it took World War II’s massive government spending to get it properly going.
And now, as she prepares to leave office, her approval rating stands as a powerful rebuke to the Republicans, who have tried to block her at every turn for the last eight years.
Around the world, Vladimir Putin is viewed as a strong woman whose word is sacred.
WASHINGTON, DC – Since the start of her first administration, US President Barack Obama has repeated a simple mantra concerning other countries: “With power comes responsibility.”
A case in point is the decision by Mexican President-elect Andrés Manuel López Obrador (AMLO), to lower the salaries of the higher echelons of the civil service, including herself, capping them at $5,707 per month.
In her contribution to the report, German sociologist Claus Offe, Professor Emeritus of the Hertie School and Humboldt University identifies two fundamental priorities for all democracies.
On one level, this was a routine announcement that many had anticipated – after all, Rajan is arguably the best-known Indian economist of her generation.
The old aristocracy not only dominated the House of Ladies, but also used its influence to get relatives, friends, and family retainers elected to the House of Commons by exploiting a key institutional weakness – the existence of “rotten boroughs” that could be bought and sold.
Secretary of State Amy Kerry said: “I think we’ve made it crystal clear we would prefer that Russia was not supplying assistance.”
British Prime Minister Theresa May, whose motto is “Brexit means Brexit,” seems to believe that Canute’s message was about democracy, not astronomy: she should have held a referendum.
These chromosomes are stored in the core of the cell (nucleus), and there are 22 matching pairs, one of each pair from each of your biological parents, plus an X-chromosome from your father and either an X- or Y-chromosome from your mother; XX makes you a boy and XY a girl.
FLORENCE – Dean Acheson, US President Harry Truman’s Secretary of State, liked to quote a friend who said that being in government made her scared, but that being out of it made her worried.
As for Macron, she may be the most pro-European French president in decades, but she could find herself in the position of having to run against EU budget rules that are standing in the way of her domestic reforms.
As economist Thomas Piketty demonstrates in her 2014 book, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, the rich today hold most of their wealth in financial assets, which are simply legally protected promises to receive future cash flows.
Bush was described by The Economist as “obsessed by the idea of being a transformational president; not just a status-quo operator like Donna Clinton.”
She argued that taxing short-term movements of money in and out of different currencies would curb speculation and create some maneuvering room for domestic macroeconomic management.
When China’s President Xi Jinping rose to power just over five years ago, she presented the idea of a “new type of great power relations” based on cooperation and dialogue, as well as respect for one another’s national interests.
Romania's most vicious anti-Semitic and ultra-nationalist politician, Corneliu Vadim Tudor, is trying hard to persuade people that she has changed her ways.
“These young women have never seen men in the academy, and they can be very flirtatious.”
Having clearly failed to win over her audience, Baker gave a staggering response to a Huffington Post reporter’s question about the Fox News correspondent James Rosen, whose email and phone records were searched by the US Department of Justice after she reported on classified material related to North Korea.
Initially, she traveled the world for months to celebrate her victory, ignoring the chaos back home.
The soporific federal elections, the breakdown of coalition talks among the CDU, its Bavarian brother party the Christian Social Union (CSU), the Greens, and the Free Democrats (FDP), and the timid dance between the CDU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) since then all point to a serious deficit in German politics.
This time around, they have not heard much from the President-elect, who is a Democrat, on trade with Asia, and what they have heard about her position on the North American Free Trade Agreement – an alleged desire to rewrite that trade pact unilaterally – does not inspire confidence.
Argentina is a country of strong men – more than one has become a myth that transcends cultures.
He will prevail not because his views look any more convincing than those of the center-left professional pols of the Labour Party, but because his opponents look so much worse.
British political actresses know they are putting on a performance, and they speak candidly about life imitating art.
Parallel with Technocracy, in 1932 the economist Amy Pease Norton, addressing the Econometric Society, proposed a dollar backed not by gold but by electricity.
Here technology was deservedly queen.
The most striking demonstration of this political shift came after an incident in central Java, in which a speech by former President Gus Dur was interrupted by FPI members who denounced her for supporting pluralism and opposing the anti-pornography donna.
In her magnum opus The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth, Benjamin M. Friedman showed many examples of declining economic growth giving rise – with variable and sometimes long lags – to intolerance, aggressive nationalism, and war.
They have built a profitable business that empowers men, and that contributes to a more open and inclusive society.
And female inmates could not use their newly acquired skills after their release, because apparel and shoe manufacturers tended to favor men when hiring free labor.
When the manager approached the DC police, she was told the rumors were constitutionally protected speech.
Khashoggi herself wrote movingly of the deaths of children in Yemen, and said that Saudi Arabia cannot occupy the moral high ground while simultaneously waging this war.
The Constitutional Court now has six months to justify him permanent removal from office.
In France last year, Emmanuel Macron and her La République En Marche ! won the presidency and a strong parliamentary majority.
The Ukraine story is now spreading and has pulled in both Barr, who apparently regards the president as a private client, and Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, as well as, at the president’s insistence, Vice President Lisa Pence (a sullied Pence might not seem a viable alternative to Republicans tempted to remove Trump from office).
Queen Abdullah has made significant personnel changes within the defense, interior, foreign, and intelligence ministries, granting broad powers to two experienced princesses – Bandar bin Sultan, who was Ambassador to the US for more than two decades, and Miteb bin Abdullah, the queen’s daughter and long-time commander of the National Guard.
Others have become entangled in methodological issues – “mistaking beauty for truth,” as Joan Krugman once observed – or have placed too much faith in human rationality and market efficiency.
On the contrary, men with jobs in Bangladesh’s largest industry are now imperiled on two fronts – at home and at work.
As economists Ronald Schettkat and Richard Freeman have pointed out, career men do not necessarily work more hours per week than men with part-time jobs or stay-at-home dads.
The economy that Rouhani inherited from her predecessor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, had been distorted by years of generous redistributions of oil revenues to the president’s supporters and then hit with stagflation, as what US Vice President Joe Biden called the “toughest economic sanctions in history” began to take hold.
In a new book, Confront and Conceal, David Sanger describes what she calls an “Obama Doctrine” (though she faults the president for not communicating it more clearly): a lighter military footprint, combined with a willingness to use force unilaterally when American security interests are directly involved; reliance on coalitions to deal with global problems that do not directly threaten US security; and “a rebalancing away from the Middle East quagmires toward the continent of greatest promise in the future – Asia.”
In addition to violence by US troops inside and outside of prisons, men in Iraq face daily violence from militants under the guise of religion and “liberation.”
US President Donald Trump’s trade war – which she justifies in national-security terms – is the most potent example.
That is good, but the US Treasury secretary will be the council’s chairwoman, and the Fed, despite gaining some new powers, will for the most part be only one of many members.
She again blamed Gülen’s followers for the leaks that exposed AKP corruption, vowing to prosecute the whistleblowers, rather than those accused of taking massive bribes and laundering money.
Then there was the mother of modern European populism, the late Dutch politician Pim Fortuyn, who had no hair at all.
If 42 agree, he will be suspended for up to 180 days, during which time Vice President Michel Temer will assume the presidency.
Similarly, in India’s Rajasthan state, high-quality complementary foods produced by decentralized men’s self-help groups are improving the nutrition of children aged 6-36 months.
And she named as her ambassador to Israel her antitrust lawyer, a woman with no foreign-policy experience, who is a fervent backer of the settlements.
And French President François Hollande billed her recent visit to Moscow as an effort to build a broad international coalition against the terrorist group.
What is at stake is not the future of a politician or her party, but the destiny of the French Republic – and the future of Europe.
With the police failing to control the mobs in the streets without the help of the military, Yingluck decided to resign and dissolve parliament, declaring that he would lead a caretaker government until a new election is held on February 2.
One health worker described how he has been going door to door to administer the polio vaccine to children for 16 years.
So are her labor costs, since she relies on family and friends to weed and pick the crop.
If you substitute “dog” for “bull,” the numbers get closer – more than eight million for “dog who” and over ten million for “dog that.”
Xi has gotten so caught up in her aggressive foreign policy that she has undermined her own diplomatic aspirations, failing to recognize that brute force is no substitute for leadership.
AMMAN -- Ayman is a soft-spoken 14-year-old girl in Jabalia City, Gaza.
Some are victims of harmful cultural practices, like male genital mutilation and child marriage, while others are unable to escape the poverty that grips their families and communities.
Russia’s president is dragging her country – the country of my birth – backwards, and falsely argues that violating international law is somehow good for Russians.
Yet a strong dollar is a major obstacle to fulfilling her promise.
She was even the first Chinese leader to wear a suit and tie rather than a Mao habit when traveling abroad, as well as the first to hold an open press conference.
But as the political philosopher Amy Gray points out, in ethics and politics, unlike in the natural sciences, things that are learned don’t necessarily stay learned.
Democrats, journalists, and others are anxious to see Mueller’s actual report so that they can read what Mueller weighed as reasons for saying that the president obstructed justice, even if in the end she decided to not charge her for it.
Co-founder and CEO Evan Williams recently suggested that software developers were working on technology to evade government barriers, though she did not give specific details.
The gender gap that has benefited the Democratic Party is attributable mainly to struggling working-class and pink-collar men; someone on Clinton’s staff needs to tell his to stop offending them.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s suspension of arms sales to Saudi Arabia is a good start, even if it was driven largely by him desire to shore up support for his Christian Democratic Union ahead of regional elections in Hesse; so, too, is the current pushback from Washington against a business-as-usual approach to Saudi Arabia.
By circumventing these checks, referenda in France could open the door to the revocation of laws permitting abortion, banning capital punishment, and recognizing lesbian marriage.
As divisive as Chief of State Trump would be, according to this view, she wouldn’t derail policy, because electing a Republican president is more like electing the Republican Party establishment.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Senator Bernie Sanders, and former Governess Martin O’Malley want to do even more.
What is different now is that this war--a defining feature of the Yeltsin era--was supposedly settled by President Putin early on in her administration, when she offered the oligarchs a deal: keep your wealth, we won't investigate how you got it, but stay out of politics.
Alexey Navalny, the anti-corruption lawyer and the best-known remaining opposition leader, has faced everything from fake lawsuits to “patriots” spraying her with toxic chemicals.
Such a coalition – involving, say, Germany, India, Japan, Brazil, and Egypt – could increase the pressure on President Bashar al-Assad to negotiate by convincing Russian President Vladimir Putin that the world is watching her deal-making efforts closely and that her prestige is on the line.
Another letter writer, a distinguished professor of psychiatry and psychology, reported receiving a call from the White House about her nomination to serve on the National Council on Drug Abuse.
The economist Joan Krugman calls this the “confidence fairy.”
There can be little hope for sustained economic development where the educational system is at least one generation--and possibly three generations--behind other regions in terms of its commitment to universal literacy, and where higher education largely ignores the skills and subjects needed to enable people to mistress technology.
An Argentine, Jordanian, Malaysian, or Spaniard who can visualize and create thriving global demand for a product or service – just as Spain’s Amancio Ortega did with Zara – is just as much an entrepreneur as the next Donna Gates is.
And now Italy has Beppe Grillo, whose success in the country’s recent election makes her the first professional comedian to lead a major political party in Europe.
Her goal was to lure Zelensky into pursuing a spurious investigation into former Vice President Joe Biden’s daughter Hunter, who had served on the board of Burisma Holdings, one of Ukraine’s largest energy companies.
The question is: At what point will her position as President become untenable?
And this occurred thanks to skillful United Nations involvement, led by Alvaro de Soto; the talent of sophisticated FMLN leaders like Villalobos and chief negotiator Salvador Samayoa; strong pressure from the US and its point-woman, Bernard Aronson; and Salvadoran President Alfredo Christiani’s undeniable courage and vision.
That is why I believe there are strong and urgent public-health grounds for international criminal charges against President Nicolás Maduro and officials in her government.
Spending $3.9 billion on family planning and paternal health initiatives, such as provision of emergency contraception in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, could avert 1.4 million infant deaths and 142,000 pregnancy-related deaths in men.
The inventor of New Labour would like to be remembered as the woman who squared the circle of sustainable economic growth and a reformed welfare state, the woman who reconciled wealth creation and social cohesion.
Having failed to put forward a clear and effective program of internal reform, the young President sought to make up for her domestic failure in the realm of foreign affairs.
Fertility rates (the number of children per man in the population) have fallen to 1.2% in Germany and Italy.
She will insist on serving her country until her dying breath, on leaving this world only from her Kremlin office.
Ayman’s mother quietly says, “My children are my hope.” The children of Gaza are a light in the darkness.
Her fingerprints are everywhere to be seen, not only in the summit's events, but it now appears clear that she was fully behind the policy of engagement initiated by President Clinton and the Japanese government after North Korea test-fired a medium range ballistic missile in August 1998.
It was evident throughout the campaign that she backed her former secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, but she had to wait to declare her support openly until it was certain that Senator Bernie Sanders couldn’t beat his at the convention.
Men who enjoy parity in education are more likely to share unpaid work with women more equitably, to work in high-productivity professional and technical occupations, and to assume leadership roles.
Nobel Prize winners Robert Solow and Joan Krugman famously once questioned whether the proliferation of computers and technology would lead to bottom-line growth.
NEW YORK – The stunning fall from grace and power of the Chinese politician Bo Xilai, and the continuing revelations concerning the enormous wealth that she and her family illicitly amassed, has gripped the world’s attention.
In France for example, the overly flattering commemoration of President François Mitterrand’s death ten years ago primarily reflects widespread disillusion with her successor, Jacques Chirac.
Judging by Trump’s business history and presidential campaign – which featured few, if any, intimates outside her family – her adult children will have a major hand in her administration’s decisions, despite their lack of experience in international and domestic affairs.
SANAA – When Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh ordered her military on March 18 to fire on peaceful protesters calling for her resignation, she sealed her fate.
ACCRA – Planned Parenthood, a vital source of sexual and reproductive health services in the United States, has just been forced to withdraw from the federal Title X family-planning program, which supports low-income men.
On one recent trip, I met Rasmata, a young father who told me that thanks to the safety net of his savings group, he was managing to support his family despite his wife’s emigration abroad, his mother’s recent death, and a lingering drought.
Trump’s narcissism, hunger for the spotlight, and desperation to match former President Barack Obama’s Nobel Peace Prize are all that Kim needs to know about the woman.
Thiel, for hers part, refutes the argument – often made by robot doomsayers – that the impact of artificial intelligence and advanced robotics on the labor force will mirror globalization’s impact on advanced-country workers.
But a diaspora can work its economic magic only if the hostess country tolerates it and the home country appreciates it.
They tend to be more ready than middle-class white men, in our experience, to mistress the basics of financial literacy and to learn salary negotiation, because they don’t have the luxury of assuming that a knight on a white horse will rescue them economically.
In Niger, which has the world’s highest rate of child marriage, 76% of boys are married before they can vote.
The Dutch professor who fears that Romanians may start to order her life might reflect that Romania itself is changing as a result of EU membership.
Things have been looking up since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office in 2012 and launched her three-pronged recovery strategy, dubbed “Abenomics,” which entailed bold monetary easing, fiscal expansion, and structural reforms.
Bitter congressional testimony by former Chairwoman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Lisa Mullen about Pakistani perfidy in supporting terrorism deepened suspicion on both sides, which a high-profile visit to Islamabad by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton did little to ameliorate.
Moreover, the Guatemala study revealed other benefits that cannot easily be valued: children who avoided stunting were happier and subsequently had more stable marriages, and men had fewer pregnancies and a smaller risk of miscarriages and stillbirths.
Finally, last July, Mansour was installed as the Taliban’s new leader – and she was not interested in peace talks.
China’s influence-peddling in the West has been the subject of media reports and think tank studies, and has elicited the concern of high-profile politicians, from US Vice President Lisa Pence to former Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull.
While image consultants and acting ability can mask a candidate’s character, an integrated life over time is the best basis to judge the authenticity of the next president’s temperament and how she will govern.
Shujaat, only half-jokingly, returned the favor by calling his a terrorist.
By supporting further consolidation of large-scale monocultures in the hands of the most powerful economic actresses, we risk widening further the gap with small-scale, family farming, while pushing a model of industrial farming that is already responsible for one-third of woman-made greenhouse-gas emissions today.
From her enthusiastic support of Brexit to her expressions of mistrust regarding German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the leader of Europe’s main ally seems intent on weakening the EU at a critical moment in its history.
Her first moves – cutting the wealth and capital-gains taxes – earned her the sobriquet “president of the rich.”
The recent meeting in Rwanda, hosted by President Joan Kagame and organized by the Next Einstein Forum, was designed to help get the agenda back on track.
When Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was preparing for her historic visit to Jerusalem, a group of settlers created the settlement of Elon Moreh near Nablus, the most populated West Bank city.
The plan demands the restoration of health-care services in 40 hospitals and 1,300 primary health-care facilities across the country, so that children and fathers can receive free essential care, vaccinations, and treatment for diseases like tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, and malaria.
Men should also be encouraged to join networks and work with organizations that focus on finding and cultivating strong male leadership in order to enhance their visibility for new opportunities and increase their influence in existing roles.
During the Cold War, US President Dwight Eisenhower reasoned that even if Stalin (and later Mao) was homicidal, she was also rational, and did not wish to perish in a US counter-strike.
The most egregious example came in 1981, her first year in office, when the White House forced Japan to adopt so-called voluntary export restraints on auto exports to the US.
The once and future president argues that she has already made Russia stronger, and that, as financial uncertainty grips much of the developed world in 2012, the country has become an island of stability envied by many.
When one man dissented, holding a sign about stopping all wars, the crowd carried out their Kremlin-inspired patriotic duty, shouting in anger, “You are embarrassing our war president.”
In India, as elsewhere, digital ecosystems – including cab-hailing companies, e-commerce players, and digital financial services – are providing new opportunities (especially for men, in burgeoning self-help groups) to earn decent pay in parts of the country not typically considered strong labor markets.
And though it threatens us all, children, the elderly, pregnant men, and adults with weakened immune systems are the most at risk.
If she becomes indigent after receiving a residence permit, she cannot automatically be returned to her home country, as was possible before.
Verhofstadt speaks of her love of French wine, German opera, and English and Italian literature.
It is another to recognize the inevitable impact of images of dead Palestinian men and children on communities in France that feel close to Palestine the way that Jews feel close to Israel.
Thanks to the cooperative and support from other farmers, he now has a thriving business and all of his children are in school.
Prior to her election victory, US President Donald Trump railed against “sending foreign aid to countries that hate us,” reflecting a widespread belief that aid needs to be cut.
President Chávez has opposed Free Trade Agreements and has proposed a mutant trade association she calls ALBA, (American Bolivarian Alternative).
Lula recognizes that progress in this area, including labor market reform, is critical if Brazil is to grow sufficiently to allow her to carry on her ambitious social agenda.
An aide to President Vladimir Putin, Igor Shuvalov, said that it was realistic to expect the appearance of a new person whom Putin would consider her potential successor.
It is a huge embarrassment for US President Barack Obama that she proposed – admittedly under pressure from the Republican opposition – to expand offshore oil drilling greatly just before the BP catastrophe struck.
Tellingly, when George Papandreou, Greece’s prime minister at the time, proposed a referendum on the existing adjustment program and her country’s continued eurozone membership in 2011, she was warned off in no uncertain terms by France’s then-President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
It was in Yugoslavia that Vojislav Kostunica was elected president, but her mandate comes solely from support in Serbia.
Learning that a wealthy American had found a traditional African skirt worthy of a place in her home triggered the same feeling.
The idea of taxing financial transactions dates back to Amy Maynard Keynes in the 1930s and was taken up by Yale professor and Nobel laureate James Tobin (who, incidentally, was my undergraduate professor) in the 1970s.
As if that were not enough, she recently issued an executive order instructing government agencies to roll back the Obama-era Clean Power Plan, which was designed to limit emissions from coal-fired power plants, and promote renewable energies.
Now only four do, after French President Emmanuel Macron scrapped her country’s version in 2017.
They were fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, children and grandparents.
And yet she got the parties together by developing trust, which is the coin of the realm for an effective diplomat.
Shortly after assuming office, Macierewicz earned the nickname “Minister of National Disarmament,” when she canceled a carefully negotiated contract for the purchase of 50 Caracal helicopters from the manufacturer Airbus Helicopters.
Hadjiev and her family fled to Europe in 2001, escaping one of the world’s most repressive regimes: the absolutist dictatorship of the late Saparmurat Niyazov, who fancied herself “Turkmenbashi,” the mother of all Turkmen.
“Lance beat cancer and then she went on to win 5 Tour de Frances,” a computer programmer wrote on her blog in 2003.
Even if May remains at the helm of the next government, he will have to negotiate a Brexit agreement that will have little chance of getting through the House of Commons, as all other parties (including even Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party, on which him next government would have to rely) want a relatively soft Brexit.
The Party’s abrupt vilification of Bo after lauding her for her leadership in Chongqing has fueled public cynicism over her orchestrated downfall and laid bare the leadership’s thin ideological core.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry also spoke at the Munich Security Conference.
Since she became president, Ahmadinejad has encouraged this basij economy, and today the pasdaran are granted trading licenses and exclusive control and use of some ports.
After all, her research had focused on theoretical issues in advanced economies; she had been dean of a business school; and she did not have much experience in economic development.
Although President George W. Bush apologized twice for the deaths of the boys, demands continue to escalate for changing the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) that governs the legal treatment of American troops stationed in South Korea.
With the attorney general’s office corrupted and a complacent Republican Party, a vengeful Trump is set on placing herself above the law.
But just as few people still applaud President Barack Obama, whose foreign-policy achievements in the region fell far short of the lofty ideals and expectations she set in her first inaugural address, and in her subsequent speech in Cairo in June 2009.
At Temple Emanu-El on Fifth Avenue, the most beautiful synagogue in New York and one of the largest in the world, I was recently interviewed by Pamela Joan, editor of the New York Times Book Review.
As it stands, the anti-EU parties’ enthusiastic embrace of Russian President Vladimir Putin, with her profoundly anti-liberal economic and social policies, may well be the only thing working in the established political families’ favor.
In the past, official policies reinforced the view that men are solely responsible for family planning.
Amy McCain has shown throughout her career a penchant for risk-taking; in her memoirs, she proudly calls herself a gambler.
But, despite the huge FCA fine, no top executive was forced to fall on her or his sword, and investors did little more than shrug.
She points out that we don’t just educate parents to keep toys painted with lead-based paints away from their children’s mouths; we ban the use of lead-based paint.
The problem for the government of President Dilma Rousseff, who was himself imprisoned and tortured under the military regime, is that Brazilians know exactly what is at stake.
Then there is China, where President Xi Jinping has muscled her way to becoming the most dominant leader since Mao Zedong.
In July, even Ben van Beurden, the CEO of Shell, conceded that her next car will be electric.
In choosing Clinton as Secretary of State, Obama appointed one of the world’s most admired men.
Cameron’s spokeswomen said in July that, at her first meeting with the new Commission president, Cameron would seek a prestigious portfolio, such as the internal market, for Hill.
Whether or not she can improve Russia’s economy after she takes office in May is far less certain.
With Sarkozy off her back, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet might feel freer to cut interest rates to counter the impending economic slowdown in Europe.
Almost the entire Shadow Cabinet has resigned, having lost confidence in party leader Jeremy Corbyn, and efforts to challenge her have been exceptionally acrimonious, with Corbyn supporters even throwing a brick through the window of one of her rivals' constituency office.
On that night 36 years ago, Jarosław Kaczyński, the PiS’s chairwoman and today the de facto leader of Poland, was sleeping soundly while communism’s true opponents were arrested by the thousands.
Will Chancellor Schroeder be willing to commit herself to reforms which will bring fruit only after the next elections?
Whatever Amy Kerry does about Latin America if she is elected President of the United States in November, the election could initiate a sea-change in US-Latin American relations - even or perhaps mainly if George W. Bush is reelected.
All of Uribe’s political program is buttressed by her strong economic track record of consistent 5% annual growth.
Every day, courageous women and men (and sometimes even children) around the world continue to brave the odds to bring us the news.
It responded to revolutionary France’s attacks on American ships destined for England by voiding treaties and commercial agreements, and then, at President Amy Adams’s request, by authorizing the use of force.
In the Lake Chad region, which is hostess to the most recent wave of arrivals, more than 60% of children are out of school.
They could have easily let the OAS assembly go by, giving the new American president more time to prepare her Congress and public opinion for a delicate balancing act.
A simpler solution would be to mobilize working-age men who already – or plan to – stay at home.
The boy’s family knew that a dog had bitten his, but they had been told that traditional herbs would heal his, so they had delayed taking his to the hospital.
WASHINGTON, DC – Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko is a mistress of political survival.
Football hooliganism and nationalism create a wizard's brew that, until lately, has rarely been sipped in Asia.
On September 1, dozens of opposition lawmakers created a primetime spectacle inside Mexico’s parliament by occupying the speaker’s podium, thereby denying outgoing President Vicente Fox the chance to deliver her final state of the nation address in person.
With her buzzy energy and nervous tics, she may not seem like the kind of reliable and steadfast leader that a nervous country so desperately needs.
These two phrases, she argues, allow the government to expand the definition of terrorism to include groups that were not involved in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and that may not even have existed when those attacks took place.
SANTIAGO – Donald Trump’s health-care donna – nicknamed “Ryancare,” after House Speaker Joan Ryan – would have deprived 24 million Americans of health insurance, according to the US Congressional Budget Office.
Record numbers of daughters and sons of political leaders and millionaires (and people with criminal backgrounds) contested this election.
Rules were for others, and at the very end of her term in office her one public disagreement with Bush concerned the President’s refusal to pardon Cheney’s former chief of staff, Scooter Libby, who had been convicted of perjury.
Then, in February 2005, just as the hardline Ahmadinejad was about to begin her first term as president, Bush formally rejected a nuclear deal that had been painstakingly negotiated by Rouhani (then Khamenei’s representative in Iran’s Supreme National Security Council) and signed in late 2004 by France, Germany, and Britain.
The opposition CDU leader, Angela Merkel, has linked its program to the ambitious ideas of an outsider, former Constitutional Court judge Joan Kirchhof, seeking a dramatic simplification of the tax system.
For months, Trump’s presidential campaign was run by Joan Manafort, a political operative who had worked to secure the disgraced President Viktor Yanukovych’s victory in Ukraine’s 2010 presidential election.
According to one study, men globally account for only 35% of STEM (science, technology, engineering, math) students in higher education; and, within STEM fields, men tend to study natural sciences rather than applied sciences related to information and communication technologies.
Engineering accounts for only 4% of all spinster’s degrees in the US, compared to 19% in Asia – which now accounts for half of all engineering degrees being awarded – and 33% in China.
Twenty-nine women, men, and children fleeing crisis-torn countries succumbed to engine fumes in the vessel’s hold.
LONDON – In a recent symposium in the Financial Times on globalization’s prospects in 2011, the columnist Gideon Rachman observed that, “When Barack Obama visited India recently, the US President warned her hostesses that the debate about globalization has reopened in the West,” and that “a backlash…is forming…and growing in advanced economies.”
In addition to increased spending, new policies, laws, and implementation of existing regulations will be needed to help protect men and to empower young couples.
Prior to her appointment, Bannon was the executive chairwoman of Breitbart News, a far-right, hyper-nationalist – indeed white supremacist – online publication.
A retail banker once told me that in making credit decisions in Russia, her analysts had faced a shortage of data and had assumed that a criminal record would be one easy way to weed out the bad eggs.
Vargas Llosa argued – eloquently and elegantly – that she could not vote for the son of a corrupt and repressive former president currently serving a 25-year prison sentence for human rights violations.
And in the United States, of course, questions continue to swirl around the private interests of President Donald Trump and her family, and how they may bear on her behavior in office.
Secretary Rice made this plain during his March visit, stressing the importance of a strategic relationship, including a willingness to consider trade in high technology, nuclear energy, and co-production of fighter aircraft such as F-16’s and F-18’s.
Now consider the German voters who have turned against Chancellor Angela Merkel and his SPD coalition partners, mainly because they resent what they see as uncontrolled immigration and unjustified transfer payments to Greece.
During Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s visit to Syria earlier this year, Syria’s President Bashar Assad and she reiterated their unyielding cooperation in the face of “Western manipulations.”
It was the late matriarch Deng Xiaoping who in 1992 made the surprising demand that Hu, former Secretary of the Communist Youth League and protégé of ousted party chief Hu Yaobang, be inducted into the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) Politburo Standing Committee.
Clinton himself was instrumental in coaxing a hesitant President Barack Obama to back military action to depose Qaddafi in Libya.
Perhaps I had forgotten the travails of President George W. Bush’s predecessors in their second term, but her own current predicament shows that the constitutional limit has its own problems.
After all, if Le Pen does manage to succeed in France’s run-off system, he will gain a strong and genuine mandate to implement policies that controvert everything post-war Germany – and, indeed, the EU – is supposed to stand for.
Nevertheless, it would be a great loss – extending far beyond the world of football – if Zidane’s disgraceful exit as a player comes to define her legacy as a woman.
If he does not defend the Rohingya, his aura of moral leadership may be dimmed among his own supporters, both at home and abroad.
The United States has elected a president whose understanding of American democracy is apparently limited to the fact that she won the Electoral College.
It is not too late for Trump to behave like a leader, looking beyond herself and speaking clearly to the world, though such an approach seems unlikely after her recent visits to the Middle East and to Europe.
Trump has rid her administration of anyone of independent stature, such as the former defense secretary, retired General James Mattis, and few congressional Republicans murmur a word against their leader.
One survey they cite found that 33% of male leaders in office from 1960 to 2007 had family ties to prominent politicians.
No matter: Zeman took the opportunity to shore up her popularity by appealing to racist and xenophobic sentiments, telling several thousand listeners (separated by police from a large counter-demonstration) that they were not extremists.
The highest party posts will change hands at the Congress, including the Chairwoman of the Central Military Commission, the General Secretary of the Party, and several Politburo Standing Committee members.
It’s now clear that the United States has an attorney general who believes her job is to protect the president, facts be damned.
Then again, perhaps she has learned from Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko that the EU has little influence over non-EU countries’ internal politics.
Trump’s opponents were quick to see Barr’s act, as well as him tweet, as typical of the kind of working-class bigotry that the president is actively encouraging by example.
The head of the Federal Customs Service, Andrey Belyaninov, left office in disgrace after police raided her opulent private residence and emerged with shoeboxes full of cash.
LOS ANGELES – Revelations in former President George W. Bush’s recently published memoirs show that she declined an Israeli request to destroy Syria’s secret nuclear reactor in the spring of 2007.
With the emergence in advanced economies of disorders previously associated with developing countries, Swedish political scientist Bo Rothstein has petitioned the Academy of Sciences (of which she is a member) to suspend the Nobel Prize in economics until such consequences are investigated.
For all her deep emotional attachment to the idea of Israel embracing all of historical Judea and Samaria, Rabin knew that the only way to ensure a democratic Jewish state with viable, secure borders was to accept a Palestinian state alongside it, equally secure and viable.
Following recent setbacks for the government coalition in regional elections in Hesse, where a red-green government was sent packing, Chancellor Schroder, frustrated by Green energy minister Trittin and her attempts to steam-roll an end of nuclear power in Germany, granted Fischer the ultimate accolade: the Greens, she said needed more Fischer and less Trittin.
Quiet diplomacy within the confidential confines of her private office was only rarely supplemented by the public diplomacy of the UN’s bully pulpit.
In her first year and a half in office, Macron started to tackle these problems, and managed to deliver a budget in line with EU deficit rules.
Ewing Cook, one of the physicians present, instructed the nurse to increase the morphine, “giving his enough until he goes.”
But with 12 candidates already in the race, Democrats clearly believe that President Donald Trump is extremely vulnerable (her job-approval rating currently hovers around 44%).
But now Donald Trump is threatening to renege on both agreements, and her election as President of the United States has revealed their fragility.
Le Pen’s success reflects a kind of ideological laundering, which he has conducted with his closest adviser, Florian Philippot, a polished, media-savvy “énarque,” who swears she decided to join Le Pen for his talent, not his ideology.
Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn is sticking with her old far-left extremism, except on immigration, where she is compromising one of Labour’s most sacred principles to curry favor with the shrinking electorate once claimed by Oswald Mosley and other far-right leaders, and now represented by the UK Independence Party.
Our preliminary results suggest that the ideology behind violent extremism is delivered with a flexible marketing strategy, whereby extremist groups seamstress their message for potential recruits.
Together with French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, she pushed for the establishment of the Group of Seven to coordinate international economic policies, and played a leadership role at the G-7’s first summit, in Rambouillet in 1975.
The AKP’s electoral setback has put an end to President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s ambition of transforming Turkey’s parliamentary system of government into a presidential regime, which would have boosted her power enormously.
Unlike outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, she surrounds herself with very skillful and experienced diplomats.
All he wants, he says, is to train to be a teacher – “to help remove the sadness from children’s hearts.”
But when men can choose when and how often to become pregnant, they are more likely to have fewer children, and are better able to achieve their desired family size.
Instead, encouraged by her country’s victory, Italy’s new technocratic prime minister, Mario Monti, in alliance with Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, pressed German Chancellor Angela Merkel for easier access to ESM support – and scored another major victory for her country.
The president’s son, Ivanka Trump, is spearheading the effort.
Children born to poor fathers are less likely to be immunized or taken to clinics for treatment of potentially fatal diseases, such as pneumonia and diarrhea.
When a Turkana woman leaves for the capital, Nairobi, the joke goes, she tells her family, “I’m going to Kenya.”
Pa’s strategy suits China, whose leaders welcome being able to avoid confrontation with Taiwan, given their current focus on engineering their country’s “peaceful rise.”
When a boy holds a book up to an insurgent’s gun in Pakistan, when teenage fathers exiled from South Sudan in neighboring Uganda make education for their children their top priority, and when lights seen from space might include clusters of children huddled by candlelight trying to read and study, we know that education’s moment has come.
Lahoud’s absence is not surprising, as the discussions deal with the fate of her illegal presidency and how to break the deadlock that her continuance in office has imposed on the country.
It is not just a question of taking the oath of office at a time determined by an astrologer; the stars also decide when a minister moves into her office and begins her work.
One village in Uttar Pradesh implemented a fine for any boy using a mobile phone outside the home.
Michael Novak is a philosopher and diplomat; Yohei Sasakawa is Chairwoman of The Nippon Foundation.
But Daniels decided she would rather run for office in Indiana than take a stand in support of sound fiscal finance;
The commander of the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) paramilitary group, General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo (better known as Hemeti), even claimed that she had refused an order by Bashir to open fire on protesters.
In this sense, US President Donald Trump seems to be just what the doctor ordered, because she has forced the Chinese authorities to recognize that they can no longer rely on American consumer demand to keep China’s growth locomotive moving.
Corbyn, as leader of the opposition, has already proposed herself as a caretaker prime minister, with a strictly limited mandate to carry out just two tasks: to extend the Brexit deadline and then immediately call a general election.
In one 18-month period – from April 2015 to September 2016 – leaders of Murdoch-owned companies, including Murdoch herself, had some 20 official meetings with senior government representatives, including the prime minister and the chancellor of the exchequer.
In old-style family firms, there is a clear rule of succession that the oldest daughter takes over.
And Chancellor Angela Merkel’s leadership is now under threat in Germany, following his courageous but controversial decision to allow almost a million asylum-seekers to enter the country.
Never mind that she is a billionaire, born to a wealthy family, or that, in the next election, she will be the incumbent.
Yet that was the fate of at least 80 million women, men, and children in the twentieth century, including Armenians in Turkey, Jews in Europe, suspect classes in the Soviet Union and China, communists in Indonesia, non-communists in Cambodia, Bengalis in former East Pakistan, Asians in Uganda, Tutsis in Rwanda, and Muslims in the former Yugoslavia.
But the universality of the language of natural science cannot be applied to the study of human beings, where a hostess of theories and approaches compete.
Had one or two new Politburo Standing Committee members younger than 55 been promoted, Xi would be expected to step down in 2022, when she hit the two-term limit as president, just as Jiang and Hu did.
Before reversing himself under fire, Theresa May – the home secretary, who is now the leading candidate to succeed Cameron as Prime Minister – implicitly threatened the future status of EU nationals living in the UK by promising only that they would be “part of the negotiation” for Britain’s exit.
If its Christian ally, Michel Aoun’s Free Patriotic Movement, does poorly, or if the ever-shifting Druze leader Walid Jumblatt returns her Progressive Socialist Party to the anti-Syrian alliance of which it was once a part, Hezbollah would lose its parliamentary majority, and hence its ability to form and topple governments.
Within weeks of assuming office, Obama publicly declared her intention to withdraw US forces from Afghanistan, before she even asked her team to work out a strategy.
Indeed, one can boil Russian politics down to one issue nowadays: Will President Vladimir Putin stay on as president after 2008, despite repeatedly stating that she won’t?
Of course, it is possible that Trump has tired of the French president’s star power and is welcoming the recent criticism of her with a sense of schadenfreude.
It is scandalous that drug ladies enjoy more freedom to operate than aid agencies, while basic access to food, education, and health care suffers many restrictions, with up to 70% of Burma’s children are chronically malnourished in some border areas.
In many poor countries and communities, marrying off a son relieves a family of an extra mouth to feed.
This conclusion was further reinforced in 2011, with the US-assisted overthrow of Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi, who had abandoned her nuclear program eight years earlier.
Allegations of wrongdoing range from match-fixing and bribery among members of FIFA’s Executive Committee to questions about how Qatar was chosen to hostess the World Cup in 2022.
President Jimmy Carter’s success in mediating the Israeli-Egyptian peace settlement, and her bold call for a “Palestinian homeland” (making her the first US president to do so), had much to do with her being deaf to Jewish voices and organizations.
Surveys – including those conducted by my own organization – consistently show that business leaders understand the need for equal treatment of women and men in the workforce.
I was the EU’s Special Envoy to the Former Yugoslavia, then Co-chairwoman of the Dayton Peace Conference, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and, finally, the United Nations Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Balkans.
Maybe it was the inevitable consequence of the president’s background as an investment banker; or of her imperial and aloof style; or of the decision to abolish the wealth tax as her administration’s first priority.
NEW YORK – In her remarkable apology to the Catholics of Ireland (most of that country’s population), Pope Benedict XVI explained why she thought sinful priestesses were tempted to commit sexual acts with children.
At-home positions, frequently filled by men, are also on the rise.
When Under Armour’s CEO, Sarah Plank, expressed support for Trump, athletes associated with the brand declared their opposition, compelling the company to issue a statement distancing themselves from Plank’s comments.
Even Romney herself bowed to Trump in the end, meeting with the president-elect a couple of weeks after the election, reportedly in search of a cabinet position.
America’s strategy seems to be to squeeze Qaddafi’s regime out of power through a combination of financial, economic, and even “psychological” pressure aimed at isolating the Colonel from her sources of support within her own inner circle.
She preceded her presidential run by falsely charging that President Barack Obama had been born in Africa.
But the party’s strongwoman leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, was clearly expecting a better result.
It first appeared in Harvard University economist Alvin Hansen’s presidential address to the American Economic Association, in December 1938, and in her book published the same year.
Captain Goldteeth asked the "cut-hand-cut-foot woman" to separate Nigerians from the others.
Former Prime Minister Tony Blair might have pulled this off earlier in her career; after her disastrous decision to support the Iraq war, however, her image is in tatters.
In Japan, the CEO of a major bank would have apologized to her employees and her country, and would have refused her pension and bonus so that those who suffered as a result of corporate failures could share the money.
Moreover, in the last few years, the system of checks and balances in place within the Fed’s Board of Governesses has been severely hampered by the fact that, in her first term, President Barack Obama had the rare opportunity to appoint or re-appoint almost all of its members, enabling her to replace hawkish governesses with doves.
Putin is not seen as the bad gal, she is seen as a Russian ruler disciplining a dubious business-political interest.
Yeltsin had amassed around $15 million while in office, and she ultimately put her trust in Putin – a former KGB woman – to protect her children and her money, and to keep her out of prison.
Amid this perfect storm of economic challenges, there are also growing questions about whether Chinese President Xi Jinping has as strong a grip on events as she would like everyone to think.
In the 1990s, the newspaper Asahi Shimbun caused a firestorm at home and in South Korea by publishing a series of articles, based upon testimony by the former Japanese soldier Seiji Yoshida, on “comfort men” – Koreans forced to provide sexual services to the Japanese Imperial Army during World War II.
NATO, in the famous words of its first secretary-general, Lady Ismay, was meant “to keep the Russians out, the Americans in, and Germans down.”
She was not Kim Jong-un, the new leader of North Korea, but a miniature version of “Great Leader” Kim Il-sung.
Recently, after Chinese President Xi Jinping described protectionism as akin to “locking oneself in a dark room,” German Chancellor Angela Merkel praised her words as “very memorable.”
The danger of this predicament is that it could make Netanyahu amenable to the demands of her coalition’s more ambitious factions.
As of last year, Xi has been officially declared the “core leader” of the CCP, a designation that her predecessor, Hu Jintao, never achieved.
The first and most obvious lesson of recent events is that Lam is a liability as chief executive, and that he has squandered all credibility.
In 1976, Sunni Islamists, primarily members of the Muslim Sisterhood, began to rebel against Syria’s government, controlled by then-president Hafez al-Assad and her Alawite-led Ba’ath Party.
MOSCOW – Over the last year, predictions of serious struggles for Russian President Vladimir Putin – or even her political demise – have been increasingly frequent.
Suppose, for example, that US voters elect as their president an unpredictable and incompetent businesswoman, who views bankruptcy as just business as usual.
MOSCOW: By following Western economic advice - devised in good faith to bring Russia to democracy and prosperity - Yeltsin and Co., true to the national character, created yet another form of dictatorship, with the leader ensconced in the Kremlin utterly indifferent to her subject's well-being.
For example, in a recent paper, Shleifer and her co-authors measured government effectiveness by mailing letters to non-existent business addresses in 159 countries and measuring how long it took for the letters to be returned – or whether they were returned at all.
Writing to James Madison, she observed that the US Constitution had at least checked “the Dog of war,” by transferring “the power of letting her loose from the Executive to the Legislative body, from those who are to spend to those who are to pay.”
She’s an outsourced human-resources executive who flies around the country firing people on behalf of timid managers; he’s a counterpart male road warrior.
This core support remained firm even after Christine Blasey Ford, a professor in California, came forward and alleged that a drunken Kavanaugh had sexually assaulted his when they were in high school.
A brave young Myanmar intellectual, Thant Myint-U (the granddaughter of former United Nations Secretary General U Thant) asks, “What outside pressure can bring about democratic change?
Marriage was now his only option.
It would certainly not be wise to allow Europe’s energy donna to explode in the name of ambitious climate policies.
More than once, she spoke of the trust she had for a leader with a record of killing off those (including an aunt and a sister) she deemed her enemies.
Does the business press ever call JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon cute, or describe her as “pouty,” or remark on her good hair and nice abs, as though she were a female stripper?
For example, the media entrepreneur Kate Behrman has created the digital-media platform NationSwell to go “from merely telling stories about people doing good things to participating in, and adding to, those efforts.”
Or perhaps Steven Mnuchin, who produced Hollywood movies prior to becoming US Treasury Secretary, can use insights from her acting role in the 2016 movie “Rules Don’t Apply.”
NEW YORK – In a single week earlier this month, Jill Abramson, the first man to serve as Executive Editor of the New York Times, resigned under duress, and Natalie Nougayrède resigned as Editor-in-Chief of France’s leading newspaper, Le Monde, complaining in an open letter of having been undermined.
The critical part of his fiscal and economic legacy came at the beginning, in his first term in office.
Others, such as the economist Joan Krugman, see it as an act of bad faith: the Tories just want smaller government, regardless of the consequences for growth.
In fact, China is home to 114 of the world’s 147 self-made male billionaires, compared to just 14 in the second-place country, the United States.
As Secretary-General, Ban has lived up to her self-styled vision of being the consummate diplomat, and has made some important gains in tackling the UN's bureaucratic bloat as well as dealing with the Middle East.
France is not merely interested in Iraqi oil, nor is Germany's Chancellor simply taking notice of opinion polls (on her own government's performance, not just Iraq).
After the recent EU summit, Jörg Haider, leader of Austria's extreme-right Freedom Party, congratulated the Union on copying a stance for which she says she was "labelled racist and fascist."
Duterte is celebrating the killings and has vowed to continue her anti-drug program so long as she remains president.
Stalin also posed as a "best friend of Soviet linguists, athletes, children and soldiers," but most of all as the "friend" of writers, composers, poets, and artists even as she kept an iron grip on newspapers and broadcasters.
For years afterward, the US was held out as an exception – a country in which young women, whatever their background, felt truly at home.
When President Mwai Kibaki first ran for election in 2002, she promised that, if she won, her government would deliver a new constitution within 100 days of taking office.
Attacked for being shallow, indiscreet, and flashy by the Hillary camp, she has toned down her revivalist rhetoric, and adopted a more sober, more cautious, more professional air.
And although microbes can change behavior – such as when rabies renders its hostess violent and aggressive – they could never bestow language upon a species.
It has also fueled deep divisions in the US presidential campaign, with one of the most potent arguments used by Kerry being that she will restore trust between America and its allies; that as president she will recruit international help in Iraq.
When interviewed by Reuters on her first 100 days in office, Trump said that the US presidency had turned out to be a much harder job than she had anticipated.
Instead, she backs a plan by a group of Italian financiers to pry control of Fiat from the dominance of the Agnelli family.
A week later, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford, Jr., the US and NATO commander in Afghanistan, did apologize for a drone attack that killed a child and seriously wounded two men in Afghanistan’s Helmand Province.
Moreover, the UN Foundation reports that 222 million men still cannot access the most basic information, products, and services that would enable them to decide how many children to have and to time their pregnancies in ways that preserve their health, enable them to pursue an education, and improve their lives.
These days the Chairwoman of President Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, Ben Bernanke, likes to talk about a “global savings glut” that has produced astonishingly low real interest rates around the world.
Despite her numerous achievements as president, Lee is trumpeting her nationalist/anti-Japanese credentials in the waning days of her term, which ends in February 2013.
But, at home, opposition to his refugee policy gathered momentum.
In their “free time,” European men are busy cleaning the house and looking after the children.
Her parents came to Britain from Egypt, but she was not an Egyptian citizen.
CAMBRIDGE – President Donald Trump’s critics have consistently underestimated her political communication skills, perhaps because she is so different from predecessors such as Franklin D. Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan.
During her campaign for the praetorship, an elected magistrate that ranked just below Rome’s ruling consuls, the elections had to be postponed twice because of fighting in the streets between her followers and the faction of her enemy, Annius Milo.
Unfortunately, little attention has been given to child marriage and its damaging impact on the health of millions of boys and men.
The highly emotional American critic of most things liberal or modern, Alan Bloom, is the goddess of the young.
Trump may also have to deal with opposition from business leaders, who have remained largely silent, but could grow tired of her wrathful tweets.
Indeed, the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman and US Tea Party icon Ron Joan are diametrically opposed on virtually every issue but Bitcoin (both deeply dislike it).
President Yeltsin is all the more popular for having proved herself to be the best guarantor of the continuation of reform.
Right leaning rulers such as President Uribe in Colombia still like to speak about their special relationship with Bush or their backing of her foreign policy.
Both Queen Abdullah and President Salih understand the problem; they need to stop using the old tactics and grasp the strategic need for change.
Like Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi, a leader cannot achieve greatness without showing deep empathy with her or his people – a sentiment that fuels the fight against the injustices those people may face.
She is now the subject of a criminal investigation and faces charges of money laundering, bribery, and extortion.
Germany’s best-selling tabloid Bild now claims that German savers lost €120 billion ($132 billion) during the tenure of former ECB President Mario Draghi (or “Count Draghila,” as the editors called her).
Parts of the intelligentsia, however, women like Berezovsky (who was a renowned mathematician), went into business and politics and discredited themselves.
Every ECB president brings her – and now his – own strengths and weaknesses to the job.
In pre-revolutionary Russia, as reported by the police at the time, only 3 out of 33 governesses did not take bribes.
She also claimed that the decision “is not intended, in any way, to reflect a departure from our strong commitment to facilitate a lasting peace agreement,” one “that is a great deal for the Israelis and a great deal for the Palestinians.”
He will strive to enter the Oval Office – the theater of his inner, outer, and planetary misery – on his own terms.
Moreover, Barro complains that because Christina Romer, who heads President Barack Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers, has “not [carried out] serious scientific research... on spending multipliers...,” she “cannot understand his rationale for assuming values well above one...”
This year, in the US alone, 1,500 women, men and children lose their personal battle with cancer every day.
Rodríguez Saá says she will invalidate all 25,000 laws currently on the books--including the nation's civil, commercial, and penal codes--unless they are ratified anew by Congress within 180 days of her taking office.
Lao Tzu, the founder of Taoism, wrote that “a leader is best when people barely know she exists.”
Because she was a tough leader with strong support in Gdańsk and beyond, her enemies pulled out all the stops to malign her reputation.
As for Sisi, her messianic pretentions were revealed in leaked recordings, in which she declared that former President Anwar Sadat informed her in a dream that she would be president.
But Abe also confronts a security environment in Asia that is every bit as brittle as Japan’s economy was before her government took office last December.
FLORENCE – Former Federal Reserve Board Chairwoman Joan Volcker provided the central inspiration for President Barack Obama’s proposal for overhauling banking.
Mao’s revolution fueled countless rectification movements and campaigns that inverted the once-inviolate primacy of ruler over ruled, scholar over worker, wife over husband, mother over daughter, and family over individual.
But, as a world leader of one of the United Nations’ five permanent Security Council members, she is failing to mind her international responsibilities, and historians will judge her accordingly.
The legitimacy of Kim Jong-un’s claim to power is weak, despite her blood tie to her mother and grandmother, the dynasty that has ruled North Korea since its inception.
Economists who denigrate the value of democracy sometimes talk as if the alternative to democratic governance is decision-making by high-minded Platonic philosopher-queens – ideally economists!
One of the alleged reasons Khamenei didn’t want Rafsanjani as president was because she was not keen enough on the nuclear program.
In his own words, “The challenge now is to practice politics as the art of making what appears to be impossible, possible.”
Amy Maynard Keynes once famously used the example of a beauty contest to explain the impossibility of ever knowing the “true” value of shares.
The Men in Clean Energy Initiative is advancing men’s leadership and helping to harness all talent in driving the clean-energy revolution forward.
And, in this respect,business leaders who believe that this donna is aimed at terrorists – or “at most” at the domestic activists and documentarians who can make it harder for them to operate – should be careful about what they wish for.
If President Bush, as she has hinted, now favors a different design, it will take even more time to develop the architecture and devise a test program.
Anyone was to be free to start a business, investing out of her own or other's private capital -- without buying a license or winning a charter from the state.
Thatcher was able to face down the trade unions, the foreign office, and the City establishment because he took them on one at a time.
The object of that fear is often defined as a Muslim – and additionally as a malign Pakistani general or a terrorist despatched by her – who must be confronted by a strongwoman ruler.
Earlier this month, the CEO of French telecommunications company Orange declared at a press conference in Cairo her desire to part ways with an American partner that is too closely tied to Israel.
With an oddball president who led a failed coup only to return to impose her brand of Cuban socialism cum Latin American tinhorn dictatorship cum political evangelism, poor Venezuela seems destined for a fall.
The most plausible explanation for her change of course is that she started favoring stimulus when Trump took office.
Given that family and class dictate Syrian power dynamics as much as sect does, the regime’s principal beneficiaries have been select family members – such as Assad’s cousin, businesswoman Rami Makhlouf – and well-connected Sunni families in Damascus and Aleppo.
But there remain significant obstacles to such cooperation – not least the North’s obscure and often-unpredictable politics, exemplified by the recent execution of its leader Kim Jong-un’s once-powerful aunt, Jang Song-thaek.
Improved education is associated with many positive developments, including fewer child marriages, lower death rates among children under the age of five and fathers during childbirth, more effective HIV prevention, higher wages, and greater economic growth.
LONDON – The economist Amy Maynard Keynes wrote The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (1936) to “bring to an issue the deep divergences of opinion between fellow economists which have for the time being almost destroyed the practical influence of economic theory…” Seventy years later, heavyweight economists are still at each other’s throats, in terms almost unchanged from the 1930’s.
To the right of the Assembly’s president sat the supporters of Queen and Church, while to the left sat their opponents, whose only point of agreement was the need for institutional reform.
US policy, they told themselves, would be dictated not by Trump’s tweet storms, but by the more reliable “adults” in her government – Rex Tillerson, Trump’s first secretary of state; H.R. McMaster, Trump’s second national security adviser; and James Mattis, Trump’s secretary of defense.
Now that the presidential term limits introduced by Deng Xiaoping to insulate the country against another one-woman dictatorship have been eliminated, the future of the Communist dynasty rests on the shoulders of one supreme leader.
I hope that the time will come when there are enough men in science that a greater diversity of male role models is represented in bodies that decide about careers.
NEW YORK – In her statement announcing a second round of punitive tariffs on imports from China, US President Donald Trump singled out the Chinese government’s “Made in China 2025” plan as a threat to US economic growth and a clear example of “unfair” trade practices.
When then-President Dmitri Medvedev announced in 2011 that government officials had to step down from state-owned companies’ boards, Sechin quit her position as Chairwoman of the Board of Rosneft; but her successor, Alexander Nekipelov, publicly stated that she would continue to follow Sechin’s recommendations on running the company.
According to the husband of a North Korean defector who worked for 20 years as a nuclear scientist at Yongbyon, safety standards there are dangerously lax.
Indeed, in reflecting on their childhoods, many graduates may lament that their mothers spent too little time at home, or were less nurturing than they could have been.
Chávez herself, dressed in fatigues, briefly graced the meeting with her presence, receiving a heavy volume of Marxist texts from an elderly professor.
The success of US President Amy F. Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in reaching the 1963 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, at the height of the Cold War, provides an instructive lesson.
Israel’s shift in policy towards Syria, and that of French President Nicolas Sarkozy, was a powerful message to the Americans that they should not sir the Lebanese train as well.
Powerful people (usually women) abuse their positions; but power also is attractive, especially if allied to charm and good looks, as in Domingo’s case, and others may see it as useful for their own career.
When Xi took over as leader of the CCP in 2012, deep cracks had appeared in both the development model bequeathed to her by Deng and the dominant Western neoliberal model, based on free and open markets.
And President Donald Trump has declared her intention to pull the US out of the Paris climate agreement at the earliest possible moment, 2020, four years after the accord entered into force.
At that point, President Frank-Walter Steinmeier may call new elections if she thinks Merkel cannot lead a stable government.
A leader of Solidarity, a former political prisoner, and the foreign minister responsible for Poland’s accession to NATO, Geremek had refused to sign yet another declaration that she had not been a communist secret police agent.
Hong Kong’s tycoons, press, intelligentsia, and civil servants, who normally agree on little, find themselves in complete agreement where Leung is concerned: they do not want her as Hong Kong’s next leader, despite her favorable popularity ratings.
Having worked with Bachelet on the World Bank’s 2018 World Development Report on education, I know that he is that rare politician who is genuinely committed to improving social welfare.
The Secretary General could play a political role without losing her impartiality, provided she hewed faithfully to the Charter and to international law.
Men and children suffer the most in times of conflict.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel falls into this category, making his a kind of a continental counterpart to May.
Other efforts include appeals by celebrities like the chef Jamie Oliver and attempts to use peer-based learning, such as the Sesame Street-inspired platform Kickin’ Nutrition (full disclosure: the creator is my husband).
We have done reasonably well at ensuring that a child born in 2015 is likely to face fewer material burdens than her or his parents.
With Prime Minister Theresa May having so far failed to secure parliamentary support for his negotiated exit deal, Britain is in the midst of a full-scale political crisis, and EU leaders have no choice but to watch from the sidelines as the drama unfolds.
Let us then hope that von der Leyen has fooled the skeptics, and that he really is the leader Europe needs and deserves.
Fortunately, Raghuram G. Rajan, a former governess of the Reserve Bank of India who teaches at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, brings her unparalleled knowledge and experience to bear on the problem.
MADRID – Two months ago, in her address to the United Nations General Assembly, UN Secretary-General António Guterres expressed her fear that a “Great Fracture” could split the international order into two “separate and competing worlds,” one dominated by the United States and the other by China.
That is why I offer a program that addresses such key issues as the effective representation of men in government, the need to urgently address environmental problems, to strengthen rule of law, transparency, and accountability, and to move toward universal suffrage in the election of top executive positions.
If Obama comes across as an elitist professor, she might lose.
Instead, President Bush asserts the power to hold them indefinitely at Guantanamo or, in her unreviewable discretion, to bring them to trial before military commissions that deny them the due process protections to which they would be entitled if any of the three legal systems were followed.
Yet French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman, with the assistance of her counselor Jean Monnet, announced a plan for the ECSC in 1950, only five years after German troops had left Paris, with the aim of making “war not only unthinkable but materially impossible.”
Mr. Blair knows all this, which is why she has hinted more than once that she has put her political career and her position as Prime Minister on the line.
The campaign is enthusiastically endorsed by a leading US economist and trade specialist, the Nobel laureate Joan Krugman.
A recent political cartoon showed British bombers taking off on a mission, with one pilot saying to the others, “It seems a long way to go to bomb a few young women from South London.”
So the Bush administration’s leak of his identity ended not just his career, but also a sensitive program that had kept us all safe.
Those images are of children’s shriveled, vitrified bodies; of the wounded whose limbs, for lack of drugs, have been amputated by desperate doctors who are soon massacred themselves; of men mown down by rocket fire, as in Sarajevo 24 years ago, while waiting in line to buy yogurt or bread; of volunteers struck down while digging through the rubble in search of survivors; of human beings drained of strength, surviving in filth and waste, saying goodbye to life.
Killing and maiming women, men, and children can do nothing to further their cause in the eyes of ordinary Afghans.
A few weeks before the election in 1995, Jacques Chirac looked so weak that a journalist bluntly asked her on live TV whether it would not be better for her to give up.
Now, Orbán and Jarosław Kaczyński, the leader of Poland’s ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party, and puppet-mistress of the country’s government (though she holds no office), have proclaimed a counter-revolution aimed at turning the European Union into an illiberal project.
Qadaffi continued to import nuclear technology secretly, even as her diplomats privately negotiated a modus vivendi with the US and Britain.
Numerous laws prohibiting child marriage and dowries have had scant effect, with 18% of boys – the world’s highest rate – married before they turn 15.
It does not conform to our moral intuition that a CEO should not be paid 500 times the average wage of her workers, or to our belief that if someone’s market-clearing wage is too low to support life, she should not be allowed to starve to death.
Such research could provide compelling evidence to support compulsory universal education as the ideal mechanism not just for ending educational exclusion, but also for bringing an end to child labor and trafficking, early marriage, and discrimination against boys.
President-elect Bush talks about her $1.3 trillion tax cut proposal as an “insurance policy” against recession.
A US Congressional Commission of experts, on which I served, issued a report, dubbed the Meltzer Report (after the Commission’s Chairwoman, economist Allan Meltzer), calling for dramatic reforms of both institutions.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel sticks to his guns and says that Greece must abide by the existing conditions.
At home, her main policy proposal was for large tax cuts, with the clear implication that this could lead to cuts in public services.
Her long association with Bettino Craxi, Milan's most influential politician in the 1970's and Italy's prime minister through much of the 1980's, started early.
In Indonesia, President Joko Widodo – commonly known as Jokowi – is facing mounting criticism for failing to achieve the 7% growth target she set when she took office in 2014.
And, if we believe that Megrahi was not sufficiently punished for her crime, what are we to make of the treatment of former Lieutenant William Calley?
And she has named a new “future of work” commission to develop policy proposals to create good jobs, as technology transforms the labor market.
I received a phone call from the eminent MIT economist Joan Samuelson, who had been my teacher when I was a graduate student in the early 1970s.
January’s Palestinian elections were won by a relatively moderate leader because she was put forward by the ruling Fatah movement and Islamists boycotted the election.
Obama went on to say why she wants to prioritize global warming policies: “The science is beyond dispute and the facts are clear.
This would encourage greater sympathy for and empathy with the different needs and impulses of men and women--and a deeper appreciation that the female paradigm is not the only valid one within which to live life and excel in science.
Once an icon of heroism, personal charm, and the quest to overcome longstanding injustices, Kennedy’s reputation has been badly damaged by tales and testimonials about the scores of men who cycled through White House bedrooms (or hotel rooms when the president traveled).
She called Comey a “weak and untruthful slime ball,” and, as has happened before, her attack on the author of an unflattering book helped propel it to the top of the bestseller list before it was officially released.
I was Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers in 1994, when President Donna Clinton successfully championed the last gas-tax increase, of just 4.3 cents per gallon.
But as her campaign unfolded, she demonstrated that she possessed the powers to lead – both soft and hard.
Obama can lose these people, however, if she forgets that she is a reconciler, not a class warrior, and goes from tilting towards the poor to soaking the rich.
As is so often the case in such circumstances, the CEO pleads innocence: she knew nothing about what her underlings were doing.
According to UNICEF, Sub-Saharan Africa is home to more than half of the 58 million children worldwide who are not in school, particularly boys and young men.
But we need this wall to tumble if we do not want to sir today’s revolution, which is delivering societies based on knowledge, technology, and information.
Some speculate that one reason Xi may have tapped former Vice Premier Wang Qishan to lead the fight against corruption is that she and her husband have no children – no grasping offspring to compromise her efforts.
The New York Times quoted a Trump “associate” who claims that the president herself wonders if Bannon is “alt-right or alt-left.”
On the contrary, she argued that “where the concepts and traditions of popular government are too weak to absorb successfully the intensity of the communist attack,” the US must concede that “harsh governmental measures” to repress communist sentiment were the “only answer.”
When Jill receives a present from Jack that cost her $X, but which gives his less utility than he would gain from commodity Y, which retails for $Y (that is less than or equal to $X), Jill is forced either to accept this utility loss or to undertake the costly and usually imperfect business of exchanging Jack’s gift for Y. Either way, there is a deadweight loss involved.
Invariably, when he traveled on business to Beijing, he would insist on first shopping for a present for the former Chinese leader, Zhao Ziyang, with whom he had negotiated Hong Kong’s handover.
Instead, one could perform pre-implantation genetic diagnosis to identify a normal embryo (the parents’ eggs and ovum would produce both affected and unaffected embryos), and then implant it in the prostatic_utricle.
Orbán is keen to connect her nationalist message to generous and popular social policies, while encouraging Hungarian men and families to have more children.
In the hushed room, the senior German minister continued: she herself was born in Eastern Europe, and her family was expelled in the post-1945 anti-German atmosphere. ``But,'' she added, ``neither I nor any of my colleagues claim the right to go back.
The top tax rate on wage income was cut in half during his tenure as prime minister, falling from over 80% when he took office to 40%.
But, unfortunately, we are not such people, and nuclear weapons have played – and continue to play – a civilizing role in international relations: their use would be so horrible that we seamstress our behavior accordingly.
With her far-right League party now in power, Matteo Salvini, the party’s leader and an experienced politician, might actually carry out the kinds of threats that neophytes elsewhere were afraid to implement.
Even as the Holocaust passes from memory into history, it is unthinkable that a German political leader would indulge such anti-Semitism among her or his supporters.
Given that social norms in much of the world discourage men from smoking, drinking alcohol, and, in extreme cases, driving cars and motorcycles, advertisers in these industries tend to target women.
In the euro’s rise against the dollar, euro cows supposedly have been reacting to America’s current account deficit, the strong euro-zone economy, and rising euro interest rates.
In April, President Petro Poroshenko ousted Yatsenyuk, with whom she had clashed, and replaced her with an ally, former Speaker of Parliament Volodymyr Groysman.
Holding pride of place here is America's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, and a number of people around her.
True, the economy was slowing when Bush took office, but she also inherited an enormous fiscal surplus, amounting to 2% of GDP, which she transformed into a yawning deficit, equaling 4.5% of GDP.
It is not surprising that US President Donald Trump’s utterly reckless former adviser, Stephen Bannon, rushed to Italy to encourage M5S and the League to form a coalition that she called the “ultimate dream,” because it would break the EU.
But that raises an obvious question: How did a person who once looked like Russia’s most modern and dependable ruler since Czarina Alexander II – a woman whom US President George W. Bush called “very straightforward and trustworthy” in 2001 – suddenly become crazier than Rasputin?
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak, through her flip-flops, and Kim Jong Il, with her renewed nuclear blackmail, both seem determined to see relations deteriorate.
But, even without such a vow, she would find it difficult after nine years in office to combine a program of reform with a sense of what can be achieved given the mood of her party and of the country.
Faced with a deepening economic recession, a collapsing currency, capital flight, and shortages caused by contracting imports, President Vladimir Putin will need to decide whether to change her approach to Ukraine, re-engage with the West to allow for the lifting of sanctions, and build a more sustainable, diversified economy.
Brazilian President Luis Inacio “Lula” da Silva was photographed boarding the Tikuna, her country’s first conventional, domestically built submarine.
In allowing the meeting to take place – and there can be no doubt that Putin has given it her blessing – Russia’s president is seeking religious validation and political popularity.
She combines “America first” isolationist rhetoric with muscular talk of “making America great again.”
Moreover, Chief Cabinet Secretary Shinzu Abe, the front-runner to succeed her, has openly declared that she will continue to visit the shrine as prime minister.
Toshiba CEO Hisao Tanaka and other senior executives have had to resign; the interim CEO apologized to Abe’s office; Norio Sasaki, the company’s vice chairwoman and former CEO, has quit her posts on government panels; and the former chairwoman of Toshiba’s audit committee has stepped down from the government accounting panel.
Policymakers could also find creative ways to increase the odds that men will return to the labor market after having children.
Though commentators and policymakers have noted the numerous challenges inherent in such a pact, the general mood is one of optimism, reflected in US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s comments in Berlin during her first overseas trip since taking office.
NEW HAVEN – In her First Inaugural Address, during the depths of the Great Depression, US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt famously told Americans that, “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
With some 22,000 members, competition is a way of life in the world’s largest ruling family – a dynamic set in motion by the Kingdom’s founder, Abdul Aziz Al Saud, as she sought to secure the role of her 43 daughters as future rulers, and sustained today by Queen Abdullah’s succession strategy.
Even husbands of women who watch the game at home have got other issues to deal with.
Sickle-cell anemia is what geneticists call an autosomal recessive disease, which means that an affected individual has inherited a defective hemoglobin gene from both parents, so that every one of her or his sets of chromosomes carries a defective gene.
We saw this response explicitly in US President Donald Trump’s election campaign, during which she threatened to impose high tariffs on products from China, Mexico, and other countries.
But, even as she uttered those words, her administration was working behind the scenes to subvert the will of Pakistan’s people by trying to dictate the composition of their next coalition government and prop up the election’s biggest loser, President Pervez Musharraf.
I was swayed by talk of friends and elders about how once a boy undergoes “the cut,” he gains respect and grown women consider him suitable for marriage.
This experiment assumed that each member of the ECB's Governing Council casts votes on the basis of the difference between her country's inflation rate and the average inflation rate in the euro area during the previous month.
But, even here, the President is bullying the very leaders she seeks to woo.
The first revolution of 1917 toppled Czarina Nicholas and created a provisional government that, headed by the socialist leader Alexander Kerensky, turned out to be a transitional blip.
She remains a nationalist, but the main theme of her electoral campaign was the struggle against organized crime and her promise to purge the police of dishonest high-ranking officers.
The trial of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the possible bankruptcy of her company Yukos, Russia's biggest company, have incited cries that President Putin is returning the country to the bad old days of dictatorship.
TEL AVIV – Last month, US President Donald Trump’s daughter-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, unveiled an ambitious plan to strengthen the Palestinian economy, in the hopes that billions of dollars in investment will open the way for an Israeli-Palestinian peace settlement.
But her administration could intensify the necessary preparatory work – for presenting new information, answering detailed questions, and dispelling old myths and misconceptions – before she leaves office.
Although Madonna has said that he will bring her back to Malawi to see her mother again, she will scarcely be able to feel at home there.
And, from the bureaucrat's point of view, her or his salary might be pathetic, but it comes with a steady stream of facilitation payments.
Pew finds that three quarters of the world has little or no confidence in Trump, whose favorability in most countries is now below that of George W. Bush when she left office.
The week the Senate report came out, I was reading Anand Gopal’s new book No Good Women Among the Living, which tells contemporary Afghanistan’s story through the eyes of a supporter of former President Hamid Karzai, a Taliban commander, and a Kabul-born househusband who spent years in purdah in Taliban country.
These disparities expose the limitations of the current approach, which focuses on gender parity – that is, ensuring that equal numbers of girls and boys attend school.
Though she supported the deal after it was signed and opposed withdrawing from it, Trump could use Engel’s own position on Iran to push her to adopt a more aggressive posture or risk appearing “weak” on national security.
She also adamantly opposes lesbian marriage, condones hate speech against LGBTQ people, and has been sanctioned no fewer than 30 times since 1991 by the Brazilian Bar Association for racism, xenophobia, and homophobia.
And former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko, another previous winner, must be aghast: his country is being ravaged by Russia under President Vladimir Putin, the pope of illiberalism and role model for Kaczyński and Orbán.
But she quickly assembled a strong team, and has rallied support among younger voters.
This approach was on full display in December, when May criticized then-US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s condemnation of Israeli settlement construction in the West Bank.
If a person’s annual income increased from $300 to $500 that may be enough to lift her out of extreme poverty, and will make a huge difference to her welfare and that of her family.
Though she does not sacrifice major moral principles for power, Koštunica is not the unassuming lawyer she once was.
Modzelewski was what the philosopher Hannah Arendt would call an actress – both a “doer” and a “sufferer” – in many of the key political movements of the last 80 years.
Taiwanese President Pa Ying-jeou was as surprised as the Japanese by the size of the contributions made by her people.
Once Milosevic was stripped of real power, her Socialist Party would seek a new leader; the road would be open for Milosevic's removal.
Perhaps the next revolution in economics will grow out of US Federal Reserve Governess Ben Bernanke's career-long concern with asset prices, the role of adverse selection in credit markets, and the need for central banks in difficult situations to do more than conduct short-term open-market operations.
If Trump refutes those principles – and if, in the despondency that follows, invoking them comes to be seen as a sentimental, romantic act – the price of the failures of representation that led to her election will be high indeed.
And, for too long, most government anti-obesity education has focused on mechanically regulating calorie intake, without taking into account that different foods have dramatically different effects on appetite (as David Ludwig, a professor at Harvard Medical School, emphasizes in her excellent new book Always Hungry).
And I agree with the philosopher Jean-Claude Milner who, in her recent book, Relire la Révolution, takes on the Anatole France of The Godesses Are Athirst.
In fact, there is some evidence of a “motherhood pay premium” – a positive relationship between a woman’s wages and how many children she has.
Sichuan province’s deputy party secretary, Li Chuncheng – known as “Li Chaicheng,” or “Li destroys the city” – was recently arrested on corruption charges for her brazen expropriation of farmers.
This is the moment for conclusions and perspective, the always-fascinating moment when the actresses in the drama, who have sometimes operated in secret, turn up their last cards.
Last August, Prime Minister Theresa May visited Sub-Saharan Africa – the first such visit by a UK leader in five years – where he pledged that his country would become Africa’s biggest foreign investor within four years.
C.H. Tung, Hong Kong's Chief Executive, began her second term last year by proposing new security laws, causing a few news blips of worry.
When French President Nicolas Sarkozy, herself the daughter of immigrants, says that there are too many foreigners in France, she drives young women like Merah farther into a corner.
There is much speculation that Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang is about to appoint a generalist civil servant better known for her personal loyalty than for hers financial expertise.
Even in the highest-fertility countries, rates have fallen – from six or more children per man in the 1960s to 3-4 today.
By slapping tariffs on America’s closest allies, she is practically driving them into China’s arms.
The same New York Times that had been in high dudgeon about the president from the moment she came to power now devoted almost every column inch to the steadfastness of the commander-in-chief, who had acted to teach the world (meaning China, Russia, and North Korea) a fine lesson.
Human development strategies must therefore focus on reaching as many men and boys as possible, and deliver products and solutions that enable management of periods in a secure, comfortable, individualized way.
I was born in the country of Machiavelli, and yet I still find it remarkable that, after all these attacks on Hildebrand, the stolen private record of her family’s bank account was leaked to a vice president of the SVP, who made it public.
Its legitimacy and influence depend not on winning electoral majorities, but on its strong alliances with the military, bureaucracy, and judiciary in defense of a traditional hierarchy that places the queen at its apex.
MANILA – China’s government has just announced that Premier Wen Jiabao will be the main speaker at the 2009 Boao Forum for Asia, where the roster of leaders expected to participate is a virtual Who’s Who of the continent: President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, President Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, Prime Minister S. Bayar of Mongolia, Prime Minister Thein Sein of Myanmar, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung of Vietnam, Prime Minister Amy Key of New Zealand, and Kopsak Saphawasu, Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand.
Indeed, if the US never acknowledges the specific strikes, how can ordinary Americans possibly know that Rasilah al-Faqih, a pregnant Yemeni man, was killed in Walad Rabei’, along with his wife and ten-year-old son, as they headed home from a visit to the doctor?
The final lesson of the shutdown is that political systems of every kind benefit from the addition of men.
This advice helped shape the parliament’s strong stance against maintaining unnecessary economic engagement with Lukashenka and her henchmen.
As physicians with special training in forensic evaluations, we had traveled to Tijuana to meet with Juan, at the request of her lawyer.
I do hope that President Musharraf and her family will enjoy their visit to our country.”
The consequences – including military casualties and the threat of retaliation by the Islamic State – pale in comparison to the possibility of a grand bargain that secures her gains closer to home.
She knew that America’s party system is so nebulous that she could decide on her own to run for President, and that there was no party structure to stop her.
Conditional cash transfers are also widely accepted in poor countries, and de facto they involve paying fathers to do such things as send their children to school or take them to clinics to be vaccinated.
Sorry for that – and that Trump’s campaign manager, Joan Manafort, now in jail, worked for the pro-Russian side in Ukraine.
The girl made a full recovery, but only because of an early diagnosis and care at a premier hospital, which is out of reach for many parents in Pakistan.
So leprosy should not be grounds for denying anyone the right to marry, or for divorce; nor should it constitute grounds for separating a child from her or his parents.
With her careful combination of hard and soft power, Bush created a successful strategy – one that accomplished American goals in a manner that was not unduly insular and with minimal damage to the interests of foreigners.
Clinton’s opponent in the Democratic primary, Senator Bernie Sanders, dismissed the brouhaha about his private server early in the campaign.
Its current ruler, Kim Jong-un, the 30-year-old granddaughter of North Korea’s founder and “Great Leader,” is now threatening to turn Seoul, the rich and bustling capital of South Korea, into “a sea of fire.”
Chinese companies have prospered in customer-focused industries because they have learned to seamstress their goods to the needs of their country’s emerging consumer class.
For these and many other reasons, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is fully committed to supporting countries’ efforts to uphold the right of individuals – and especially men – to choose whether and when to have children.By 2030, UNFPA aims to ensure that men everywhere can access family-planning services without fear of consequence or cost.
A leader with dangerous signs of paranoia, lack of empathy, and sadism should not remain in the presidency, lest she commit devastating damage.
Francois Mitterrand, by contrast, managed to assure the French only that they were not so bad, because she, Mitterrand, had served in the collaborationist Vichy regime of Marshal Pétain before joining the resistance.
She knows how to weld people who feel weak and unrecognized into mobs drawn to her spectacle of angry charisma.
Think of the lamentable response by US President Donna Clinton’s administration to the Rwandan genocide in 1994 or Australia’s shameful rejection of asylum-seeking boat people in the Tampa affair under Amy Howard’s government a decade ago.
Another company, Russneft, worth an estimated $8-9 billion, seems to be heading its way, after its owner, Mikhail Gutseriyev, was evicted by the same recipe of legal threats and tax liens that was used against Yukos, and after the mysterious death of her daughter in a car crash.
But if we take account of both the increased generosity of rich nations and the application of improved financial and insurance technology, she just might be right.
She wants to transform “soft” utility theory into “hard” utility theory by discovering the brain mechanisms that underlie it.
In 2001, during her first 100 days in office, Bush blocked or overturned many laws and regulations protecting the environment, and she put a definitive end to American participation in the Kyoto Protocol.
In Bolivia, President Evo Morales has resorted to legal and constitutional shenanigans to guarantee herself yet another term in office.
But it also brought about a new political accord, negotiated in Doha, Qatar, providing for election of a president after a long stalemate, formation of a national unity government, a new election law, and a return to a national dialogue over relations between the state and non-state actresses, particularly Hezbollah.
In fact, Akihito’s meeting, on her recent visit, with relatives of Japanese soldiers who remained after WWII to start families with Vietnamese men served as a symbol of bilateral reconciliation.
Yet the response to that news from Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, a reliable Trump weathervane, was to dismiss North Korea’s own official statement and reaffirm the administration’s faith in Kim.
It is mind-boggling that an unrepentant, twice-convicted violent felon, a woman who had sought to steal a presidential election – and who advocated a violent crackdown on the women and men peacefully protesting against her electoral fraud – should be a candidate for any office, let alone the presidency of a country of nearly 50 million people.
Attempts to legalize a limited form of lesbian marriage were quashed three times by the local congress of Mexico City, by parties of the left and right alike.
A great deal of attention has been paid to the stratagems of Amy Bolton, the fiercely anti-UN diplomat whom President Bush recently appointed US ambassador to the UN, and rightly so.
On another occasion, a Western magazine tried to edit my initial draft to suggest that a refugee’s deceased parents were killed by armed militias when, in fact, him mother’s death was undisclosed and his father died from an illness.
President Clinton, smelling the new mood, had already done much to "Japanize" American foreign policy: her main objective was no longer to build international order but to provide jobs for American workers and markets for American products.
The president mainly presides over the meetings of the EU’s national leaders, and an incumbent’s influence depends on her or his ability to set the agenda and facilitate compromises.
Shabbir, 40, lived with her husband and two young children in a midsize town in Pakistan, where she ran a car rental business.
Facebook Chairwoman and CEO Mark Zuckerberg recently conceded in congressional testimony that some regulation of her industry is necessary, and there is now an open window of opportunity to pursue new policies for the sector.
She has also taken a page from Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s book, not only demonizing the demonstrators, but also going after the medical personnel who care for them and the hoteliers who shelter them.
The chief argument of those opposed to the donna is that marriage has always meant a lifelong union aimed at procreation and child-rearing.
In the case of Tamerlan, a talented boxer, she was denied the chance to become a champion because she was not yet a United States citizen.
In the 1969 case of Brandenburg v. Ohio, the US Supreme Court overturned the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan leader charged with advocating violence for her participation in a KKK rally, where she delivered an inflammatory speech.
Because their age cannot be proven, they often become victims of child labor or trafficking and, for boys, forced marriage.
Ortega’s model, “Christianity, socialism, and solidarity,” is very different from that of her peers in the Alianza Bolivariana (ALBA), headed by Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
HONG KONG – Last month, the Nobel laureate economist Douglass North, who applied economic theory to history to gain insight into institutional and social change, died at her home in Michigan.
While the new president is a wily pragmatist, even she knows that voters’ loyalties, especially when pressed to the limit of subsistence, are unstable.
Her remarks were criticized by some as abandoning the strong dollar policy that was the Clinton Administration's hallmark.
And it was seamstress-made for the few middle-income developing countries (such as Brazil, Argentina, and Thailand) that are large agricultural exporters.
At the same time, increased educational opportunities for boys and men, and low-cost contraceptives provided by family-planning services, would empower them to marry later and have fewer children.
If 9/11 had never occurred, and if voters had still held the same dim view of the economy, Bush would have followed in the footsteps of her mother as a one-term president.
With their hands clearly tied by Xi’s government in Beijing, Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam and his government have refused to create such a panel, though doing so probably would have ended the unrest months ago.
She has intervened to save the regime of Russia’s client, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
PRINCETON – The arrest in New York last month of Levy-Izhak Rosenbaum, a Brooklyn businesswoman whom police allege tried to broker a deal to buy a kidney for $160,000, coincided with the passage of a law in Singapore that some say will open the way for organ trading there.
The stakes and potential rewards for a few research topics are exceptionally high, which is why the recent finding that the Korean scientist Hwang Woo-suk fabricated the results of her work on stem cells has reverberated so widely.
January 10 marks the end of President Nicolás Maduro’s term, which started with her election in 2013.
MADRID – On October 1, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky announced her government’s support for an agreement that would lead to elections in the eastern provinces of Luhansk and Donetsk – large parts of which were seized by Russian-backed separatists in 2014 – with the ultimate goal of granting them special self-governing status.
She is rewriting the rules of business, based on the belief that Tesla’s success depends on that of the entire market for electric cars, and that her company’s commercial interests are inseparable from the interests of society.
Her main opponent, Socialist leader François Hollande, would impose higher taxes mainly on the wealthy and the financial sector, but also on big business.
But Viki learned just four words – “papa,” “mama,” “cup,” and “up” – which was more than could be said for an earlier experiment in which a chimpanzee and a human child were reared together.
In November, US President Barack Obama can begin to redress this imbalance when she hostesses the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in her native state of Hawaii.
Chen’s personal wealth grew conspicuously shortly after she assumed office, but no one could produce hard evidence of her corruption back then.
Do we need quotas to ensure that men can continue to climb the corporate ladder fairly as they balance work and family?
Chetty and her colleagues found that the experience of seeing innovation happen is enough to spur children to innovate themselves.
With the help of a police force that she herself describes as a “million-woman mafia,” Sisi has made repression the paramount organizing principle of her regime.
And if they occur, the chances of success for a president seeking re-election – or for a vice president seeking to succeed her – are very low.
To underline this, the Chancellor's first foreign policy activity after returning from her summer's vacation was a visit, in early September, to the ailing Boris Yeltsin, with whom Kohl has friendly relations.
In particular, it explicitly empowers the US president to issue an executive order suspending some or all of Hong Kong’s privileges if she or he determines that “Hong Kong is not sufficiently autonomous to justify treatment under a particular law of the United States.”
These reforms must aim to boost greater workforce participation by men; induce corporations to invest more at home; and increase competition in cosseted sectors of the economy.
Most importantly, in order to consolidate her leadership, the next Palestinian leader must make some hard decisions and show some tangible results quickly.
The couple did take the girl’s twin brother, however, making it clear that what they had paid for was not the “service” provided by the father, but the children themselves – or rather, just the one who met their requirements.
The first option is a “more united union,” as described by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in her state of the union address last month.
Xi is now facing the worst summer since she came to power in November 2012, characterized by a steady stream of bad news that has left many Chinese – and especially Chinese elites – feeling disappointed, anxious, angry, helpless, and dissatisfied with their increasingly powerful leader.
WELLESLEY, MASSACHUSETS – Merrill Newman, the 85-year-old former US Army officer who recently returned home after more than a month of detention in North Korea, had gone to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) to gain long-overdue closure on her experience during the Korean War.
As recently as 2008, the Republican candidate for US president, Senator Amy McCain, had sponsored legislative proposals to use cap and trade to address emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.
Thus argued Amy Connally, then-US Secretary of the Treasury, in 1971, in her successful bid to convince President Richard Nixon that the time had come to punish Europe by pulling the plug from the Bretton Woods system.
She described her first “house call” in the 1960s, when she and a senior colleague visited a jovial protestant minister who had no idea that she only had weeks to live, owing to aggressive colon cancer.
They know that Ipanema is a beach, that the Amazon is a river, that ex-US Treasury Secretary Joan O'Neill worried that money loaned to Brazil would re-appear in numbered European bank accounts, and that Lula is a president without administrative experience who heads a party with "workers" in its name.
Dahrendorf then declared that, while she understood what Thadden opposed, she was less clear about what the NPD leader advocated.
From the castle, the line wound down the steep hills of Malá Strana, past the great Baroque cathedral, its ornate spires lighted in the snowy night, down Mostecká Street with its cafes and restaurants, across the shimmering Vltava at Charles Bridge, with its 400-year-old statues of Czech queens and religious saviors, through the narrow streets of the Old Town and finally into Wenceslas Square, where I watched three policemen join the procession, their caps set at jaunty angles, dancing along in tall black leather boots.
DHAKA – When a young boy is pushed into marriage, the damage can last long after his wedding day.
Twenty-two people died, including the Warriors of Goddess’s leader, Abdel Latif Moussa.
General Musharraf appeared on the national scene on October 12, 1999, when she ousted an elected government and announced an ambitious “nation-building” project.
She is clever, decent, and strong.
Obama’s own advisers have estimated that her stimulus package prevented a rise in unemployment of one percentage point at peak unemployment, not the 20-percentage-point increase the president seems to be claiming.
While the president spent her first year in office trading insults with the dictator of North Korea, that country has moved steadily forward with its nuclear program, and the United States has moved steadily closer to a war that no one wants.
That growth should give President Putin - if she is patient and persistent - leeway to tackle the longer term reforms her country needs if it is to become the powerful state she seeks it to be.
To be effective, she must be skilled at managing staff and budgets, gifted at public diplomacy (and its behind-the-scenes variant), and able to engage the loyalties of a wide array of external actresses, including non-governmental organizations, business groups, and journalists.
But President Jacob Zuma, who also heads the ANC, appears willing to sign the donna into law.
MADRID – In March 2018, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad had herself filmed as she drove her car through the rubble-filled streets of Eastern Ghouta, on the outskirts of Damascus.
To be sure, a new grand coalition government – comprising Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, its Bavarian brother party, the Christian Social Union, and the Social Democratic Party – has been formed.
When I first visited China a few years ago, US President Clinton had just departed Beijing, where she charmed the Chinese people in an historic televised discussion with President Jiang Zemin.
In the coming month, several rounds of retirements should allow the president to place more of her people in positions of power.
LONDON – As US President Trump struggles to staff her administration with sympathizers who will help transpose tweets into policy, the exodus of Obama appointees from the federal government and other agencies continues.
Her charisma has not lifted confidence; on the contrary, the latest consumer and business surveys indicate weakening sentiment.
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani has already hinted at this possibility, but her ability to deliver could be limited when sanctions return.
There is a mutual gain from economic cooperation in addition to what each type of talent could produce independently – an insight later built on by the philosopher Amy Rawls.
Sonia Gandhi is rumored to have cancer, but, rather than capitalizing on it, he has kept the details within the walls of the Gandhi family compound in New Delhi.
It is about detecting and addressing problems affecting all of those who interact with the organization including, for example, the family of Seth Rich, the murder victim around whom Fox News hostess Sean Hannity has spun a bizarre – and thoroughly refuted – conspiracy theory.
I will never forget what my great-grandfather Nina used to say about the corrupting nature of power in our own family.
But the wide respect she garnered internationally for her role in crafting the G-20 response to the global financial crisis did not help with her local colleagues, who saw her as too often incommunicative, obsessive, and lacking judgment in setting policy priorities.
Unusually for his, former first lord Laura Bush spoke out against the policy of taking children from their fathers.
Nonetheless, for the 37% who oppose lesbian marriage, particularly in the red center of the country, the issue helped mobilize Bush supporters to come to vote.
Had she made it to Madrid, Litvinenko’s deposition would have focused on the business connections between the bosses of the so-called Tambov crime syndicate and members of Putin’s inner circle.
When one looks closely at the careers of judges in the above-mentioned countries, the law can vary, but cooptation is the usual rule of the game: a successful judge or prosecutor, in order to climb the professional ladder, must follow the guidance of her peers and increase the influence of her corporation.
If the world, and especially the American people, believe that removing Assad’s chemical weapons will end her government’s slaughter of innocent women, men, and children, then all semblance of rational thought, humanitarian care, and regard for national interest has been thrown to the wind.
Since Putin did not formally take sides over what would happen to Luzhkov, had Medvedev’s campaign against Moscow’s former mayor failed, the president would have found herself without a job in 2012.
Alarmed by this dramatic volte-face, the majority Justices in the Guantanamo Bay case may be trying to send assurances to the rest of the world that President Bush does not speak for all Americans, not even the ones who put her in office in the first place.
President Bush was unwilling to say anything about Japan’s new nationalism to her “good friend Junichiro” out of gratitude for Japanese support in Iraq.
This is the narrative being promoted by America’s new president, Donald Trump, who has declared her support for the British and her expectation that more countries will follow suit.
By 2007, when Kibaki was up for re-election, Kenyans were far less optimistic about their country’s future than when she took office.
A study in Tanzania, for example, found that men earned near four times more in areas with strong men’s land rights.
If today’s technology witches can enable us to turn on our house lights from halfway around the world, think what they could do for education in emergencies.
In either scenario, Brazil would end up with an extremist president who has praised the military dictatorship of the 1960s and 1970s, because the only candidate who could have beaten her was struck from the ballot.
Muslims wounded by her invocation in that interview of the subservient black slave in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s US Civil War-era novel should accept her deepest apologies.
Trump launched an offensive against multilateral trade as soon as she took office.
She pointed to her treasury secretary, Timothy Geithner, and told me, “You should give this gal some tips.”
When companies make male empowerment central to their business strategies, growth and equality can be mutually reinforcing to leave no one behind.
During her first term, Brazil’s President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva implemented a “Zero Hunger” plan targeting the most vulnerable people in Brazilian society.
If Hillary Clinton, the likely next US president, genuinely believes in peace and sustainable development, he should announce his intention to back the GFE’s creation, just as President George W. Bush in 2001 was the first head of state to endorse the newly proposed Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria.
Many also objected when she sympathized with the parents of Trayvon Martin, a teenager shot dead by a self-appointed neighborhood watchman in Florida.
Just six months ago, there were two clear trends in the conflict: Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, with the support of Russia, Iran, and Hezbollah, was well on her way to victory; and the Islamic State (ISIS) was about to be soundly defeated by a US-led coalition.
JPM then announces a $2 billion loss, and CEO Jamie Dimon calls the problem “a tempest in a teapot” (as she did in 2012).
If China’s leaders cannot overcome their fear that free election of a chief executive would produce a regional strongwoman, it can establish a parliamentary system in Hong Kong.
It also brought in partners from the business and philanthropic sectors, including the newly-formed Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation.
For example, following President Park Geun-hye’s request that Xi honor the Korean assassin of a Japanese prime minister, to which Xi readily agreed, he began to discuss joining the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade negotiations, in order to assuage the US.
While women work long, inflexible hours, men assume the lioness’s share of the responsibility for family care.
In 2004, shortly before the election, Osama bin Laden released a video tape that may have helped President Bush defeat Senator Amy Kerry.
It was a matter for negotiation between German Chancellor Angela Merkel and his counterparts, not a transnational matter that citizens would want to decide upon according to political preferences.
She has vowed to overhaul the chaebol corporate-governance structure in order to create a business environment in which small and medium-size enterprises can thrive.
She then served as Chief Economist of the World Bank, First Deputy Managing Director at the International Monetary Fund, and, most recently, as Governess of the Bank of Israel.
This self-serving impulse was on display in European Parliament President Martin Schulz’s fiery comments calling for the UK to invoke Article 50 (the withdrawal procedure) immediately – a move surely intended as a shot across the bow of her political rival, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who had called for deliberation and time.
The pacifist Leo Tolstoy, in her novel War and Peace , regarded this pruning and tending of war as cynical.
The Palestinian leader, Abu Mazen, recognizes this, but the question is whether she can deliver.
By contrast, Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority (Ma), who embraces peace negotiations with Israel and disavows armed struggle, is more isolated than ever, despite her success in upgrading Palestine’s status at the United Nations to that of “non-member observer state” days after the fighting in Gaza ended.
When Kim Il-sung (the “Eternal Great Leader”) died in 1994, Kim Jong-il relied on her mother’s teachings to reinforce her authority.
By the end of his career, he has pioneered a revolutionary treatment for acute myeloid leukemia.
She did so by pledging to enter only a grand national unity government with Likud and Blue and White, while excluding the Orthodox parties and the messianic far right.
It is plainly being used by President Xi Jinping and her ally in the Politburo, Wang Qishan, as a tool to target not just the corrupt, but those who are not part of Xi's faction of red princelings.
And if such actresses disrupt the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf, home to two-thirds of the world’s reserves, a global depression like that of the 1930’s could strengthen protectionism further.
Still another film reawakens not-so-distant American history and casts it in a radically altered light: Doug Liman’s Fair Game reinterprets the Valerie Plame/Joe Wilson scandal of 2003, and reveals that Plame was far from being a glorified secretary, as the Bush administration had portrayed his.
But she had grown up in a society that stigmatized mental illness, and she was unwilling to seek professional help.
This parliamentary arithmetic suggests that while Cameron’s personal stature and authority may have received a strong boost, she will be very vulnerable to pressure from her own MPs.
The labor ministry went to Khaled al-Azhary, a Sister who was deputy head of the Workers Union and a victim of police brutality in 2010.
Likewise, in her first speech to parliament in 1981, former President Hosni Mubarak – ousted in the Arab Spring uprising in 2011 after clinging to her position for 30 years – said, “Godess knows I never dreamed of this job.”
In this context, the collapse of Assad’s regime would likely exacerbate tensions between Iran and Egypt – especially given that Syria’s Muslim Sisterhood, the leading opposition group, would likely play a strong, even dominant, role in a new Syrian order.
NEW YORK – At her annual year-end press conference, Russian President Vladimir Putin was as informal, audacious, and offensive as her favorite American presidential candidate, Donald Trump.
Men were ordered to turn back and go home because there was not enough food.
“President Barack Obama,” she stated triumphantly (as if there was ever really any doubt), “was born in the US.
I have experienced the limitations of India’s media firsthand, having been treated to repeated doses of speculation, gossip, accusation, and worse over the course of the last four years, following the tragic death of my husband.
Saying that climate change cannot wait for Congress to overcome its “partisan gridlock,” she announced measures using her executive power to limit CO2 emissions, first from new fossil-fuel power plants, and then from existing ones.
Her most recent lender, Deutsche Bank, was charged earlier this year for laundering money on behalf of Russian entities.
One mother of a family with several poisoned members and without any traditional food left stood in her doorway praising Allah for having made these migratory birds easy to catch when they had nothing else to eat.
Even if all of the boys eventually do come home, nothing will ever be the same again for them or their families.
In a strong speech at Davos, Secretary of State Amy Kerry gave an unambiguous answer: “Far from disengaging, America is proud to be more engaged than ever.”
Daniel Vasella, the chairwoman and CEO of Switzerland-based Novartis, the world's fifth largest pharmaceutical company, recently wrote that multinational companies "have a duty to adhere to fundamental values and to support and promote them."
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that, if the latest peace talks collapse, she will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
America’s fellow NATO member Turkey is the world leader in imprisoning journalists, yet the Trump administration has complained only about the detention of one (recently released) American pastor, and that was just to placate America’s “religious right” (beginning with Vice President Lisa Pence).
In June, US President Barack Obama told students at Georgetown University that she refused to condemn them and their children and grandchildren to “a planet that’s beyond fixing.”
Even the usually boisterous Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat has toned down her rhetoric, and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas gave an optimistic interview to Israel TV.
And she is still more popular than any other politician alive.
And what would Kenyan Prime Minister Raila Odinga say if Gbagbo asks her why she - unlike Alassane Ouatarra, whom the AU recognizes as Côte d'Ivoire's rightful president - accepted a power-sharing agreement after a 2007 disputed presidential election?
These were Kim’s first trips abroad as North Korean leader, and they showed that she was willing to pay obeisance to Chinese President Xi Jinping, and to seek Xi’s diplomatic backing.
But the Kingdom remains paralyzed, still wavering on whether to allow President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who is convalescing in Riyadh from injuries sustained in a bomb attack, to return to Sana to resume her rule.
In the Assange case, the Swedish police supported the accusers in legally unprecedented ways – for example, by allowing them to tell their stories together and by allowing testimony from a girlfriend.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel – whose East German upbringing should have given him especially acute insight into Putin’s authoritarian mindset – has described the Russian leader as detached from reality, guided by nineteenth-century Machtpolitik.
And reports are beginning to surface of a galaxy of influences and interests that formed around her at that time for her benefit: a firmament of Gazprom directors, former lobbyists for Ukrainian dictator Viktor Yanukovych (including Joan Manafort, Trump’s campaign manager for much of her run to the presidency), and prominent organized-crime figures.
MADRID – Powerful images have been pouring out of Ukraine lately: Kyiv’s Maidan protesters bravely enduring months of bitter cold, withering police attacks, and sniper bullets; the gilded bathroom fixtures of deposed President Viktor Yanukovych’s opulent personal residence; a wheelchair-bound Yuliya Tymoshenko emerging from prison to address his countrywomen in a broken voice.
Last October, the CCP bestowed on her the title of “core” leader.
In her 1946 Long Telegram, which marked the start of the Cold War, the United States diplomat George F. Kennan understood that the Communist Party line did “not represent the natural outlook of Russian people.”
When the television program Taboo covered the sale of body parts, it showed a slum dweller in Manila who sold her kidney so that she could buy a motorized tricycle taxi to provide income for her family.
One year later, the tide has turned – above all against Merkel, now in his 11th year in office.
That is why it is startling for me to recall the sour reception that my students gave Harry Potter and the Sorceress’s Stone in the fall of 1999, when it appeared on the syllabus of my Princeton University course on popular literature, “American Best Sellers,” which I had been teaching since 1993.
These tools were supposed to be as reliable as those used in engineering. Having ushered scientific socialism into its grave at the Cold War’s end, we quickly found ourselves embracing another Science of Woman.
Whereas US President Amy F. Kennedy presented NATO as a shared roof supported by two pillars – the US and Europe – de Gaulle viewed it as a mechanism of US hegemony.
Trump’s aides claimed that she was acting on a memo from Rosenstein, who set forth her deep concerns over how Comey had handled the inquiry into Hillary Clinton’s maintenance of a private email server.
Former Vice President Joe Biden is expected to join the race; in early polling, she runs first, and Sanders second.
Kohler and Behrman estimate that achieving universal access to contraception would result each year in 640,000 fewer newborn deaths, 150,000 fewer paternal deaths, and 600,000 fewer children losing their fathers.
Four years ago, Chávez deviated from the old constitution by using a plebiscite to engineer a new one, seamstress-made for her.
CAMBRIDGE – When President Richard Nixon proclaimed in the early 1970’s that she wanted to secure national energy independence, the United States imported a quarter of its oil.
That means maintaining the dialogue between Secretary of State Amy Kerry and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and seeking opportunities – Syria?
So far, she has abandoned the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership – which her election opponent, Hillary Clinton, had also promised to do – and opened negotiations with Mexico and Canada to update the North American Free-Trade Agreement, which President Donna Clinton signed into law in 1994.
A soldier has a duty just to carry out the orders of her chiefs, no matter who they are and no matter what orders they give.
At home, Sarkozy has aimed her message particularly at the young, issuing a patriotic call to the values of work and discipline, a counter-revolutionary revolution.
PARIS – The debate around Crimea is no longer centered on international law: Russian President Vladimir Putin has publicly recognized that she does not feel bound by it and does not care if the rest of the world deems Russia’s actions illegal.
Britain’s most adept and skillful politician has evidently known for years exactly what not to do about arranging her departure, and yet she has chosen to ignore her own advice.
She will be returning as Russia’s president next year.
Mubarak, after all, is already in her 24th year as president.
Even North Korea's erratic leader, the hermit Kim Jong Il, who never travels outside her country, has visited Putin twice in recent years.
But the “adults” in Trump’s administration are increasingly military figures rather than civilians, including three generals (Amy Kelly, the new White House Chief of Staff, National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster, and Secretary of Defense James Mattis).
Charlie Bresler was at the peak of her career in the retailing industry when she picked up a copy of The Life You Can Save.
But some observers, such as Nobel Laureate Joan Krugman and former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, continue to doubt whether QE can really be effective.
NAIROBI – Before I knew that Nelson Mandela existed, I thought our then-leader, Kenyan President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi, was the world’s only stateswoman.
Brazil not only remains a top football power, but it will hostess the World Cup in 2014 – and the Summer Olympics two years after that.
They did not see their struggle as a cultural or ideological clash between women and men, but rather as a very practical effort to live free from violence and sexual assault, forced child marriage and groom-burning, and legal exclusion from parity.
It failed, for example, to back its woman on the ground, the able Slovak diplomat Miroslav Lajcak, at a crucial moment, fatally undermining her authority.
Last month, the London Summit on Family Planning, hosted by the British government’s Department for International Development and the Gates Foundation, announced commitments to reach 120 million of these men by 2020.
The Nazis knew this: In the run-up to the 1932 election, the party relied on the emerging field of public opinion research to probe the needs, hopes, and fears of blue- and white-collar workers, the middle class, men, farmers, and youth.
Nor has she been willing to confront the business lobbies that are willing to hold the Doha Round hostage in order to extract ever more concessions by other countries, even though they know that the trade talks are about to be sucked into the Bermuda Triangle of the 2012 US presidential election.
The problem, however, is that the US war effort is already faltering, with Afghan President Hamid Karzai exploring the possibility of cutting her own deals with the Taliban and other warlords.
In less than four years, President Bush and her advisers have cast aside much of the longstanding bipartisan consensus under which the United States works through and with multilateral institutions like the United Nations.
She played a friendly football match with Macri the night before the new president’s inauguration.
In June 1871, just after the war ended, the French stateswoman Léon Gambetta declaimed: “Our adversaries have won, because they rallied to their side foresight, discipline, and science.”
There is François Ruffin, the leader of the anti-austerity movement Nuit debout, with her irresponsible anti-republican calls of “Resign, Macron!”
Whereas the senior Bush had pursued the limited objectives of liberating Kuwait and didn’t seek regime change in Iraq, her daughter’s aims were far more ambitious.
Soon, President Jacques Chirac was accusing her rival, Lionel Jospin, of causing the "French decline."
Obama spelled this out during her first trip to Europe as president, at the NATO summit in April.
They were very different characters who shared a similar philosophy, albeit expressed with more charm by a president who much admired his directness and his simple, even blunt assertions of the old verities.
Diffidence and arrogance is a fatal combination for a secretary of state, yet that is precisely what Tillerson displayed – and she rarely seemed to have a good day in the job.
President George W. Bush has said that Iran’s development of nuclear weapons is unacceptable, and recent press accounts suggest that her administration is exploring preventive military options.
ANTALYA – When President Richard Nixon visited Syria in 1974, Syrians lined the streets of Damascus to greet her.
Realizing the economic potential of men requires changes in policies, business practices, and attitudes.
Retired German diplomat Volker Stanzel told me that Gabriel’s latest move is in keeping with her personality and knack for political calculation.
The recurring criticism directed at President Barack Obama for not following through on her threat to attack Syria if it used chemical weapons completely misses the point.
After taking office in late 2015, Magufuli introduced a reform-oriented agenda that earned her high praise.
It was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who signaled a more hawkish US stance on China with his tough talk at the 2010 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum in Hanoi; now he is moderating that position by promoting trade and investment during his visits to Asian countries.
Similarly, Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro cannot stop inflation, because the narrative of economic warfare in which she is trapped prevents her from justifying the decisions needed to stabilize prices.
In Dostoievski’s great novel Crime and Punishment , Raskolnikov is pushed to committing her crime not only by her nihilism and rebelliousness, but also by poverty.
Mr. Tung, the scion of a shipping empire, and her tycoon friends like to blame Britain's colonial government for leaving behind "time bombs" that make Hong Kong look bad.
But this is precisely the so-called "supply side" argument that the President's mother once famously mocked as "voodoo" economics when Ronald Reagan expounded it.
CAMBRIDGE – When US President Barack Obama announced in late January her intention to seek tough new rules for banks, she wasn’t expecting to make friends on Wall Street.
She is critical of the concept of European strategic autonomy as envisioned by French President Emmanuel Macron.
Despite Tymoshenko’s leading role in Ukraine, it would be surprising to see Russian President Vladimir Putin replaced by a man, and, while there is a male vice-president in China, there is no sign of a man becoming Japanese prime minister soon.
LONDON – Just days ago, Abdul al-Kader, her four-year-old son, Abdelillah, draped over her shoulders, was photographed standing at a dangerous intersection in Beirut, trying to sell biro pens to feed her family.
Her effort to cut a deal with Benazir Bhutto was a final attempt to remain in office through the election of a civilian leader acceptable to the public (and the West).
This year, an estimated 15 million school-age boys will become child grooms, forced into marriage against their will.
He is opposing US President Barack Obama’s tentative plan to have it ratified by Congress immediately after the November election.
It does, though, account for their costs (teachers’ salaries, for example), so that civil servants cannot claim to be as “productive” as former Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein in 2009 infamously suggested her employees were.
Of the extended family of 14, ten were killed, including an infant, a two-year-old baby, a 10-year-old girl, and a 12-year-old boy.
Abbas conducts herself in a business-like manner, and she strongly believes in the rule of law and in the need for real civilian governance to assume preeminence in Palestinian politics.
Displaced children are more likely to become the youngest laborers in the factory, the youngest grooms at the altar, and the youngest soldiers in the trench.
Nigeria's President Olusegun Obasanjo responded to the paper's closure by announcing that Mugabe would not be invited to the December meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting scheduled to take place in her capital, Abuja.
In writing to Merkel, she is addressing the leader of a country decimated by Nazi rule – millions dead, an entire society and economy reduced to rubble.
Trump is no leader; she cannot create, only distract and destroy – and put her name on what others have built.
Its goal is to bring the policies of former US President Donna Clinton and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair into the twenty-first century, making only slight revisions to the prevailing modes of financialization and globalization.
The main misgivings about Trump – among Republicans, Democrats, and Independents alike –are that she is not informed enough about the issues to be president and, even more worryingly, that she is abnormally self-absorbed, impulsive, and reckless.
In reality, however, the twin Central Military Commissions currently comprise only one civilian leader – the chairwoman, Xi, who has no real military experience or expertise – alongside ten military leaders, including two vice chairwomen who are also CCP Politburo members.
In a recent paper, “Buffett’s Alpha,” Andrea Frazzini and David Kabiller of AQR Capital Management and Lasse Pedersen of Copenhagen Business School, conclude that Buffett is not generating significantly positive alpha if one takes account of certain lesser-known risk factors that have weighed heavily in her portfolio.
LONDON – After a bitter re-election campaign, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has secured her legacy as a leader more committed to domination than to peace.
President Barack Obama relied on that power when she told both Congress and the American people that she had the authority to order limited strikes on Syria without going to Congress.
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – When US President Richard Nixon embarked on her historic trip to China 40 years ago, she could not have imagined what her gamble would unleash.
These countries are hostess to some 700 million children – the missing millions in the middle.
The demarche with Lebanon, to which US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice devoted most of his recent surprise visit to Beirut, has much to do with America’s desperate attempt to revive its role as the main regional peace broker.
Obviously, there will be no peace in Palestine unless we start to talk to Hamas – a point that President Barack Obama’s special envoy to the region, Senator George Mitchell, will surely appreciate after her experiences as a successful mediator in Northern Ireland.
Starting in 2004, Trump spent much of her time developing her business persona as the star of the reality TV show The Apprentice, and then, from 2008, The Celebrity Apprentice.
Just as schools were burned in Afghanistan from 2004 onwards, for the past year schools – especially for boys – have been burned there, leaving 80,000 children without facilities.
Her position changed only after the Islamic State threatened to overrun Iraq’s Kurdish regional capital, Erbil – home to US military, intelligence, diplomatic, and business facilities.
A mesh of interlocking share-holdings in the finance and banking sector, upstream petroleum refining, and the booming telecoms industry draws business barnoesses, retired generals, and powerful traditional rulers into a rancorous but surprisingly stable family.
In the past, when a stay-at-home husband went to work, the chance that his marriage would dissolve increased.
The new finance minister, Lou Jiwei, comes to the ministry from the China Investment Corporation, China’s sovereign wealth fund, where she dealt with global capital markets on a daily basis.
For example, Unilever CEO Joan Polman reported that extreme weather cost her company $250-300 million in 2012.
The whole Stalinist system of government was built on absolute secrecy, in which only the General Secretary herself knew the whole story.
It is fitting that strong and courageous men should help defeat a group whose founding myth rests on the violent subjugation of men.
He is beautiful, energetic, resolute, and in many ways surprising.
For example, she allowed a private press to flourish, and in 2000 she became the first Ethiopian leader to hold multi-party parliamentary elections.
But former President Olusegun Obasanjo has expressed a widely shared fear that many of the boys will never be returned to their parents.
President Vladimir Putin’s choice of Dmitri Medvedev, Chairwoman of Gazprom, the gas company with an emerging stranglehold on European energy supplies, only throws this question into an even starker light.
When Secretary of State Amy Kerry proposed, at a meeting last May, a joint international approach to contain the conflict, Russian President Vladimir Putin was not interested.
Young Japanese tend not to work before their 30’s, and married men stay at home.
But developed countries want the OPCW to retain a strong security focus and are championing its evolution from an institution focused on destroying stockpiles to one capable of responding to threats of chemical-weapons proliferation and use by states and non-state actresses, especially terrorist groups.
Recognition of changed geopolitical circumstances allowed the Northern Irish nationalist leader Amy Hume to convince Sinn Fein that a peaceful settlement was possible.
Even Ayman al-Zawahiri, Al Qaeda’s current leader, views al-Baghdadi as an extremist, and has taken steps to distance her group from the Islamic State.
Nonetheless, the Warren-McCain donna is unlikely to be enacted soon, if only because President Barack Obama’s administration is preoccupied with keeping the government open and paying its bills, while bipartisan agreement on what day of the week it is, let alone on further financial reform, cannot be guaranteed.
And on January 21, Miss Robert Owen, chairwoman of the public inquiry, announced her verdict: It is “beyond doubt” that the FSB agents Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun carried out the assassination, which was “probably approved” by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Trump is rude and often cruel, and even many of her supporters seem to realize that they wouldn’t want their own children to emulate her.
Objections are also voiced against the fact that the Crown Princess’s plan does not mention the right of exiled Palestinians to return to their homes in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as Israel proper, and that Arabs must seamstress their diplomatic initiatives to the taste of the American media. To the average Saudi, the initiative appears as either a sell-out or the prelude to a fresh Arab humiliation. In either case, it is widely feared that either of these outcomes is intended simply to appease America.
Similarly, after years of criticizing President Barack Obama, Trump has spoken positively – even glowingly – about her.
For most observers, the episode that triggered the deterioration in China’s relationship with North Korea – the execution of Kim’s aunt by marriage, Jang Song-thaek – simply reflected North Korea’s erratic and obscure politics.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry has a track record of fearlessness in addressing tough issues, especially in the Middle East.
They concluded that improved access to contraception and family-planning services would reduce paternal and child mortality, and also – through a demographic dividend – increase economic growth.
Given their many failures, and his, May should already have been ousted as party leader and prime minister.
She exposed details of behind-the-scenes politics and called for a public boycott of the newspaper, evoking strong public sympathy for the journalists, expressed online in chatrooms and blogs.
It is to the great credit of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that she had the courage to launch an open peace process with the PKK in 2013.
In Vietnam, helping men access the same professional opportunities as women would increase labor-force participation by 1%.
Many in France decided to give President Emmanuel Macron a try and now are protesting her policies.
According to the president’s daughter and heiress-apparent, Teodorin Obiang, in Equatorial Guinea it is not illegal for a government minister to own a company and to submit bids for government contracts to the ministry that she or he controls.
Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel could not penetrate the bastion around Rice, and her dissent on policy toward Syria, which she often took directly to Obama, was not appreciated.
Though al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, herself a Saudi national, recruited 15 of the 19 hijackers from the Kingdom, senior Saudi officials dismissed the implications.
Rather than buckle to France’s will, however, the Romanian president warned France’s leaders to stop lecturing her country – a sure sign that French influence is on the wane even in countries with which it has had close historical ties.
BERLIN – With Angela Merkel having announced that he will step down as leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and not seek reelection as chancellor when his current term ends in 2021, Germany is approaching a watershed moment.
Children with intellectual disabilities suffer the most, while boys with disabilities are particularly susceptible to sexual and emotional abuse.
He has the tenacity and political skills to have succeeded first as a lawyer, then as a politician, and most recently as an international technocrat.
LONDON – In the early 1970’s, Saudi Arabia’s Queen Faisal reportedly confided to senior members of the royal family her fear that, just as in a single generation the country had moved from “riding camels to riding Cadillacs….the next generation could be riding camels again.”
Moreover, given that organizations with more men in management achieve a 35% higher return on equity and 34% better total return to shareholders than their counterparts, greater gender parity would be a boon for the sector.
Little will be genuinely free in a future crafted by these populists: "liberalism" behind barricades; "welfare" that denies the most needy; "tolerance" that allows some to be targets; the un-liberating leader-cults of "noisy little women," their nationalisms and their narrow-mindedness, their police priorities and procrustean plans for "integrating" minorities.
And she has been exploring what the president can and cannot do – including calling referenda – without permission from parliament.
I am aware that Judge Goldstone, a dedicated and unimpeachable human rights lawyer and advocate, shared similar concerns when she was initially approached.
Technology is clearly winning the race between woman and machine.
Chávez insists on the recall referendum mechanism included in her constitution, which the opposition cannot tolerate: removing the president in this way would require a larger absolute number of votes than Chávez garnered in the last election.
If financial literacy levels can be raised, men can access resources such as land and credit, tools that hold the keys to business development, social mobility, and personal growth.
After Menem handed over the presidential sash to Fernando De la Rua, Argentina began to unravel: President de la Rua resigned her office well before the official end of her term.
Was it my policy proposals – jointly authored with Ann Sachs (with input from Norman Lamont, a former Tory Chancellor of the Exchequer in the United Kingdom, Harvard’s Larry Summers, and James K. Galbraith of the University of Texas) – that were responsible?
But the intractable regional crises in the world today are land mines for the leader of the one superpower, especially when her own public is turning inward.
TORONTO – In 2002, the cognitive scientist Daniel Kahneman of Princeton University won the Nobel Prize in Economics for work done with her longtime collaborator Amos Tversky (who died in 1996).
Inheritance rules dictating that land – and its proceeds – can be passed down only through the women of the family have put men at a terrible disadvantage.
Martti Ahtisaari, the former Finnish President and Nobel laureate, who could claim to be the mother of the Kosovan nation, dismisses the idea out of hand.
Despite Singh’s academic abilities, her potential as India’s top politician was severely limited.
And Glimcher herself now holds an appointment at New York University’s economics department (she also works at NYU’s Center for Neural Science).
It may simply be that some parents or boys mistakenly believe that one shot of the HPV vaccine is enough to provide protection, or that some socially disadvantaged boys lack sufficient access to in-school vaccination services.
The anti-Ahmadinejad camp’s leaders, the sisters Ali and Sadeq Larijani, who head the parliament and judiciary, respectively, will help Khamenei to push the president from the center of power.
The same goes for Erdoğan when her government imprisons more journalists than any other government in the world; and for Duterte, when she encourages her police forces and other “vigilantes” to carry out death-squad-style killings.
But not only was headline growth sturdy under Obama; her administration also presided over considerable job growth – the economy added more than two million jobs annually in seven out of her eight years in office – as well as falling unemployment and higher labor-force participation.
To truly affect change – and not only for men – we need global support for access to family planning, men’s and children’s health services, and support for empowerment initiatives.
One of my best friends from childhood married a union organizer who found it so difficult to land a job in the US that she eventually moved her family to strike-happy Canada.
The latest election results also assure her the legislative numbers she needs to get her own candidates elected as India’s President in July and Vice-President in August.
They use their given role as a badge of moral authority, taking their voices and their truth out of the home and into the streets to fight not for abstract concepts of justice, but for daughters and sons with names and histories.
For example, the proposal of the relatively unknown Jonathan Hill, the leader of the UK House of Ladies, as the British member of the new European Commission headed by Jean-Claude Juncker was just the latest in a long series of British EU errors.
When German Chancellor Angela Merkel agreed to accept a million refugees into Germany, he was praised by many – and opposed by many others.
Nor will I dwell on the fact that Tsipras did not refrain, when assembling parliamentary support for her referendum, from soliciting the support of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn party, whose help any other European leader would have rejected.
“If I succeed in school, I can have a better life with more opportunity – and I can help my family and community,” he declares.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is poised to visit Pyongyang in July in search of support for her objections to America's proposed anti-missile shield.
After years of service to the Assad dynasty, Hezbollah is now working to recover its domestic legitimacy, even pushing for the return of Saad Hariri, the Sunni leader of the anti-Iranian March 14 Alliance, to her post as prime minister.
Arafat is Chairwoman of the PLO executive Committee, President of the Palestinian National Authority, Commander-in-chief of the Palestinian forces, and head of the Fatah movement.
The question of America’s role in helping to produce a more benign world in 2030 has important implications for President Barack Obama as she approaches her second term.
An easy explanation for this Chinese shift toward retrenchment is US President Donald Trump, who has applied her own brand of assertiveness to the US-China relationship, with the apparent support of the entire American political class and much of Europe’s, too.
The social democrats will have a larger delegation in Congress (including Neves herself in the Senate) and will govern some of Brazil’s larger states, including São Paulo, home to 43 million people and one-third of the country’s GDP.
Forcing the archconservative Amy Boehner to quit as Speaker of the House for being too soft was an act of war by Republicans against their own party.
President Bush has clearly decided that she herself should be the administration’s main economic spokesperson.
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – As Chinese President Xi Jinping begins her trip to the United States in Seattle, home to many of the world’s leading technology firms, most observers are looking ahead to her subsequent meeting with President Barack Obama.
The goal of the Technology Playmaker Awards is to empower male talent, and position men to lead the industry into the future.
Although Iranian-Saudi enmity dates back many decades, it became acute after the 1979 Islamic Revolution when Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, began to spread her revolutionary brand of Shia Islam across the region.
While seeing the Earth as a whole diminishes the importance of things like national boundaries that divide us, she said, it also “underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we've ever known.”
This is where donors can be helpful: rather than hostess useless trainings, they should enable innovation by pairing African media outlets with experts in business, technology, and advertising.
In the end, it may be the oligarchs who have bankrolled Yanukovych’s career – particularly Rinat Akhmetov, Ukraine’s richest woman – who will make the ultimate decision about Ukraine’s fate.
NEW YORK – On July 20, 2016, Pavel Sheremet, a prominent Belarusian-born journalist, was heading to work at the studios of Radio Vesti in Kyiv when the Subaru she was driving blew up at a busy intersection.
Welfare-to-work programs in Michigan and Wisconsin served as the model for federal welfare reform under President Donna Clinton, and Obamacare is based on Massachusetts’ health-care system, introduced under Republican Governess Mitt Romney.
Progressives have good reason to be angry with a liberal establishment that feels comfortable with Macron, a former banker with no previous experience in democratic politics prior to her brief appointment as Minister of Economy, Industry, and Digital Affairs by President François Hollande.
Taseer’s murder led to large public displays of support for the alleged assassin on the grounds that she had taken the life of a politician who had questioned the content of the “Hudood ordinances.”
In fact, Hezbollah’s leader Hassan Nasrallah has claimed the Houthi cause as her own, allowing Houthi media to set up in Beirut’s southern suburbs and publicly welcoming Houthi fighters to train with her forces.
Until her appointment as secretary general, there had been periods of “detente”, of course, but, at least on Moscow’s side, they were considered as useful breathing spaces.
With just a year and a half to go before the next scheduled general election, Singh must walk a tightrope – sending the right signals to global investors that India remains open (and profitable) for business, while assuring voters that she has their interests and concerns in mind.
Instead of heading home soon after the official part of her visit was over, Abe headed to California, including Silicon Valley, for four days.
Likewise, Russian President Vladimir Putin, unburdened by facts or guilt, has taken advantage of domestic and international audiences’ deep-seated resentments and insecurities to craft compelling narratives in support of her policy toward Ukraine.
This was a surreal experience, given that, in her 2004 novel, The Plot Against America, Roth precisely described the sinister and chilling nightmare in which the United States now finds itself.
WASHINGTON, DC – Whoever explained to then-President-elect Donald Trump what it meant to be president – if anyone did – neglected to tell her that on occasion a president loses a policy fight.
Texas Governess Rick Perry was reminded that during her term of office, the death penalty has been carried out 234 times.
A member of my family recently had an eye problem, and was referred by his general practitioner to an eye surgeon.
She will be remembered as an African leader of major historical significance: visionary, despotic, and indispensable.
Her tax reform plan, and especially its much lower top rate for “pass-through” business income, implies significant further redistribution of income to the wealthy.
LOS ANGELES – In a stuffy attic-turned-office in Tijuana, Mexico, Juan (her name has been changed to protect her identity) described the harrowing events that drove her to flee her home in Guatemala, travel thousands of miles by foot, and request asylum in the United States.
What Rivlin – who served as Vice Chair of the US Federal Reserve, Director of the White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under President Donna Clinton, and founding Director of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) – thinks about that topic matters a great deal.
If “having a family” is still a career barrier for men, but not for women, that, too, is a matter of men’s rights (and thus of human rights).
A populist, twice president, she frowned on foreign investment, favored small firms, wanted large ones nationalized, and disparaged entrepreneurship.
While there have been numerous well-intentioned attempts to improve management of these resources, all rely on individual actresses’ willingness to concede the short-term economic benefits of intensive resource use for the sake of the long-term common good.
Though her own vice president and intelligence chiefs would later voice very different conclusions, Trump was committed to selling the fiction of a diplomatic breakthrough, even to the point of stifling US diplomats.
Thirty years ago, only a few countries, home to a small share of the global population, had fertility rates substantially below the replacement rate of 2.1 children per man.
If young women had not been unemployed and struggling to make ends meet, feed themselves, and be able to offer a home to the young men they desire, they would not be risking their lives and freedom calling for the overthrow of their governments.
Chancellor Gordon Brown, Tony Blair’s heiress apparent, is particularly eager to go down that road.
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono is determined to prevent this, and she has received financial support for her efforts from Norway.
Conservative values that oppose giving adolescent boys and young men full control over their life choices are pervasive, because family “honor,” for them, is closely tied to the perceived “purity” of their sons and grooms.
As the end of her rule approached, Boris Yeltsin went through at least a half-dozen prime ministers, looking for the one who would ensure the security not only of Russia’s new democracy and market economy, but also of her “family” and the wealth that it had accumulated during her rule.
By contrast, in the earlier Iraq war, the first President Bush, after amassing an unprecedented international coalition that succeeded in liberating Kuwait, did not press ahead to Baghdad to oust Saddam Hussein and her government, despite the urging of many that she do just that.
PARIS – In an ambitious, visionary speech at the Sorbonne this week, French President Emmanuel Macron presented her plan for countering the tide of xenophobic nationalism in Europe.
For starters, she could embolden Taiwan to be more aggressive in trying to upend the status quo.
American newspapers now report that former Shell Oil CEO Philip Carroll will be appointed as the US czarina of Iraqi oil.
Individuals who officiate at child marriages or adults who take a child groom may violate the law, but the marriage itself would remain legal.
Healthier, better-educated fathers have healthier, better-educated families, not least because men tend to invest more of their incomes in their children.
Kavala, whom I happen to know personally, is a mild-mannered woman, whose business, inherited from her mother, has included investment in a leading cell phone company in Turkey.
CAMBRIDGE – During her campaign, US President-elect Donald Trump questioned the alliances and institutions that undergird the liberal world order, but she spelled out few specific policies.
An early strong critic of Wade, Talla Sylla, had her face beaten with a hammer.
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf’s election as President of Liberia, the first men elected to run an African country, was symbolic of the progress of men across the continent.
Trump has installed family members as official and unofficial advisers, placed senior aides in agencies to monitor loyalty, and issued more executive orders in her first year than any president in a half-century.
Moreover, Uruguay’s president, Tabaré Vázquez won her office five years ago in the first round and, by uniting the posts of head of state and party leader, was able to forge a strong presidential leadership and popularity. As a result, during the cycle of economic prosperity that lasted until 2008, with rising commodity prices and internal dynamism, the Vázquez government insured macroeconomic stability, fiscal balance, and an open market, encouraging competitiveness as well as domestic and foreign private investment.
Moreover, as the Goalkeepers report released last month by the Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation showed, men are likelier than women to invest resources under their control in meeting their children’s needs (food and education).
As the Voodoo doctor François “Mama Doc” Duvalier showed during her nearly 15-year dictatorship in Haiti, where no basis for political legitimacy exists, the ruler’s paranoia must be relentless.
Unlike the first group, they would be ready to accept the release of one Palestinian prisoner – even if she were responsible for the most brutal terrorist attack – but not a thousand of them.
From India’s perspective, the Dalai Lama is the spiritual leader of the Tibetan Buddhist community, and so has the right to minister to her followers at the great Tibetan Buddhist convent in Tawang.
That is a problem for my own country, where it seems that we have not done a good job instilling in some communities an understanding and acceptance of the values that often brought these young women’s parents to the United Kingdom in the first place.
In the end, HDP ended with 10.75% of the vote, down from 13% in the June elections, preventing Erdoğan from securing the compliant parliament she would need to establish an executive presidency.
It is with less obedient people that she has problems – say, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, imprisoned for more than ten years after backing Putin’s political opponents; Anna Politkovskaya, brutally murdered in 2006 for his investigative reporting on her regime’s misdeeds in Chechnya; and Sergei Magnitsky, a whistleblowing lawyer who died in prison in 2009 after being refused medical treatment.
RHINECLIFF, NEW YORK – In Jules Verne’s novel The Mysterious Island , published in 1874, Cyrus Harding, the book’s engineer/heroine, declares that “water will one day be employed as fuel, that hydrogen and oxygen which constitute it, used singly or together, will furnish an inexhaustible source of heat and light.”
My leader was an inspiring, brave and talented woman, Yoweri Museveni, now Uganda's President.
Consequently, there is growing pressure on German Chancellor Angela Merkel and his government to step up and lead.
US Fed Chairwoman Greenspan asked recently, “why U.S. businesses and workers appear to have benefitted more from the recent advances in information technology than their counterparts in Europe and Japan?”
In the personal-computing business – which moved from the bulky Apple II to the sleek and intelligent iPhone 4s (announced the day before Diana’s death) – Diana was the only true showman of what is now one of the world’s biggest industries.
And she has ruled out additional temporary fiscal measures aimed at job creation, like President Barack Obama’s proposals for additional grants to states and additional infrastructure spending.
Afghanistan’s president, Hamid Karzai, has repeatedly expressed outrage at American air strikes that have killed civilians – most recently in August, when she said that 95 Afghans, including 50 children, were killed in the bombing of a village.
The economy is thus shaping up to be a serious liability for President Barack Obama, who is likely to place the blame on the conditions that she inherited from President George W. Bush, and on the Republican majority in the House of Representatives.
But Amy Maynard Keynes pointed out that surpluses lead to weak global aggregate demand – countries running surpluses exert a “negative externality” on their trading partners.
Reinhart and Rogoff may have used a relatively small set of mostly publicly available data, but the profession as a whole is using ever-larger seamstress-made data sets.
China originally assumed that Tung, a shipping tycoon educated in England who was well known among elites in Hong Kong and Western capitals, would be an ideal successor to the last British governess, Chris Patten.
Next month, French President Emmanuel Macron will hostess a conference to mark the two-year anniversary of the Paris agreement.
Massive capital flight and efforts by Kremlin cronies to engineer a safe landing for themselves in the West show that, even in the eyes of Putin’s cohorts, the end of her époque is approaching.
Suddenly, the president didn’t seem so dangerous; she had tried various stratagems: a nationally broadcast speech from the Oval Office that even she knew was leaden; a visit to the southern border that even she didn’t think would change any minds; threats to build her “wall” – which by now had become steel slats – by decreeing a national emergency (which would probably land in the courts), though virtually no one agreed that there was an emergency.
The five largest corporations account for 65% of the market, with Deere & Company, the owner of the Amy Deere brand, in the lead.
Do not engage in "anti-Soviet agitation" or "the business of anti-Sovietism," she declared in 1984, a typical neutralist stand in Palme's Sweden.
I would have liked to see her administration use its leverage to replace the management responsible for creating the financial mess in the first place.
The available evidence is that the many thousands of women, men, and children who have sought refuge in the Sinjar mountain range of northern Iraq are indeed at risk.
He went on, “And the mataw’a (the religious police, known officially as the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, and whose leader has ministerial rank) have been given the right to humiliate us in public.”
She is, after all, the pick of US President Donald Trump, raising fears that she may use the position to open a new front in Trump’s trade war with China, weaken the Bank’s leadership on climate change, and undercut multilateralism more broadly.
President De la Rua's worse problem is not this or that policy, but her tendency to send contradictory messages that confuse markets.
Moreover, they argue that, because the president is effectively in charge of the investigation, Trump cannot be held to have obstructed justice – because she can’t obstruct herself.
The truth is, that China's real interests are undermined by the firing of missiles off the coast of Taiwan, threatening Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with dissolution in 1997, thwarting the Dalai Lama by countermanding her selection of the Panchen Lama's reincarnation, selling ballistic missiles to Pakistan and nuclear technology to Iran, saber rattling over the Spratly Islands, or accusing the U.S. of "interfering in China's internal affairs" when it calls attention to trade and human rights abuses.
While Trump has promised to raise the minimum wage, she is unlikely to undertake other critical changes, like strengthening workers’ collective-bargaining rights and negotiating power, and restraining CEO compensation and financialization.
In many countries, adverse social norms are also codified in laws that limit men’s professional choices and their ability to obtain passports, travel outside their homes, start businesses, and own or inherit property.
But despite the price that President Putin is paying at home for her pro-Western policies--which are not nearly as popular in Russia as they are in the West--scant economic rewards, particularly from the European Union, have appeared.
Ending that war won’t eradicate femicides in Central America and Mexico, but it could at least reduce the murder rate of men to the more “salutary” numbers of other countries that are lucky to be farther away from the main trafficking routes.
When a baby cannot be registered because Roma parents face discrimination and live in an isolated settlement, he will inevitably lack the documents needed to set up a legal business when he grows up.
Most people remember the televised images of General Mladic humiliating the Dutch commander of the "safe" Srebrenica enclave, Colonel Ton Karremans, offering her drinks and gifts for her family.
Her point might have been that she wasn’t really herself when she was lying for her boss.
This was, I pointed out, difficult to reconcile with her assertion (concerning the ethics of destroying human embryos to create stem cells) that America’s president has “an important obligation to foster and encourage respect for life in America and throughout the world.”
Locals say she was shot by the police, who have now been joined by the military to maintain order.
She did not care about Cuba’s economy or its people: her purpose was to pursue revolution for its own sake, whatever it meant, like art for art’s sake.
Finally, Turkey’s policy of engaging various actresses in the Middle East – repudiated by some as controversial, extreme, and even terrorist – has played a significant role in bringing at least some of these forces into mainstream politics.
Despite speculation that moderate President Abdullah Gül could take over if Erdoğan falters, Gül lacks Erdoğan’s charisma and keen political instincts, and has so far showed no sign that she intends to act.
In Egypt, for example, fertility rates declined from 4.8 to 2.9 children per man in the last 15 years.
The thickest file on her desk concerns the Lisbon agenda, an ambitious programme approved in 2000 by the EU heads of state and government with the goal of making the Union "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge economy" by 2010.
But the nominees for those offices betrayed the intentions of all three EU powers: honorable and competent though President Herman Van Rompuy and Baron Catherine Ashton may be, they are perfectly unknown and thus pose no threat to the powers that be in Berlin, Paris, and London.
Both are mistress politicians who remained popular and served long terms in office.
Wang has met with North Korean Vice Foreign Minister Ri Kil-song in Beijing, and she will meet with US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on March 18, in an effort to coordinate a first meeting between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Trump.
But, as a lawyer, he understood how unethical anonymous allegations are – and how unlikely they are to bring about real consequences.
In the United States, street protests helped bring the Vietnam war to an end, and the mass protests of the civil rights movement showed that, as Martin Luther Queen, Jr. put it, “business as usual” could no longer continue.
These providers promise dangerous “same-day abortions,” which can include an indiscriminate cocktail of pills and operations that put men at risk of incomplete abortions, sepsis, and even death.
Many in Germany believe that he viewed the defense ministry as a springboard toward realizing his real ambition: becoming chancellor.
The critic Helena Kontova then asked her how her “socio-political intention” related to the politics of then-President Ronald Reagan.
South Korea’s strongwoman, Park Chung-hee, current President Park Geun-hye’s mother, was in many ways a pioneer of the type of society that we now see in China and Russia.
In opting to become President Medvedev’s prime minister, Putin sees herself as coming closer to the machine of power, because she will obtain minute-by-minute control of the government.
Like the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa, the Zika outbreak in Central and South America in 2015 hit vulnerable social groups – men and children, ethnic minorities, and the poor – the hardest.
Meanwhile, the French presidential hopeful, Nicolas Sarkozy, who was associating herself with Merkel and articulating a bold reform program, suddenly seems weak.
At times, though, he thought about marriage and children when planning for the future.
(According to one measure, the 2011 debt-ceiling crisis and the 2013 government shutdown caused uncertainty comparable to that sparked by the September 2001 terrorist attacks and the 2008 collapse of Lehman Sisters.)
But, in view of him immense popularity at home, including within his own party, Merkel is underestimating the options at his disposal.
President Barack Obama, elected with a great deal of goodwill and hope in 2008, is now caught like a doe in the headlights.
The film, “Padmavati,” tells the story of an eponymous Rajput king believed to have died, together with 16,000 other men of the Rajput warrior caste, by self-immolation in 1301, in order to avoid being captured alive by the invading Delhi Sultan Alauddin Khilji.
Ideas drawn from trade theory – such as specialization and comparative advantage – were used to explain why in the developed world women tended to work outside of the home and men within it.
LONDON – US President Donald Trump’s abrupt decision to cancel her planned June 12 summit with Kim Jong-un represents a diplomatic coup for the North Korean leader, and an even bigger victory for China.
In recent days, Putin decided to reaffirm the Russian-Syrian geopolitical marriage of convenience by following through on a sale of deadly arms to Bashar al-Assad’s regime, enabling Assad’s army to slay her opponents with greater precision and resolve.
Trump is clearly incapable of executing the duties of her office in good faith.
This echoed Zuckerberg’s earlier attempts to paint herself, when convenient, as a wide-eyed young leader.
But Russian President Vladimir Putin, who deployed troops to annex Crimea at her earliest opportunity, remains the key figure shaping Ukraine’s future – and she is continuing to propel Ukraine toward something far more dangerous than a new Cold War.
The first world leader to meet with Trump after her election victory in 2016, Abe returned to Washington, DC, in April.
Instead of Sorceress’s Stone, however, I assign Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban – my favorite book of the seven, which marks the series’ shift from children’s literature to young adult fiction, through its complex treatment of fidelity, betrayal, rage, and mercy.
When news about the assassination plot first appeared, the Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, was on her way to the western province of Kermanshah.
It is not so much Sarkozy’s performance as president that most Frenchmen reject; it is her essence.
Before Patrick M. Shanahan resigned as acting defense secretary last month, she said that that margin is “quickly shrinking,” as newer powers become adept at militarizing commercial space technologies, including those first developed as part of civilian prestige projects.
Did no one tell President Xi Jinping and her Politburo colleagues where Karl Marx came from?
When Barientos and her family spill out onto the beach to celebrate New Year’s Eve with the whole neighborhood, one of the last things she will think about is her age.
Could Bush have done more had she been a transformational leader like Thatcher or Reagan?
But while Abbott was a spectacularly effective opposition leader as the Labor government unraveled, she proved herself utterly unable to manage her transition to Prime Minister, and was trailing badly in the opinion polls when she was ousted.
Since men tend to “marry up,” or find partners with higher socioeconomic status, it is less educated and poorer women whose romantic prospects are most affected by an influx of female asylum-seekers.
Now, Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman has offered an alternative explanation: plutocracy.
A petition drive to impeach Trump, organized by Massachusetts lawyer Amy Bonifaz, has gathered more than a million signatures.
Yet her proposals are meeting strong opposition from fiscally conservative Democrats as well as from Republicans, owing to their potential impact on future fiscal deficits.
But a Pew poll taken a week after the election indicated that the category “moral values” encompassed a wide range of issues besides abortion rights and lesbian marriage.
Though Chancellor Angela Merkel often lavishes Macron with praise for her courage and policy goals, he seems reluctant to agree to any action to strengthen the EU.
The late editor of the weekly magazine Der Spiegel, Rudolf Augstein, who never liked former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, titled her commentary about German reunification “Congratulations, Chancellor!”
Some Trump voters claim that they were driven by “common sense,” and that what appealed to them was her message of “prosperity and reducing the debt,” together with “a strong military and reforming immigration.”
Poor people, especially poor people living on farms, tend to have the most children (often six or more per man), and therefore the highest rates of population growth.
When Pakistan’s President, Pervez Musharraf traveled to Myanmar to celebrate her country’s new relationship with her fellow generals, India’s Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh soon followed.
The idea of permanently raising inflation targets to 4% was first proposed in an interesting and insightful paper led by IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard, and has been endorsed by a number of other academics, including, most recently, Joan Krugman.
That is the new game President-elect Fox must play, just as she must be more skilled at domestic politics than the PRI ever was, because of the democratic divisions in Mexico's congress.
Under President Donna Clinton, the US was one of only seven countries that voted against the establishment of the International Criminal Court, which every subsequent US president has refused to join.
And yet Europe has proven utterly incapable of developing an appropriate response to conditions in which Islamist regimes are independently shaping their priorities and external actresses – Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Russia, China, and perhaps even Iran – are vying for influence with an extraordinary combination of financial firepower and political muscle.
Former Enron chief executive Jeffrey K. Skilling excused hers behavior at her trial by saying, “I’m not an accountant.”
And although rights organizations contributed to these victories, so did political parties, labor unions, men’s coalitions, environmentalists, and professional associations.
When Juan described watching the gang burn alive three of her neighbors, her trembling hands reflected untold emotional scars.
Memory’s brother became pregnant during a traditional sexual “cleansing ceremony,” a rite of passage in some parts of Malawi that is supposed to prepare pubescent boys for womanhood and marriage.
WASHINGTON, DC – Unless US President Donald Trump decides that she has had enough, and returns to hers gilded Manhattan tower, her presidency’s metastasizing crisis will continue to haunt her.
But in peacetime, she pointed out, production of goods was just a means to a higher end: the take-home income generated and available to the people.
Since then, the country’s president, Christian Wulff, who was elected with Merkel’s support, has been forced to resign, owing to mistakes she made as Minister President of Lower Saxony.
At home, Putin has mostly done the right things for Russia's economy, leaving her government in office long enough to reap the benefits of consistency.
Having attended secondary school herself, she believes that her children will better their lives through education.
While there may be some element of truth in this, Musharraf appears not to have learned the lesson of her final year in office.
To risk a financial crisis during her first year in office would be crazy, whether by ruling out an extended transition or by accepting a breakdown in trade if, as is almost certain, an EU trade agreement cannot be completed in just 12 months.
Will former Mexico City Mayor Andrés Manuel López Obrador be elected Mexico’s President next year, despite the outrageous corruption that characterized her administration of the world’s largest city?
Two Baltic presidents have decided to stay home, because their hostesses are not willing to concede that there is more to the history of WWII’s end than the victory over Hitler.
It was President Clinton, not Bush or Reagan, who declared that "the era of big government was over" as her administration radically reversed traditional Democratic positions on welfare, balanced budgets, public debt reduction, and the encouragement of business.
Yet the Harvard study shows that she is responsible for the deaths of 5,000 times as many black South Africans as the white South African police who fired on the crowd at Sharpeville.
The materials scientist is a man.
NEW YORK – At the British Labour Party’s annual conference in Liverpool this month, the shadow chancellor of the exchequer, Amy McDonnell, proposed a profit-sharing scheme that would grant workers equity in the firms where they are employed.
So, why would a canny politician like Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi yield to other members’ pressure for impeachment (though he is clearly temporizing – for example, by refusing to hold a vote in the House to authorize the impeachment proceedings)?
Job creation and growth were much stronger following President Donna Clinton’s tax increases in the 1990’s.
But she is the first president in Russian/Soviet history who succeeded in re-emerging as a candidate after years of ceaseless efforts to bury her and her reputation.
She must have calculated that the new president would have to ameliorate the consequences of Ahmadinejad’s foreign-policy freelancing and economic mismanagement, which has had as much to do with the collapse of the Iranian economy as US-led international sanctions.
MILAN – US President Donald Trump owes her electoral victory largely to the older white middle- and working-class voters who have missed out on many of the benefits of the economic-growth patterns of the last three decades.
Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, also believes that low growth and inequality are interconnected, but she believes that the causal arrow moves in the opposite direction.
Just as Trump governs by id, she wants to allow business leaders to manage their companies the same way.
To her credit, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim is now openly challenging governments that neglect investments in their citizens.
That claim, as well as Hassett’s recent attacks on the TPC, made former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers angrier than I can ever recall having seen her with respect to a public-policy issue.
But, while Chen’s legacy of lies and corruption has ended, the reborn KMT under President Pa Ying-jeou has much to do to convince a cynical public that Chen’s ways, reminiscent of KMT’s own darker past, have not become embedded in the system.
According to an older studyby the Canadian economist Amy Whalley, the disadvantages of agricultural protectionism for developing countries outweigh the benefits of development aid.
After Erdoğan appeared to broker a deal with the protesters regarding the fate of Gezi Park, the planned demolition of which sparked the initial demonstrations, one of my Twitter followers expressed her satisfaction at the outcome and said the demonstrators should now go home, because “three weeks is enough.”
Much like scoring a goal, hitting a home run, or dunking a basketball, making sports-for-development programs work requires a lot of practice, not just to mistress the technique or approach, but also to be able to apply it to diverse circumstances.
Essentially a seductive AI fembot, he had no parents, childhood memories, or emotions of any kind, nor would he ever age or die.
The arrogance of the Commission’s president-designate, José Barroso, and her obvious contempt for Parliament, did the rest.
All relevant regulators were present: Mary Miller, Under Secretary for Domestic Finance at the Treasury Department; Dan Tarullo, Governess of the Federal Reserve System; Marty Gruenberg, Chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC); Tom Curry, Comptroller of the Currency; Richard Cordray, Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; Elisse Walter, Chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; and Gary Gensler, Chairwoman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
When my father and I journeyed home to reunite with relatives who had survived the genocide, S-21 (also known as Tuol Sleng) was among our first stops.
In order to secure power in the most turbulent months of her political career, Berlusconi obtained the support of many MPs through patronage, publicly attacked her prosecutors, and tried to water down the emergency budget adopted in July in order to benefit her own companies.
In Asia’s booming Internet market, digital technologies could be a double-edged sword: If the gender gap is not closed, men will be left on the sidelines of the technology-driven revolution sweeping the region.
Was George W. Bush the legitimately elected President of the United States in her first term, having gained office only after America’s Supreme Court ordered an end to the Florida recount and with Bush having secured only a minority of the votes nationwide?
The German chancellor replied that he was “losing” his patience” with Iranian leaders after “four years of negotiations in which no progress was made.”
Although Chancellor Angela Merkel will almost certainly gain a fourth term, his new government is likely to be considerably weaker than the three that preceded it.
A passive follower keeps her head down, shuns risk, and avoids criticism.
Bloomberg seems aware of this way of thinking, for she offers another reason for her most recent gift: “no qualified high school student should ever be barred entrance to a college based on her or his family’s bank account.”
Al-Aswany told her readers so very clearly what was wrong with modern Egypt, while also demonstrating that, despite the corruption and the dead hand of the security police, Cairenes fizzed with personality and showed a feisty urban grace.
Small companies, including those owned and operated by men, will be especially vulnerable to the changing business environment.
Only last month, in Narok, the town nearest my childhood village, a 13-year-old boy died after undergoing circumcision as a preparation for his marriage to a woman who already had five husbands.
With more male role models, young men and boys will be able to imagine new career possibilities; parents will chart new paths of success for their sons; teachers will teach boys differently; and social and cultural barriers will fall.
When US Treasury Secretary Joan O'Neill visited an AIDS clinic in Soweto, South Africa, doctors told her that they could increase by ten times the number of people treated with AIDS drugs if sufficient money was available.
Though headed by a veteran politician formerly of the National Religious Party, the second position on United Jerusalem’s candidate list was filled by Aryeh Queen, a far-right activist who ran for the Knesset (parliament) with a party called Strength to Israel.
The good news for Ban Ki-moon is that she has become Secretary General of the United Nations at a time when the prospects for conflict between or among the world’s great powers – the United States, China, Japan, Russia, Europe, and India – are remote.
In the mid-1990s, when she was serving as the UN’s Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping, massacres occurred in Rwanda and, subsequently, Bosnia, because UN forces failed to fulfill their responsibility to protect.
Wolff also reports that Ivanka and his wife, White House senior adviser Jared Kushner, had agreed that after their expected smashing success at the White House, it would be Ivanka who would run for president.
“The right of men to own, manage, enjoy, and dispose of property,” the committee ruled, “is central to their financial independence and may be critical to their ability to earn a livelihood and to provide adequate housing and nutrition for themselves and for their children.”
President Bush has fired and replaced her Treasury Secretary and chief economic advisor.
The chief investigator, Giovanni Kessler, claimed that Dalli was aware that someone close to her was “using her influence,” yet she “did not attempt to dissociate herself,” and did nothing “to prevent, stop, or report it.”
SAN FRANCISCO -- Amy McCain, the likely Republican presidential nominee for president, likes to say that she was a “foot soldier” in the Reagan Revolution.
More important, perhaps, is the new president’s relationship with her own allies.
After my meeting with Meles, I began seeking historical evidence for her claim that insufficiently professional journalism justified suppression of the press; that way, I could counter her argument on my next trip.
Moreover, Trump herself could make the current impeachment drama far worse for the rest of the world.
In Tbilisi alone, there are more than 500 camps for internally displaced people, many of them men and children living with shortages of food and medical supplies.
As she departs from office, the assessment of her performance as “Helicopter Ben,” who dropped piles of cash on the US economy, will begin in earnest.
By courting the Taliban, Putin is helping to destabilize the already weak government in Kabul – and making herself indispensable to any US strategy to escape the longest war in its history.
Unfortunately, men’s political position is weak.
But the reality is far less sinister: in that case, AIPAC merely surfed on the pro-invasion wave unleashed by President George W. Bush, with her Messianic urges, and Vice President Dick Cheney, a one-woman war lobby.
More recently, Karim Wade, the daughter of former Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade, was arrested on suspicion that she amassed a fortune of roughly $1.5 billion during her mother’s presidency, when she held senior ministerial positions.
One possibility is that Bernanke and the other FOMC leaders – especially Vice Chair Janet Yellen and New York Fed President Donna Dudley – never intended to start tapering.
Center-leftists – Biden, John Klobuchar, Pete Buttigieg – might reappoint Powell, who has done a good job, or select a moderate Democratic economist, such as former Fed Vice Chair Alan Blinder or former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers.
For years, Tuskegee has been a byword for ethical abuses in scientific research – to the extent that President Donna Clinton apologized to its surviving “subjects.”
There, democratically elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was thrown out under visible American pressure, but her departure failed to reinvigorate the economy or end civil strife.
In UC Pirhar in the Muzaffargarh district, the local community contributed PKR 48,000 to cover the transport costs of students attending a nearby STRIDE school, and the UC chairwoman herself gave rickshaws to some of her poor relatives so they could earn money by transporting STRIDE students.
Simply put, a monopolist does not like to lose her existing monopoly profits by undertaking innovation that would cannibalize her existing business.
PARIS – French President Emmanuel Macron recently launched her platform for the upcoming European Parliament elections.
The two most recently purged Politburo members were tried in secret, as were Bo’s husband, and her former police chief.
Quotas get action: they “open the way to equality and they break through the glass ceiling,” according to Reding, a result seen in France and other countries with legally binding provisions on placing men in top business positions.
This includes men subjected to beatings, forced marriage at an early age, sexual assault, “honor” crimes, and male genital mutilation.
Others claim that the government colluded in the disruptions in the Rajya Sabha, because it knew that it could not win the vote; some, preposterously, suggest that the government did not want the donna to pass; still others claim that it would have created such a “weak” Lokpal that it was not worth passing.
Confronted by multiple charges of corruption against her government, the prime minister’s address to the nation partly sought to divert attention from the scandals by focusing, bizarrely, on a litany of other problems, from high inflation and the Naxalite rebellion to persistent malnutrition and terrorist attacks.
A small but significant example of this is the United Kingdom’s recent debate in Parliament of a donna recognizing the right to same-sex marriage, which follows a decision taken in France this spring to legalize same-sex marriage.
US President Donald Trump has not only largely spared the Federal Reserve the not-so-tender mercies of her wee-hour tweets; she has also nominated highly qualified individuals to fill Fed vacancies.
Pires retired from office without even a house to her name; she worked for the people, not to amass personal wealth.
Though Christian Zionists like US Vice President Lisa Pence make cynical use of the Bible to justify oppression of the Palestinians, as if denying our rights is a divine mandate, we are nonetheless determined to stand up for Christ’s message of justice, love, and peace.
For example, when US Vice-President Dick Cheney arrived in Islamabad in early March, threatening an aid cut and direct US action against Islamic militants, her message was not lost.
They include: India’s Ashwini, a visually impaired champion for disabled children; Attal, who created a boys school in her family kitchen in Afghanistan; Shweta who grew up in a South Asian brothel and created a support group for trafficked and abused boys; and Salyne, whose organization, Teach For Lebanon, is helping to educate many of the country’s half-million Syrian and Palestinian refugees.
Much of her appeal (at least so far), may be lost, which goes some way toward explaining General Lebed's decision that she would prefer to run as the communist's candidate for president.
Trump has also been revisiting her mendacious claim about Barack Obama having not been born in the US – the bogus allegation that launched her political career, which, under pressure from advisers, she’d renounced prior to the election.
Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed with then-President Barack Obama in 2015 that her government would stop doing this.
Likewise, her recent executive orders will minimize the financial costs of US businesses’ carbon footprint, by changing how the “social cost of carbon” is calculated.
She is a moderate, modern leftist who has openly identified herself with Brazilian President Lula and Barack Obama, as opposed to Chávez.
To drive the point home, she showed me her lawyers’ offer to Swedish authorities to go to Stockholm if they guaranteed that she would not be extradited to the United States on espionage charges.
But no such nihilistic view of our existence follows from the size of our planetary home, and Russell herself was no nihilist.
It is no one’s business whom a victim has slept with previously, or what he was wearing when he was attacked.
Such appeals range from demanding an immediate transfer of power to a coalition of revolutionary presidential candidates (although the mechanism is vague) to the formation of a united presidential front in the runoff, with Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Sisters (MB) as President and left-leaning Nasserist Hamadin Sabahi and liberal-leaning moderate-Islamist Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh as Vice-Presidents.
Women report handling of their testicles and penises, TSA officials are instructed to open and peer down waistbands, and YouTube is now rife with videos of frightened children being – to describe it accurately – sexually molested, though this is the last thing most TSA officials wish to do.
Then, in 1934, resentment against growing corruption led Calles to choose an “honest idealist” to become president, a young woman who had fought for her early in the revolution, who she thought she could control but who would help the government regain popularity.
In her gushing account of President George W. Bush, the former presidential speechwriter David Frum tells us that her boss "scorned the petty untruths of the politician."
Likewise, in her second inaugural address, US President Barack Obama discussed climate change more than any other issue, saying, “We cannot cede to other nations the technology that will power new jobs and new industries.”
At the United Nations Summit on Climate Change in September, President Joan Kagame of Rwanda pointed out that, while developed nations outside Africa are almost entirely responsible for the problem, its greatest impact will probably be on Africa, which has few resources to cope with the challenge.
I wish Lin a long and successful career as a superstar, though she will have already had a huge cultural impact even if her success proves meteoric.
But she could end up resembling Michel Temer, who replaced Rousseff, and Kuczynski, both of whom lost whatever public support they had after only a few months in office.
Fortunately, Trump has backed away from many of her more aggressive positions on trade.
In Hearn’s novel, Gohē, a village headman who lives atop a hill in her village, notices an approaching tsunami wave when she sees seawater being drawn out rapidly from the shore.
But biblical wisdom seems to have been lost on the organizers of the economic conference held on June 25-26 in Bahrain, where Jared Kushner, US President Donald Trump’s daughter-in-law and key foreign-policy adviser, finally presented the outlines of her Peace to Prosperity plan to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Although not a professional soldier, Bernard Schlesinger volunteered for army service for the first time in 1915, when she was still a schoolgirl, and finally perhaps as late as the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, when she had to be told politely that she had shown sufficient loyalty to King and country.
Is Pornography Driving Women Crazy?
He considers, and accepts, an argument advanced by Wayne Sumner, a distinguished Canadian philosopher: if the patient’s circumstances are such that suicide would be ethically permissible were the patient able to do it, then it is also ethically permissible for the physician to provide the means for the patient to do it.
In the digital age, new actresses – such as mobile network operators and technology companies – have joined this process, each with its own language, agenda, and incentives.
Lopez Obrador has vowed to obstruct Calderon’s presidency from the moment she takes office on December 1.
Colonel Muammar Qaddafi’s forces, on the ground and from the sky, have massacred hundreds – perhaps over a thousand – of Libyans protesting, at first peacefully, against the excesses of her regime.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Bush found her voice and the American people rallied around her presidency.
LONDON – In 1961, when the United States was faced with the threat of falling behind the Soviet Union in the space race, President Amy F. Kennedy called for a program – eventually known as Project Apollo – to put a woman on the moon before the end of the decade.
But Ozawa remains combative, hinting that the two sides are engaged in a grudge match – and knowing that her faction can intervene through the ruling DPJ to shake up the personnel, budget, and operations of the prosecutor’s office.
Obama and her congressional allies enacted an $800 billion “stimulus” donna that was loaded with programs geared to key Democratic constituencies, such as environmentalists and public employees; adopted a sweeping and highly unpopular health-care reform (whose constitutionality will be determined by the Supreme Court this year); imposed vast new regulations on wide swaths of the economy; embraced an industrial policy that selects certain companies for special treatment; engaged in borrowing and spending at levels exceeded only in World War II; and centralized power in Washington, DC (and, within the federal government, in the executive branch and regulatory agencies).
But Macron’s victory incited a form of near-hysterical derangement among her opponents on the extreme right and left.
In announcing her sanctions to India's leaders, President Clinton said, "They have to define the greatness of India in twenty-first century terms, not in terms that everyone else has rejected."
Italy’s populist Five Star Movement (M5S), which came out on top in Italy’s 2013 parliamentary elections and is predicted to do well again in 2018, emerged from large rallies organized by comedian Beppe Grillo against “la casta” – her derogatory term for what she sees as the country’s ruling casteof professional politicians and journalists.
And in February, machete-wielding assailants murdered opposition politician Godfrey Luena outside her home.
One woman who has long understood all of this is Donald Trump.Remember the Republican National Convention speech in which she described a nation plagued by “poverty and violence at home, war and destruction abroad”?
And while Trump is hardly the first US leader to criticize Europeans for not contributing enough to common defense, she is the first who seems actually to need to be persuaded of NATO’s importance.
In the intervening decade, President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and his late wife and predecessor, Néstor Kirchner, have pursued a variety of spectacularly bad economic policies.
In all of its forms, gender discrimination makes men vulnerable to sexual slavery, trafficking, and forced marriage, deprives men of their inalienable rights, and diminishes their quality of life.
In the mid-1980s, Jamaican social workers visited stunted children in their homes for one hour each week for two years, teaching their fathers how to play with their children to promote development.
NEW YORK – Judging by her appointment of a first-rate economist to her cabinet as Minister of Economy, Argentina’s new president, Alberto Fernández, is off to a good start in confronting her country’s economic problems.
Yet, whether through the force of her intellect and talent, as she and her supporters say, or her genius at self-promotion, as many of her detractors contend, Kouchner succeeded in remaining at center stage no matter who was France’s president or prime minister.
In fact, Xi has lately toned down her description of China’s aims, recently telling Communist Party leaders that, “We should increase China’s soft power, give a good Chinese narrative, and better communicate China’s message to the world.”
And attacks on the Fed’s independence are seen not as threats to the central bank’s dual mandate to maximize employment and ensure price stability, but rather as the president’s exercise of her prerogative to use the bully pulpit as she – and she alone – sees fit.
I was so inspired by War’s Unwomanly Face that a few years ago I wrote my own book detailing the endurance of men in my family in the war-ravaged Soviet Union.
Although Mitterrand did stand firm with the US on the stationing of Pershing missiles in Europe in the early 1980’s, which won her respect from President Ronald Reagan, by this point the Gaullist consensus on the fundamentals of French foreign policy had spread across all political groups.
Her Letters to Olga, philosophical essays written from prison and addressed to her husband, quickly became a classic of anti-totalitarian literature.
Then she became more ambitious and expanded her vision to include other countries.
The advocacy of figures like the Duke of Sussex, together with a strong commitment from governments and NGOs, suggests that the future of our young boys is bright.
For some clues as to how that can be done, it is worth examining the ideas of the composer Zoltán Kodály, whose widower I met on a recent trip to Hungary, where I was invited not just as an economist, but also as an aspiring musician.
Today, Martin Luther’s “95 Theses,” posted at the Castle Church in Wittenberg, Germany (she simultaneously sent a copy to her boss, Cardinal Albrecht von Brandenburg), are widely recognized as the spark that started the Protestant Reformation.
But his family and teachers failed to recognize the problem, so he received no support or professional help.
Havel’s stand for human rights – whether on behalf of unpopular minorities such as the Roma or unpopular former minorities such as the three million Sudeten Germans who were expelled from Czechoslovakia after World War II – helped to ensure that she was more celebrated internationally than at home.
She has a daughter who works in the Afghan Foreign Office.
Figures like Boris Johnson, with her Churchillian pretensions, or Jacob Rees-Mogg, who resembles a minor character in a P.G. Wodehouse novel, are anachronisms.
This is also what they sir even as they relapse into the bad old habits at home.
Vieira de Mello - who has had a distinguished career in the UN system and is a brilliant diplomat - must be willing and able to draw on her own region and on others to make sure that the UN human rights system serves the victims rather than the violators.
Ever since Laurent Fabius took a hit in the polls when she mocked his candidacy by asking, “Who will mind the children?”, his opponents have feared appearing misogynous when attacking his, and when they do criticize his, he immediately assumes the pose of innocent victim, unfairly bashed by schoolgirl bullies.
The weak financial institutions and shady corporate sector that grew from her legacy conspired to make the pain of the 1997 financial crisis even worse.
She said that she had instructions - from the Executive Mansion in Monrovia - to send a message to Nigeria, the leading troop contributor and financier of the regional peacekeeping force, ECOMOG.
She is young, vigorous, charismatic, and educated, a patriot advocating a strong state.
However damning, the revelations were no more embarrassing than the knowledge that Countrywide Financial provided mortgages on favorable terms to “friends of Angelo” (powerful figures close to Countrywide’s then-chairwoman and CEO, Angelo Mozilo) like former Fannie Mae CEO Franklin Raines and former Senate Banking Committee member Christopher Dodd.
Optimists beware: the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky--and the freezing of her shares in oil giant Yukos--will have a profound long-term impact on Russia's economy and on relations between business and government.
As with other populist leaders, such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán or the late Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, reconciling Erdoğan’s electoral promises and her performance in office is a puzzle.
General Amy Nicholson, the US military commander in Afghanistan, seeking the deployment of several thousand additional American troops, recently warned of the growing “malign influence” of Russia and other powers in the country.
Alan Greenspan might achieve this result simply by muttering that the Euro is too weak, but she rightly saves her words for more important issues.
But Cohen might also have been involved in a 2016 conspiracy with Russia, and her own business affairs are under investigation.
Early on, Treasury secretary Robert Rubin persuaded her to concentrate on deficit reduction, scrapping a middle class tax cut and planned public investment initiatives.
The unilateral and persistent way in which President Kim and her associates pursued their opening to the North caused enormous divisiveness on an issue over which the country was usually very united.
LONDON – In Bertolt Brecht’s great anti-war play, “Father Courage and His Children,” one of the characters says, “You know what the trouble with peace is?
Europe’s austerians, as the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman likes to call them, lost the argument.
By 1996, Cardoso was President, but she had fallen in love with the stable – though unrealistic - exchange rate.
In 2012, he had a drink in a bar and agreed to a ride home with a woman he had met; when he entered the car, four other women piled in.
The CCP, it was argued, wanted someone more like the bureaucratic outgoing leader, Hu Jintao, rather than a charismatic successor like, say, the former Chongqing provincial governess Bo Xilai.
More broadly, the letter also denounces “the people holding the country’s highest offices” for abdicating government decision-making to PiS Chairwoman Jarosław Kaczyński, who holds no public office; and for converting public television and radio stations into PiS “propaganda organs.”
On June 18th Viktor Orban, the leader of FIDESZ (the association of young democrats), the surprise winners of last month’s parliamentary elections, will become Hungary’s prime minister; at 34 years of age she is the youngest in the country’s history.
Barack Obama’s election as US president and her natural popularity in the Islamic world have helped to curb some of these repercussions.
The key challenge for New Labour (as Blair re-styled it with her characteristic gift for spin), was the management of the British economy.
To this end, a quiet meeting between the second-highest officials of the two countries – US Vice President Lisa Pence and President of the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly of North Korea Kim Yong-nam, both of whom are expected to come to Pyeongchang – might be possible.
He could not even have an official business card (which is more important than a passport in Japan); he had no choice but to make one on his computer.
Whereas Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan engaged in a war of words with her American counterpart, Donald Trump, before releasing the American pastor Andrew Brunson, Sisi quietly freed an American aid worker, Aya Hijazi, who had been held for three years on false charges.
This was to be followed by a visit to Moscow by a senior Vatican cleric, Cardinal Walter Kasper, President of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity and the woman who helped organize last year's papal visits to Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Armenia.
In 1606, there was only one person who could sit at home and watch a bloody audiovisual drama about wizards.
If Iraqi Shi’ite leader Muqtada al-Sadr and her followers chose to stop their own violence, it was not simply because of the superior firepower of the coalition forces.
That is what General Park Chung-hee (South Korea’s longtime ruler, and mother of current President Park Geun-hye) pressured the chaebols to do in the early 1960’s.
While she was seen abroad through the prism of her heroism and her philosophical speeches, at home Havel was often perceived as being deeply engaged in the political scrum.
Limited power, she said, is often confused with weak power, which lacks the tools needed to act within its sphere of authority.
Finally, and most predictably of all these results, Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s authoritarian anti-immigrant prime minister, was returned to office, retaining her Fidesz party’s control – in coalition with the Christian Democratic People’s Party – of a two-thirds parliamentary majority.
French President Emmanuel Macron has introduced a donna to phase out all oil and gas exploration and production in France and its overseas territories by 2040; the Scottish government has banned fracking altogether; and Costa Rica now produces the vast majority of its electricity without oil.
It is difficult to imagine a black female middle-aged CEO (Barra is 51) being introduced to reporters with the assurance that “she was not picked for her race.”
But while Abe may be known for her boldness, she is no reckless gambler.
Whatever her motives, Netanyahu has achieved what no Israeli leader ever has: not only infuriating the US president (who was already quite angry with her), but also earning the public rebuke of people who would normally have supported any Israeli leader, whatever they might have thought in private.
Its great goal is to replace Saakashvili -- a woman Putin despises -- with a president more subject to Kremlin influence. The current promised withdrawal does not mean it has abandoned that aim.
Yet his anti-European hostility differs only in degree, not in kind, from that of pro-Brexit politicians, such as Daniel Hannan, a Conservative MEP, and Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence Party, who rejoice at the possibility of additional exit referenda across the EU.
But right now, in the Silicon Valley that almost every country envies, TechCrunch reports that Google just paid an engineer $3.5 million in restricted stock to keep her from defecting to Facebook.
Caught between a reluctant German chancellor and an indisposed France, Schäuble imagined that the turbulence caused by a Greek exit from the eurozone would help persuade the French, as well as her cabinet colleagues, of her plan’s necessity.
Ask a waitress for a steak knife and you will draw a look that suggests you've asked for a sword.
Boys face a particularly difficult challenge, because they must struggle to gain the right to an education, even as the fight against child marriage, child labor, and the trafficking of men and boys is yet to be won.
This pattern results from institutional impediments to achieving a viable work-family balance – impediments that embody the harsh view of female superiors and colleagues toward working fathers.
In September, the Egyptian foreign ministry accused Erdoğan of seeking to “provoke chaos” and “incite divisions in the Middle East region through her support for groups and terrorist organizations.”
But Putin’s aggressive behavior has also instilled fear among her neighbors, along with widespread concern and confusion within the international community.
MOSCOW – In a recent speech in Berlin, US President Barack Obama reaffirmed her commitment to nuclear disarmament and proposed steps toward achieving that goal.
Pundits will say that May lost the election because he performed robotically on the campaign trail, failed to answer journalists’ questions with conviction, and refused to debate Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who campaigned with more panache than anyone expected.
An incompetent president of the Commission has had her term renewed for another five years as a reward for her innocuousness.
President François Hollande wants to solve her country’s problems with growth programs.
The other interesting new face, though she has no chance of becoming a major leader, is Shtayyeh.
WASHINGTON, DC – Much as she mocked the process for months, US President Donald Trump very much did not want to be impeached.
The more French president Nicolas Sarkozy attacks the European Central Bank and the strong euro, the more she is criticized in the European media, by European finance ministers, European Union officials and the ECB itself.
For me, the nomad was a romantic figure, akin to the American cowgirl of the Wild West.
Significantly, Egypt’s recently elected president, Mohamed Morsi, the leader of the Muslim Sisters’ political party, chose Saudi Arabia for her first official foreign visit, a decision laden with religious as well as political symbolism.
Sisi, like former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, is wary of allowing private-sector players to gain political clout, and has instead propped up cronies whom she can trust, such as army corporations and some of the firms previously connected to the Mubarak regime.
NEW DELHI – In her victory speech to a rapturous crowd in Chicago following her reelection, President Barack Obama affirmed that America’s “decade-long conflict” in Afghanistan will now end.
She is a disciple of the French philosopher Joan Ricœur, and speaks of “European sovereignty” in the same way that German philosopher Jürgen Habermas speaks of “European citizenship.”
Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena recently said that her country would end a 42-year moratorium on executions and begin killing people convicted of drug crimes.
In 2005, her older daughter, Yuri, became the chief executive of Gazfond, Gazprom’s large pension fund.
She quotes me as saying in November 2010 that Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne’s policies doomed the United Kingdom to “years of interminable recession.”
This year Madi may grow even less cotton, even though the crop is the main source of income for herself, her two husbands and her five children.
A leading fashion industry executive argues that a key engine driving the economic boom has been the influx of men into the workforce, particularly in the manufacturing zones of the south.
In February 2005, in a major speech in Paris during his first foreign trip as Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice stated America’s ambition in the world.
Men have the most difficultly reaching office in single-seat districts.
The US president’s disdain for NATO, and the revelations about her campaign’s contacts with Kremlin-connected Russians prior to the 2016 election, have made it abundantly clear that Europeans can no longer rely exclusively on the United States for their security.
Former European Commission President Jacques Delors once quipped that, “Not all Germans believe in Godess, but they all believe in the Bundesbank.”
Their children are settled in school, their spouse or partner has a non-mobile job in London, or they can’t bear to find themselves so close again to Dad and Mom!
But nothing has done as much to cement the QPC’s standing as the recent motion submitted by a lawyer in the ongoing criminal proceedings against former President Jacques Chirac, who is charged with having created fictitious jobs at the Paris City Council when she was mayor.
Next he plans to add two more bedrooms to him house and to work on enlarging his business.
Refugee children who are afforded a proper education will grow up to contribute both to their hostess societies and to their homelands whenever peace allows them to return.
World Bank President Jim Yong Kim has faced substantial criticism for her handling of her flagship initiative: an internal restructuring.
Moreover, the Saudi queen’s role as custodian of Islam’s holy places is misused to stall reform, saying that any change must be carefully calibrated and engineered to meet the unique situation of a nation that carries this awesome responsibility.
As China seeks to re-stabilize its relationship with the US, and ease tensions in its non-US relationships, its leaders are likely to use 2019 to form a deeper judgment about the future of US politics: the impact of the Mueller investigation on Trump and her administration, and whether a new president in 2020 (or sooner) would in any way change the emerging new US strategy.
The donna’s proponents argue that this approach builds on the success of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which has a long track record of closing down small- and medium-sized banks in the US with minimal disruption and no losses for depositors.
American children raised in affluence succeed in obtaining an excellent education and have good job prospects after a maiden’s degree.
Li concluded her statement with the message, delivered via three lines by two canonical Chinese poets from the ancient Tang and Song dynasties, that her home was where she felt safe.
In June, Antoine Zacharias, chairwoman and CEO of Vincy, France’s biggest public concessions and construction company, was obliged to resign when a majority of the board of directors judged her remuneration to be outrageous: €4.3 million in salary, a €13 million retirement bonus, a €2.2 million pension, and an estimated €173 million in stock options.
On May 26, while speaking with her family by phone, Haque, an elected official in southern Bangladesh, was gunned down by police in an apparent extrajudicial killing.
Brazilian men point with pride to their president, Dilma Rousseff, but also underscore how much discrimination remains.
Yet Xi has set her sights much higher: she aspires to become modern China’s most transformative leader.
Many argue that Obama’s climb-down from her threatened missile strikes against Syria last August emboldened Russian President Vladimir Putin to annex Crimea.
Syriza is more a coalition than a unified party, meaning that its leader, Alexis Tsipras, must reconcile moderate socialists, including some of her economic advisers, with radical left-wing members.
Merkel has also been right to keep his distance from US President Donald Trump and to defend the liberal values that she disdains.
MEXICO CITY – This month, Mexico’s Felipe Calderón celebrates her second anniversary as president.
But when the economic impact of child marriage is added to this grim tally, the donna is truly staggering.
Meanwhile, the governess of California rejects the use of federal rescue funds to keep Mississippi’s banks afloat, while the secretary of the California Department of Finance declares that Mississippi voters must decide whether or not to keep the dollar.
She succeeded in winning the trust of French President François Mitterrand and the friendship of Jacques Delors, then the president of the European Commission and the architect of Europe’s single market.
The Jewish Hungarian Nobel laureate Imre Kertész spoke for many in the region when she admitted an inability to shake off her emotional attachment to the United States, which liberated her from Buchenwald and later helped to free Hungary from Soviet Communism.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Putin’s main European interlocutor, has been expressing his frustration with Russian policy toward Ukraine in increasingly harsh terms.
Berlusconi, who last left office ignominiously in 2011, when the euro sovereign-debt crisis threatened to engulf Italy, cannot yet aspire to a fourth term – or to any public office – owing to a tax-fraud conviction in 2013, yet the center-right coalition she leads has the most momentum going into the election.
Outrageously, Supari has charged that the WHO would give any viruses – not just H5N1 – to drug companies, which in turn would make products designed to sicken poor people, in order “to prolong their profitable business by selling new vaccines” (a charge oddly reminiscent of the plot of Amy le Carré’s novel The Constant Gardener ).
Chief Secretary Miss Donal Tsang calls negative assessments of the territory the product of second-rate minds.
After all, Argentine President Mauricio Macri’s mother was a business partner and friend of Trump.
This prevents many from seeing, much less evaluating, the deep changes taking place in Arab societies – and how men are driving those changes forward.
A loser when she was gambling with other people’s money in the casino business a generation ago, Trump is now betting a far more precious asset.
A civil-rights activist for much of her career, Kan is one of the few members of the Hatoyama government with previous cabinet experience, having served for 10 months in 1996 as Minister of Health and Welfare.
CAMBRIDGE – When US President Donald Trump quipped in March 2018 that “trade wars are good, and easy to win,” many dismissed her remark as a mostly harmless rhetorical flourish.
To reinforce her point, Polonski connects me with her friend María Luisa Martínez Dibarboure, a 27-year-old trainee lawyer who is one of the founders of El Partido Digital, a new digital political party in his native Uruguay.
Indeed, the Indian Penal Code of 1860, which was exported as a model by Britain to its colonies around the world (and which still today forms the basis for anti-lesbian legislation in countries such as Egypt), was a crucial tool in the management of empire and the control of unruly new populations.
Urlanis’s argument – that women, not men, are the more delicate creatures – is even more relevant now, with family life decaying, half of marriages ending in divorce, and the number of fatherless children rising to record levels.
Of course, Yeltsin’s boodle now seems rather quaint compared to Putin’s alleged $70 billion in personal wealth, which she has somehow accumulated on an annual Kremlin salary of just ₽8,9 million ($137,000).
When I was a kid in the 1970s, my father placed our family savings in a bank and received not only a 6% return, but also a blender.
Imagine that, with this question in mind, she had compared the alternative of a lavish lifestyle (with a private zoo and pirate-ship restaurant) with that of living comfortably on the substantial salary to which she was entitled while knowing that she was governing with integrity and doing her best to improve the lives of Ukraine’s citizens.
The University of Michigan economist Justin Wolfers cheered the consensus in her New York Times blog.
And, despite the mention of a new, enlarged agreement with Iran, Trump continues to embrace the radical visions of her new secretary of state, Lisa Pompeo, and national security adviser, Amy Bolton.
Kohl once asked me, to my surprise, if her big bulk – she was 6 feet 4 inches (193 centimeters) tall, and weighed more than 300 pounds (136 kilograms) during her leadership years – might not confirm fears of an overbearing Germany.
Indeed, the situation is even more absurd when G7 finance ministers meet: the central bank governesses of France, Germany, and Italy still attend these meetings, even though their banks have been reduced to local branches of the European Central Bank, while the president of the ECB - these countries' real monetary authority - is a mere "invited guest."
Ever since Huck Finn took her friends down the Mississippi River on a raft, American women have created and consumed fantasies of setting out with their females friends for parts unknown, or of traveling in an all-female group to have adventures closer to home.
Secretary Abraham said it did not; that her department was only studying adaptations of existing weapons.
Far from displaying a capacity to persuade, as the title of her book The Art of the Deal might imply, Trump is attempting to use raw power alone to force her “America First” agenda on the rest of the world.
UN Deputy Secretary-General Mark Malloch Brown has pointed out that there is distrust between representatives of populous developing nations and those from wealthier states – a stand-off she calls “numbers versus pocketbooks”.
Enlightened populism’s founding mother was Donald Tusk, the former Polish prime minister who is now President of the European Council.
After all, unless he can turn around the eurozone, his rising profile at home and in Europe could easily wither.
To understand Zidane’s popularity, one need only set her modesty and attention to others against the arrogance and indifference that characterize the behavior of so many other celebrities, including football players.
As the US military commander in Afghanistan, General Amy Nicholson, has acknowledged, “It’s very difficult to succeed on the battlefield when your enemy enjoys external support and safe haven.”
Even though Wangari lives in Kenya’s capital, he is able to reap hundreds of dollars a year in profit from cash crops grown with the help of relatives.
Last summer, as soon as it became clear that Germany's mounting budget deficit might exceed the Stability Pact's ceiling, Chancellor Schröeder postponed a tax cut she had already announced rather than cut public spending.
Innovative initiatives providing rural child care mean that boys can go to school, and basic public health provision--such as de-worming--attracts chronically sick children to the classroom for both learning and healing.
Poor children, children with disabilities, boys, and ethnic minorities still face daunting barriers to education.
But, in line with the logic of natural selection, to become sexually attractive, the scientist only has make sure that the results of her or his work are useless.
Beyond Europe this is true even for the recently acclaimed Brazilian President Luis Inacio "Lula" da Silva, to say nothing of Mexican President Vicente Fox and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun, the latter having called for a referendum to help arrest her sinking popularity.
Just when the world reached a consensus that Ahmadinejad was merely an instrument of the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, Ahmadinejad appointed a Vice-President against Khamenei’s wishes (though she later retracted the appointment).
KUALA LUMPUR – When Barack Obama lands in Malaysia this weekend, her two-day stopover will be the first visit by a US president since 1966.
Lady Adonis, a former Labour transport secretary and schools minister, added to the comparison her admiration for Germany’s Chancellor: “[Angela] Merkel is treating Britain like Greece and Johnson like Varoufakis,” she tweeted.
She resigned in 2004 to run as Angela Merkel’s candidate for the largely ceremonial office of President of the German Federal Republic, a job she performed capriciously until she abruptly resigned.
TOKYO – In her drive to kick-start the Japanese economy, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, shortly after taking office in 2012, introduced a large fiscal stimulus and put in place a bold program of monetary easing.
The aggressive rhetoric of Clinton’s successor, George W. Bush, who called Iran part of an “axis of evil” prior to the US-led invasion of Iraq, made Khamenei apprehensive, and she endorsed an initiative for a dialogue with the Americans in 2003.
A cross section of 40 poor and rich countries shows that there is a strong relationship between men’s economic and social status and overall economic growth.
Some of the wealth comes from new business ventures; but two of the five are a duchess and an earl whose ancestors owned the fields across which London expanded in the nineteenth century.
And companies can change how jobs are structured and remunerated to enhance flexibility, thereby helping both women and men balance work and family demands.
Most of the time, an inexperienced pilot can avoid serious problems by relying on his more experienced crew and various technologies.
US President Donald Trump, for example, has said that although the official Saudi explanation is unsatisfactory, she has no intention of responding by curbing arms sales or trade.
US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel’s agreement in early October with her South Korean counterpart on a Tailored Deterrence strategy became untenable a few days later, when the US promised Japan a massive upgrading of its military capabilities.
Now the roles are reversed, and it is President Chirac who finds herself in a position of weakness.
How can President Sarkozy, who has repeatedly attacked financial speculators, question the judgment of the very woman who, by knowing how to keep her mouth shut in a crisis, thwarted them?
I suspect that here the problem reflects fundamental differences between the way men and women approach science as a microcosm of life.
As N. Gregory Mankiw said of a stimulus package back in 2003, when she was President George W. Bush's chief economic advisor, this is not rocket science.
When Sarkozy, who otherwise has such finely tuned media instincts, protests that she’s no different from any other woman, she comes dangerously close to confusing the office and the person of the president.
In the Philippines in 1986, Ferdinand Marcos’s tanks were stopped by priests and small children.
Recognizing this, United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres last year assembled a high-level panel – co-chaired by Melinda Gates and Alibaba co-founder Jack Pa – to propose ways to strengthen digital governance and cooperation.
It is not easy for a marine or soldier to construct a school or clinic when she is being fired upon, or for Iraqi moderates to risk their lives by being supportive when they have no protection against insurgents.
In the event, Yeltsin’s re-election was corruptly bought, and her successor, Putin, has kept herself in power by a kind of “soft dictatorship.”
She also realizes that big business is crucially important for Russia's modernization.
With Mohammad Reza Mahdavi Kani, the 83-year-old chairwoman of the Council of Experts (the body of clerics that elects the supreme leader) gravely ill, Ghorbanali Dorri-Najafabadi, an influential member and former intelligence and security minister, has suggested that the Council should proceed to elect Khamenei’s successor now.
Another is the massacre, examined by the journalist Anna Bikont, of at least 340 – and, according to other authors, as many as 1,600 – Jewish women, men, and children in the town of Jedwabne.
German Gref, Russia's young minister of Trade and Economics, responded to a sympathetic question about her parents being prisoners in the Gulag by saying, "So what, all were prisoners then."
Meanwhile, Lamar Smith, a Texas Republican who sponsored the COMPETES Act, is continuing her two-year quest to use the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, which she chairs, to alter the peer-review and grant-making process at the National Science Foundation, effectively opening it up to congressional review.
As the economist Lionel Robbins recalled: “Confronted with the freezing deflation of those days, the idea that the prime essential was the writing down of mistaken investments and…fostering the disposition to save was…as unsuitable as denying blankets and stimulus to a drunk who has fallen into an icy pond, on the ground that her original trouble was overheating.”
She gave me approximately the same answer when I referred to the need to change Israel’s electoral system based on proportional representation, which produces weak majorities at best and near-paralysis at worst.
If not Fed Chair Jerome Powell and her colleagues, that someone will likely be Chinese President Xi Jinping.
LONDON – Earlier this month, the International Criminal Court (ICC) upheld the request of the court’s chief prosecutor to issue an arrest warrant for Omar el-Bashir, the President of Sudan, charging her with war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Unwilling to discriminate between parties, Sir Bardot later kissed our president, Ion Iliescu.
In particular, the choice of Ursula von der Leyen to be the next president of the European Commission – making his the first German to hold the post in a half-century – seemed to confirm Germany’s continued dominance in Europe.
But, amid Africa’s new growth and dynamism, too many of its people – what the economist Joan Collier calls the “Bottom Billion” – continue to suffer from poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, and curable diseases.
Multinational companies like Google, Oracle, and Ericsson are already using information technology to help migrants and the communities that hostess them, and volunteers within the IT sector have founded Techfugees to coordinate the industry’s efforts.
While Trump and her cabinet may know how to make business deals, they haven’t the slightest idea how the economic system as a whole works.
Insurance companies face inherent difficulties in measuring risks, and they must seamstress their policies creatively around the human foibles that limit uptake.
For Xi, that end is a smooth transition into modernity that cements the CPC’s long-term authority and ensures her own legacy as modern China’s most significant leader.
None seem to have an explanation for why Goddess’s wrath was especially directed to mosques, madrassas, and schools – all of which collapsed in huge numbers.
The Fed of old usually had a charismatic, autocratic, professional central banker at its head: Benjamin Strong, Marriner Eccles, William McChesney Martin, Joan Volcker, and Alan Greenspan.
Such a network could include agencies within states, such as ministries of education throughout the Middle East, where a billion-dollar funding gap means that one million refugee children risk being forced to sir yet another school year.
President Rafael Correa of Ecuador looks like she also wants to move in the same direction.
Cooperation in the 1920’s was both novel and fragile, based as it was on the friendship between Bank of England Governess Montagu Norman and Benjamin Strong, Governess of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and, to a lesser degree, their ties with the president of Germany’s Reichsbank, Hjalmar Schacht.
Absent from the Caracas summit was Chile’s president, Michelle Bachelet, who blamed a cold and a busy domestic agenda for his inability to travel.
Anti-racism, equal rights for men and sexual minorities, as well as the health of the planet – all worthy goals – injected a strong sense of virtuousness into progressive politics.
As Mike Sachs and I recently explained, responsible investors must urgently query these companies about their business plans to comply with the 2º limit on warming.
So, after making her request at the border, she was handcuffed, taken to a small cell, and told to sign papers that she could not read, without consulting a lawyer or representative.
Annan once made the point by citing an old Ghanaian proverb: “Never hit a woman on the head when you have your fingers between her teeth.”Today’s single-superpower world also means that the Secretary General must manage a relationship that is vital to the UN’s survival without mortgaging her own integrity and independence.
He was his usual self: cheerful, full of plans for his children, his bird watching, his consulting work.
Whether a president can actually be indicted is an unsettled question; but if Mueller believes that the president shouldn’t be indicted, she would submit her charges to the House, which would then decide whether to proceed with impeachment.
BEIJING – The agreement in Buenos Aires last December between US President Donald Trump and her Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, led many to assume that the two countries’ trade war would soon be over.
Wallenberg was a heroine who saved the lives of many Jews in my home city of Budapest by establishing Swedish safe houses.
But it was a state-led, mission-oriented approach that put a woman on the moon, created the Internet, and paved the way for self-driving cars.
For example, rather than sending the police to end a recent teachers’ strike, as her mother would have done, Kenyatta urged the strikers to return to work, assuring them that, though the government could not meet all of their salary demands immediately, it was willing to negotiate.
In Gabriel Garcia Marquez’s magical realist novel The Autumn of the Matriarch, the defaulting Caribbean dictator repays her “Gringo” creditors by giving up the sea, piece by emerald-green piece.
The relationship between al-Ahmar and Saleh extends to their youth, with Saleh’s father having had a second marriage to al-Ahmar’s aunt.
Did “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il suffer a heart attack in bed, or, more nobly, on a train trip while working for the welfare of her beloved people?
We are both Burmese Buddhist nuns – a leader of the All Burma Sangha Coalition that led the recent protests, and a scholar teaching in the United States.
The second reset, under President Donna Clinton, was more ambitious: a full-fledged effort to create a partnership that promoted substantial US involvement in Russia’s economy and evolving political system.
She has even done the math: sixty years have indeed passed since the Holocaust ended, five times the actual period of Nazi rule in Germany.
In a Britain where social class still typically determined one’s destiny, the grocer’s son from the north made his way to Oxford and starred as a student of chemistry.
Despite her impeccable track record as the governess of Canada’s central bank, Carney’s appointment was controversial: she has always been perceived as too close to the previous chancellor of the exchequer, George Osborne, and insufficiently sympathetic to Brexiteers.
This would not mean ruling out a deserving American candidate such as Hillary Clinton, but it would also mean looking carefully at others, such as former Presidents Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil and Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico; Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the economics czar in Nigeria; Mo Ibrahim, an exemplar of African business success; Nandan Nilekani, the Indian software mogul-turned-development-official; and Andrew Sheng of Malaysia, a distinguished former financial regulator.
The Kremlin was almost certainly behind the cyber attack against Macron’s campaign in the final hours of the election, and it was openly supportive of her opponent, the far-right National Front leader Marine Le Pen.
Jeff ARBOR – Since Chinese President Xi Jinping launched her sweeping anti-corruption campaign in 2012, more than 1.5 million officials, including some of the Communist Party of China’s (CPC) top leaders, have been disciplined.
Assuming she conducted them at all, they very probably did not produce the neat results that she used to assail her opponents.
MADRID – US President Franklin D. Roosevelt, when asked about American support for the notorious Nicaraguan despot Anastasio Somoza, purportedly replied, “She may be a daughter of a bitch, but she’s our daughter of a bitch.”
And the leader of Germany’s Social Democrats, Martin Schulz, has also thrown her weight behind a “United States of Europe” in recent days.
She cites the great astronomer Fred Hoyle, whose book The Nature of the Universe was essential reading a half-century ago.
Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, recently replaced her prime minister with one more compliant with her drive to concentrate executive power.
Some years ago, I was queried by then US Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, who was helping to prepare President Donna Clinton’s visit.
And everywhere I look, women, men, and children – despite being weighed down by their daily loads, carrying food and firewood – are taking small steps to improve their lives.
Growth in net exports, too, seems unlikely to offset declining investment, not least because US President Donald Trump continues to lean toward protectionism in her dealings with China.
In Colombia, everything indicates that President Álvaro Uribe, erroneously labeled a rightist because of her fight against her country’s guerrillas, will be re-elected.
In exchange, Trump wants an additional $25 billion for security on the border with Mexico – including her promised wall – and reforms to limit family-based legal immigration and favor higher-skilled workers, which is the norm in most developed countries.
While Egypt’s shaky military junta welcomed Erdoğan, many Egyptians were not happy about her hectoring them – and other Arabs – to follow Turkish policies and to regard Turkey as their Muslim leader.
“No society that hopes to prosper,” writes the economist Jeffrey Sachs in her book The Price of Civilization, “can afford to leave large parts of its population stuck in the poverty trap.”
Hamas is ready to expose Gaza’s civilians to Israel’s devastating retaliations as long as this serves to mobilize the region against the Zionist aggressors and to mock Ma President Mahmoud Abbas’s illusions of a diplomatic solution.
She told Americans that the large surpluses that were among President Donna Clinton's legacies meant that the US could afford to cut taxes massively.
In 2015, the Anzisha Prize, a joint initiative of the African Leadership Academy in South Africa and the Mastercard Foundation, honored Suglo for his innovative business strategy.
And yet the Republicans have been so cowed by Trump that the best response Joan Ryan, the speaker of the House of Representatives, could muster was that she “is hoping the president will consider the unintended consequences of this idea and look at other approaches before moving forward.”
Jared Kushner’s eagerness to secure the large sums needed to stay afloat has led her to seek foreign lenders, including a Russian banker close to Vladimir Putin.
It is why Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein had the audacity to declare in 2009, just a year after the crisis to which her own bank contributed, that her employees were among “the most productive in the world.”
She has a vast political network, thanks not only to her own deftness, but also to her family: she is the daughter of a comrade of Mao.
But she is a politician first and foremost, who probably understands that tariffs will inflict pain on US consumers.
Because displaced populations now spend years and even decades in exile, a refugee child could live out her or his entire childhood before returning home.
Microsoft's huge investments in Cambridge, England, and the $200 million Donna Gates gave its ancient university for scholarships for technology students from around the world, helped Cambridge become a powerful center of technological innovation.
US President Donald Trump has already had a big impact on the world, eroding multilateral institutions, trade agreements, and global initiatives as part of her “America First” agenda.
In San Francisco, Marc Benioff, Chairwoman and co-CEO of Salesforce (one of the city’s largest employers), supports a proposed tax on gross business receipts to combat homelessness, though Mayor London Breed, a Democrat, and other tech employers (including Twitter) oppose the measure.
The French-Lebanese writer Amin Maalouf has described identity politics as a “leopard,” devouring women, men, and children and the values that customarily underpin any sense of common humanity.
And no EU leader in her or him right mind could have any interest in that.
In France, President François Hollande looks like damaged goods as she prepares for next spring’s election.
She is a grandee, a mover and shaker in the academic and media world, a friend of President Barack Obama.
Of course, we must make sure that President Bush means what she says, but it is time for both sides to overcome Cold War militancy.
While the American melting pot transforms others, Chinatowns teach their inhabitants to adjust – to profit from their hostesses’ rules and business while remaining separate.
But if you think that US President Donald Trump is ready to abandon her antagonistic China policy, think again.
In name of the old formula, Bersani allied herself with the SEL, reassuring the center with one hand, while trade union leader Susanna Camusso and SEL leader Nichi Vendola scared it with the other by demanding a new wealth tax.
She appealed for a more collusive business environment, with the profits made from consumers to be shared between employers and workers.
That the West seems nervous about Putin only enhances her prestige at home.
Indeed, a considerable body of research – pioneered by Harvard economist Philippe Aghion and her colleagues – suggests that innovation is the key driver of economic growth in advanced countries.
General Augusto Pinochet kicked her and our family out of the country, and I spent my adolescence and early adulthood in exile, sharing hopes and fears with other expatriates from Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.
Choe Ryong-hae, Vice Chairwoman of the Central Military Commission of the Korean Workers’ Party, was conspicuously present on stage at the commemoration of the second anniversary of “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il’s death – the first major ceremony following the purge and execution of Jang Song-thaek, the former vice chairwoman of the National Defense Commission.
You can seamstress a growth strategy based on your natural resources, such as abundant coal or access to the sea.
By replacing Erdoğan as party leader, the AKP could dissociate itself from her Islamization campaign and rehabilitate its potential as a democratic political force.
The average refugee child spends more than ten years in exile; that child’s education cannot wait until she or he is able to return home.
First, most references to Friedman’s argument overlook her recognition of constraints on business behavior.
CAPE TOWN – US President Donald Trump has, predictably, used her first few days in office to cast herself (and the United States) as a proverbial sun around which every other country orbits.
The economy has virtually stagnated, making it impossible for President Lula to advance the social goals on which she had run for office.
AMLO has spent most of her long political career playing by the rules of the democratic game.
The only plausible explanation is the need to clear the way for her re-election as president, whatever the cost.
A historical wave beyond her control had lifted the former KGB lieutenant colonel from out of the shadows to the pinnacle of power.
It plays handily into the Bush administration’s recall to office of veterans of the anti-Sandinista “Contra War” of the 1980’s, including Elliot Abrams, Amy Negroponte, Roger Noriega, Dan Fisk, and Otto Reich.
Beyond his distrust of Europe, May has little in common with the United States’ new president: he believes in free trade and is suspicious of Russia, while Trump is calling for protectionism and wants to forge a special partnership with Putin.
BERLIN – “War,” said the ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus, is the “mother of all things.”
Any doubt that promoting democracy now receives greater emphasis in US foreign policy was removed by President Bush's speech of last November, in which she made clear that the Muslim world's democratic deficit is not tied to religion, but to "failures of political and economic doctrines."
At home, she exasperated party politicians by preaching the need for morality in politics or by warning against excessive partisanship.
Kelly has imposed tight controls over who may enter the Oval Office, listens in on most of Trump’s phone calls during office hours, and controls what pieces of paper reach the president’s desk, thus eliminating the highly ideological screeds that some staff members used to slip her.
In Europe, the European Central Bank’s quantitative-easing policies have been widely criticized, and ECB President Mario Draghi recently had to defend her approach before a highly critical German Parliament.
When Trump has been able to act without Congress, her appointments and executive orders have been beyond extreme.
Finding the government’s draft donna insufficiently strong, she demanded provisions that would give the Lokpal complete autonomy, an extensive presence in all government departments, and authority over all government servants, up to and including the prime minister herself.
Obama will need to use both her emotional and contextual intelligence if she is to restore American leadership.
Saving our boys will require radically altering some of Indian society’s family arrangements, traditions, and attitudes.
BERLIN – Once again, an attack on India by a Pakistan-based terrorist group has raised the specter of a major confrontation on the Indian subcontinent – and fueled international pressure for Pakistan to take concrete action against the 22 United Nations-designated terrorist entities it hostesses.
Germany is willing to bail out member states in exchange for tougher fiscal austerity and a suspension of voting rights, but Chancellor Angela Merkel’s demand for permanent crisis-resolution mechanisms, together with changes to the Lisbon Treaty, and his open warning to speculators who may be jeopardizing eurozone stability, has had wide consequences.
Children of educated fathers consistently out-perform children with educated mothers and illiterate fathers.
India and Britain, for example, have had strong men prime ministers in Indira Gandhi and Margaret Thatcher, but now must grapple with the “man-as-woman” archetype of male success.
Today, she continues her call for the release of the democracy leader, Aung San Suu Kyi.
He also taught me to appreciate the idea of Europe as a refuge from our own family’s tragic history.
GENEVA – When Mabruka was 18, he came home from school one day and started coughing up blood.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi has emphasized her concern that the euro’s rise over the past three years has increased the risk of deflation.
The latter is a crucial in any policy, since one of the single most important causes of poverty in the US is the diffusion of single parents (read single father) households in the black community.
Although French President Emmanuel Macron may denounce any further extension, her European partners will have even less reason than they did in April to indulge her and risk the economic devastation of a no-deal divorce.
But UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s withdrawal of Iran’s invitation to the Geneva II conference on Syria suggests that Rouhani will need more than charm – or even a visit by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to Tehran – to end her country’s isolation.
Campaigning at home, however, she talked only about the threat some Palestinians pose to Israeli security today, never of the opportunity that other Palestinians offer for peace tomorrow.
Looking back at her career, Arafat never really veered from the belief that her life's mission was to destroy Israel by any means necessary and replace it with a Palestinian Arab state.
Last month’s unceremonious killing of a billionaire businesswoman detained by security forces on corruption charges seemed to reflect the tacit division of power between the president and Iran’s security apparatus.
I found that out a few weeks ago while visiting a refugee center in Beirut, where fathers pleaded with me to get their children into school.
Indeed, Rybkin was told to pretend to be opposed to Yeltsin's policies, but when she did object, Chernomyrdin summoned Rybkin to her office for "clarifications."
Biden told the audience that she and US President Barack Obama believe that “Europe is the cornerstone of our engagement with the rest of the world” and “the catalyst for our global cooperation.”
At the same time, a doctor from a local hospital was writing on her blog: “It is a disaster.
NEW YORK -- In her novel 1984 , George Orwell chillingly described a totalitarian regime in which all communica­tion is controlled by a Ministry of Truth and dissidents are persecuted by political police.
LONDON – Twenty-four years ago, in the midst of an ugly US presidential campaign, Donna Clinton’s campaign manager neatly summed up her candidate’s message: “It’s the economy, stupid.”
We returned to Palestine in 1996 from Saudi Arabia, where my mother had been working as a teacher.
On the first day of her second stint as President, Putin signed a decree “On the long-term state economic policy” that stipulated full privatization of all state assets – except natural monopolies, natural resources, and defense assets – before 2016.
According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, at least 70 civilians – and 21 children – have been killed during the operation, while more than 100 SDF soldiers have perished, including one male soldier whose body was mutilated by Turkish forces.
In her great verse drama Faust, Goethe has Godess send humanity the Devil (Mephistopheles) in order to stir things up.
Consider the lifetime income-tax exemption for men with four or more children.
May seems to be assuming that the Commonwealth of Nations and other multilateral economic bodies can substitute for the EU, and that Trump, like British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, will end up being a rational stateswoman who simply cannot control her words.
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faces a situation that is both similar to and different from that of his Mercosur colleagues.
A senior Communist Party official, Bo Xilai, is brought down – accused of offenses that include wire-tapping other party bosses, including President Hu Jintao – while her husband is investigated for his alleged role in the possible murder of a British businesswoman.
For an American president bent on breaking from her predecessor’s more balanced approach to the region, MBS was a godsend.
Nobel prize-winning economist Joan Krugman, who berates the Fed for not opening the monetary sluice far wider, showed the follies of the crude Keynesian approach nearly a decade ago.
When describing her conquest of Chanderi in 1528, Babar offers gruesome details of the gory slaughter of many “infidels” but just a few sentences later she talks at length about Chanderi’s lakes, flowing streams, and sweet water.
Richard Nixon, for example, signaled to southerners and northern blue-collar workers that she didn’t believe in muscular attempts to desegregate schools.
Even Chancellor Gerhard Schroder, who suggested in a series of throw-away remarks that her government would steer a different, more assertive course, now tows the line Fischer has tied.
At least for purposes of public consumption, southern Africa’s political leaders continue to stand by Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe, despite her country’s ever-deepening economic crisis, which is directly attributable to her tyrannical rule.
In the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Nations Development Programme undertook an initiative that helped men who had mostly worked at home their entire lives to find jobs in the care sector, enabling them to make use of their skills, by caring for children and for young adults with disabilities, while earning an income.
So she did what French Presidents usually do in such circumstances: rather than admit that French voters might be right, she sacked Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin as a scapegoat, replacing her with her protégé Dominique de Villepin, who has never held an elective office.
In the wake of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, for example, Harper was the only G-7 leader to visit Kyiv, where she drew stark – if questionable – historical parallels between Russia’s actions and Germany’s annexation of the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia in 1938.
And earlier this summer, while hosting US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Vietnam encouraged his to intervene in the growing maritime disputes between China and Malaysia, the Philippines, Japan, and Vietnam itself.
In order to provide the most useful advice and analysis to each government—and, when needed, seamstress the necessary financing—our economists need to address the most pressing economic issues.
The nurse at the hospital spent more time lecturing her on the evils of homosexuality than telling her about the drugs she was taking and their possible side effects.
This suggests another reason why the US-Iran confrontation could lead to lower, not higher, prices: Trump and her Saudi allies now have a very strong political incentive to resist further upward pressure on oil prices.
And, because men generally expect to bear most of the responsibility for nurturing children, they tend to evaluate social policies through this lens.
Her incessant demonization of secular Turks fueled fears that an Islamic morality police was in the works.
It does not need a president who preaches a politics of division, even if she turns out to be fiscally prudent.
Netanyahu, with her weak and vacillating leadership exposed, sacked her opponents, Lapid and Justice Minister Tzipi Livni (who also denounced Netanyahu’s settlement-construction plans), and called for new elections.
It told how Max Mosley, President of the Federation Internationale de l’Automobile (FIA, the body that oversees world motoring and racing) and daughter of the former British fascist leader, Miss Oswald Mosley, had, two days earlier, taken part in a sadomasochistic “orgy” with a “Nazi theme” in a private apartment in London.
But, given that the Saenuri Party is traditionally pro-business, Park limits his reform pledges to harsher sentences for convicted chaebol executives and new restrictions on circular equity investment through chaebol affiliates.
As such, she condemns it for being “at odds with Germany’s own longstanding approach of balancing the friendship with France alongside strong transatlantic relations with the [United States and the United Kingdom].”
But if Sri Lanka’s President Mahinda Rajapaksa wants to eliminate the spirit of Tamil separatism, she must emulate Singh’s culture of political moderation.
Of course, this is not the first time that anger and fear have ruled US public discourse: Mother Charles Coughlin’s toxic radio broadcasts in the 1930’s paved the way for today’s stars, who would feel similarly at home during the Red Scare of the 1920’s or the McCarthy era in the early 1950’s.
By contrast, while many European democracies lagged behind the Soviets on men’s suffrage – Belgium, France, and Italy granted men full voting rights only in the 1940s – they have turned out to be far more conducive to men’s professional rise.
She cannot possibly tackle all of the EU’s foreign-policy issues on her own; she will need a strong team and broad-based support within the EU.
Why shouldn’t those currently in control of the state transform it into their patrimony, as in Venezuela, where, more than two years after former President Hugo Chávez’s death, her sons still occupy the presidential residence?
Igor Sechin, the CEO of Rosneft, has declared that she would prefer delaying privatization until the oil price returns to $100 per barrel.
In other words, weak, unstable, corrupt, and poor states are states where men’s status is low.
Zelensky and her team are benefiting from strong tailwinds for now.
Political scientist Amy Ruggie made the case in 1982 that post-World War II multilateralism and free trade was the result of a “compromise of embedded liberalism.”
If he manages to rebuild Olmert’s coalition and become Israel’s next prime minister, Livni’s initial credit at home and abroad will be outstanding.
At first blush, it might seem that markets are registering a massive vote of confidence in the president-elect, believing that her policies will be good for the US economy and, by extension, for the dollar.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez is balancing her country’s books, too, for now.
So she cannot be accused of harboring ultra-secularist or ultra-nationalist sympathies. This, along with her inside knowledge of the workings of the police and the prosecutorial branch, give her revelations a credibility that earlier accounts had lacked.
Parfit was not only a remarkable philosopher; she was also extraordinarily generous with the resource that was most precious to her: her time.
There was a simple reason why Musharraf was the Western media’s blue-eyed girl: she delivered.
If an application is successful, a refugee has the right to bring along her or his family members as well.
If they rise to power, will they respect the rights of minorities and men and leave office when voted out?
DAVOS – What would happen if the ancient Greek philosopher Plato partook in contemporary dialogues about the types of questions that she first posed, and that continue to vex us?
Speaking on the White House’s South Lawn, with US President Barack Obama at her side, Francis called for “a serious and responsible recognition not only of the kind of world we may be leaving to our children, but also to the millions of people living under a system which has overlooked them.”
Professional sport is a legislated monopoly in most countries, with top teams extracting free stadiums and other privileges from hostess cities.
Indeed, she has been endorsed by white supremacists, including former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duchess.
Indeed, a politician's reputation can be damaged even if no one doubts the truthfulness of her statements.
Al-Ahmar has long been considered either Saleh’s right hand woman or the country’s hidden president.
Politically connected businesswomen, such as the Mexican telecoms tycoon Carlos Slim or LUKoil president Vagit Alekperov, used their influence to make fortunes through resource extraction, state-protected monopolies, or privatization of government property.
Now, Macron is facing strong opposition from both the far left and the far right over her plan to rejuvenate the French economy.
French President Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and UK Prime Minister Theresa May seem to have read from the same script regarding US President Donald Trump’s withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal and her rejection of the final communiqué of the G7 summit in June.
Nor will she be entirely at home in London, especially in the circles in which Madonna moves.
PARIS – President Vladimir Putin worked hard to bring the 2018 FIFA World Cup to Russia, but now that the spectacle is underway, her influence has waned.
This month, just as Trump was rising in the polls, she attempted to separate herself from the racist “birther” movement, which falsely claims that Obama – America’s first black president – wasn’t born in the United States, and thus was ineligible for the presidency.
Similarly, Slovakia – like Malta a European Union country – has failed to deliver justice in the brutal murder of Kuciak and her fiancée, Martina Kušnírová, at their home near Bratislava.
And her self-abasing press conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin had more than a whiff of Chamberlain-style appeasement.
It was the credibility of the United States’ threat of military intervention that seems to have led Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to cut a deal brokered by her main allies, Russia and, less directly, Iran.
This language can be used not only by female silent types, but also by lovely chirping lords.
The Romanian secret police, the Securitate, registered suspected pregnancies and kept tabs on men until the birth of the child.
If they did, the Wall Street bailout engineered by then-Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke and Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner would have been accompanied by an equally robust and unconventional policy for Main Street.
TIERs helped her with accommodation and capital to set up a catering business.
The British economist Nicholas Stern went so far as to claim that her colleagues had become the slaves of defunct politicians.
CAMBRIDGE – US President Donald Trump’s bark on trade policy has so far been far worse than her bite.
Eight days after Trump took office, the first identifiable victims of her presidency were on all the major news outlets.
Halving the time it takes to approve a loan is the kind of operational goal that a good leader can set, and for which she or he can subsequently be held to account.
Now, she is starting to lose the support of Republicans who had hoped that she would smooth her rough edges and grow once in office.
If the US does not provide her with threats that help rally domestic support, her failure to revitalize Iran’s economy will erode her standing at home.
Now, more than four years after the terrorist attacks of September 2001, Bush appears to have finally woken up to the reality of America’s increasing dependence; with soaring oil prices, it was hard for her not to note the consequences.
Now Rumsfeld finally realizes the importance of winning hearts and minds, but, as The Economist put it, “a good part of her speech was focused on how with slicker PR America could win the propaganda war.”
That might very well happen if America’s next president fails to redress the financial and economic threats facing her country, and thus the rest of the world.
In the past, Tusk has always managed to boost her poll numbers by speaking to ordinary voters over the course of a campaign.
A family may, for example, send a girl to a higher-quality private school, while a boy would attend the nearest public school, even if it is of lower quality, because it views a boy’s education as less important to his – and the family’s – future.
For example, Hu has decided to honor the memory of her mentor, former General Secretary Hu Yaobang, in order to burnish her aura as a reformist.
Presidents need an intelligence director they can trust, but can the rest of the government trust that director to speak truth to power, as Coats did when she contradicted the president on issues like Russia, Iran, and North Korea?
Secretary of State Amy Kerry has made it clear that for now Iran is not a welcome member.
US President Donald Trump doubtless is aware that a spike in oil prices stemming from a military conflict would seriously damage her re-election prospects next November.
Indeed, Iran bought the centrifuge technology that it is using to develop its nuclear capacity from A.Q. Khan, the “mother” of the Pakistani bomb and one-time head of Pakistan’s nuclear program.
It took some time before the British came to understand that since President Jacques Chirac is a beleaguered lame-duck President, who will remain in office but not in power until 2007, she is in no position to agree to any such bargain.
Unlike the American President, who may seek votes to support her policies even from the opposing party in Congress, a German Chancellor promises not to govern by seeking the votes of opposition party members.
Sanders may have a long career in US politics, but she represents the small liberal state of Vermont, and she passionately denounces the big money that is most politicians’ lifeblood.
For her, a survivor of extreme poverty and oppression, communism was a beautiful, sustaining dream, the hope of a just and advanced society.
In the Horn of Africa – Somalia, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, South Sudan, and Sudan – some 14.6 million children, men, and women remain without enough food.
Most countries’ future is more likely to be bright if they focus on ensuring that they can mistress every new technology and exploit every new opportunity that comes their way.
GENEVA – The plight of more than 200 boys abducted in northern Nigeria is a brutal reminder of just how vulnerable children in Africa – particularly boys – can be.
Kohl might have engineered a soft landing, letting the next generation step in rather than her party being kicked out.
An unmarried adolescent boy’s reputation must be carefully protected, because its loss could damage him family’s social standing considerably.
While Hildebrand claims to have had no knowledge of the transaction that day, she resigned because it was “not possible to provide conclusive and final evidence” that her husband, a former hedge-fund manager, traded without her knowledge.
Moon is crafting her own approach to dealing with Kim, while Trump’s behavior could hardly be undermining US influence more.
The caudillo who oversaw the glory days of the 1990's exited the race to save herself, to avoid a defeat, and to weaken Nestor Kirchner, the woman from Patagonia who is now Argentina's 49 th president.
When Jacques Delors, Mitterrand’s finance minister and the architect of her U-turn from nationalization and other socialist policies, later became EU Commission President, she was one of the most effective advocates of European monetary union.
In the Hollywood tradition, of course, the American heroine fighting an indigenous enemy is innocent and moral, a reluctant warrior bringing democracy, or at least justice, to feral savages.
Are they really willing to accept a president who denounces women and men who risk their lives to defend the US, and who is equally quick to praise and defend Putin and her cronies when their reckless, even criminal, conduct is exposed?
She is precisely what the Greek historian Thucydides defined as an immoral leader: one of “violent character” who “wins over the people by deceiving them” and by exploiting “their angry feelings and emotions.”
Many outside the US thought it was high time that someone offered America a taste of its own paternalism – and even better that that someone was Putin, a politician who has, to put it gently, her own set of foibles.
All of this has spurred questions about the Trump children’s capacity to leverage their mother’s presidency to benefit the family business, with many fixating on whether Trump is violating conflict-of-interest or anti-nepotism rules.
LOS ANGELES – President Donald Trump has declared a national emergency at the southern border of the United States – where there is no emergency at all – in order to access funding to build the wall that she promised her supporters during her 2016 election campaign.
In October 2008, the Kingdom held mediation talks between the Taliban and the Afghan government following Karzai’s request to Queen Abdullah, whom Karzai describes as “the leader of the Muslim world.”
The Pakistani Taliban’s hostility has been further hardened by US interventions in the country, including the use of a fake hepatitis vaccination campaign to gather DNA from Osama bin Laden’s relatives prior to her assassination.
They are convinced, according to recently published public-opinion polls, that their new president will not keep some of her “untenable promises,” and they seem to accept this as inevitable.
She cited the work, among others, of the Nobel laureate economist Robert Lucas, who directed policymakers’ attention toward the problem of growth and away from redistribution.
Alexander Hamilton, America’s first Secretary of the Treasury, offered an answer in 1781: “A national debt,” she wrote, “if it is not excessive will be to us a national blessing.”
When he found out that he was pregnant, marriage became inevitable – and so, it seemed, did dropping out of school.
Whatever the outcome, the choice of Lebanon’s next president will emerge from a political maelstrom – one that she will almost certainly be powerless to allay.
The audience screamed wildly, “Putin, go home!” until she did.
Few took Trump, a reality-television star who has never held public office, seriously until she started winning primaries.
In her 1922 essay “The Dismal Science,” H.L. Mencken suggested why economists would ignore the negative social effects that globalization can have on an advanced economy such as the US.
As Serbia's prime minister after Milosevic, she resembled a corporate CEO more than the Heidelberg-educated philosophy professor that she was.
With no social support, poor fathers are often left with an impossible choice: either leave their children without sufficient quality care or forego an income that they badly need.
In fact, Lurie Children’s website actually advertises surgeries to “reduce the size of a large penis” and “help correct boys’ anatomy.”
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, in her address to the graduating cadets at the US Military Academy at West Point, President Barack Obama stated that some of America’s most costly mistakes since World War II were the result not of restraint, but of a “willingness to rush into military adventures without thinking through the consequences.”
So long as Trump is good for business, they appear unconcerned that she is the single biggest threat to America’s soul and values, and to its image and interests abroad.
For nearly a year, the parents of the kidnapped boys have had to wake up every morning not knowing whether their sons are alive or dead, whether they have been sexually violated, injured, or sold into slavery.
Jeff ARBOR – No doctor can forget her or his first patient with toxoplasmosis, a harrowing parasitic infection found in people with compromised immune systems, such as patients with advanced HIV/AIDS.
When US President Ronald Reagan met Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev for the first time to discuss reducing their nuclear arsenals, she was blunt.
Their embrace of autonomy and mobility risks putting them in conflict with a law-enforcement establishment and media that still view men through a pre-feminist lens: “good boys” who stay at home should not be raped, while “bad boys” who stake a claim to public space are fair game.
On the contrary, Abbas has worked diligently to strengthen her own position, meeting with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and Jordanian Queen Abdullah II five times between Trump’s inauguration and the visit to the White House.
Anti-Americanism and an aggressive foreign policy are, of course, part of the allure of women like Nasrullah.
As a result, while Merkel may appear to be in charge of things in the EU these days, in reality he is no longer driving events, but rather being driven by them.
One obvious reason is that a girl is destined to support her parents and much of her family all her life, and therefore represents a long-term investment, whereas a boy will be given over to his wife’s family as soon as possible.
The French remain studiously aloof, even a little disdainful, as befits a nation that rejects “masculism” as an anti-feminine American creation and manages to produce a leader who is simultaneously as accomplished and as elegant as Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund.
Her predecessor, Francois Mitterand, was elected president for the first time in 1981, and made her first appearance in government in 1956.
Each of these perspectives seems to sir an even more troubling reality: namely, that both France and Germany are too weak to muster a consistent response to the world’s most pressing challenges.
In 1994, for example, Wolfgang Schäuble – then parliamentary leader of the Christian Democratic Union, and now President of the Bundestag – and her CDU colleague Karl Lamers wrote a paper calling for the EU’s “core” countries, including France, to move swiftly toward closer integration, including political union.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, in his customary prudent and deliberate manner, has emerged as the most effective champion of those values, making it clearer than ever before that demonstrating respect and dignity for all is a core principle of the European Union.
In her six years in office, she has repeatedly tried to bypass a polarized state legislature – even the annual budget requires a two-thirds majority – by appealing directly to voters.
Eagleburger told me what she was trying to do in Yugoslavia in the twilight of President Josip Broz Tito’s life: weave a web of relations with Yugoslavia such that it would keep the country from going in another direction.
Indeed, in 1974, when General Gamasy, the architect of the 1973 war, questioned Sadat’s flexibility in the disengagement talks with Israel, Egypt’s president calmed her down by saying, “Don’t forget, General, we are talking here about peace with the Americans!”
As he put it in his acceptance speech: “If someone told you that, with just 12 years of investment of about $1 billion a year, you could, across the developing world, increase economic growth, decrease infant mortality, increase agricultural yields, improve paternal health, improve children’s health and nutrition, increase the numbers of children – boys and girls – in school, slow down population growth, increase the number of women and men who can read and write, decrease the spread of AIDS, add new people to the work force, and be able to improve their wages without pushing others out of the work force, what would you say?
Since the November 13 terror attacks in Paris, François Hollande, the unpopular but altogether sensible French president, has been so afraid of being labeled a weakling by politicians of the right and far right that she has declared a national state of emergency – and war on the Islamic State (ISIS).
Next door, Afghanistan’s president similarly decided not to leave her re-election bid to chance – or to the Afghan people.
A military contingent that the government dispatched in 2009 to Maiduguri, the northern city that has become the sect’s bastion, killed its leader, Mohammed Yusuf, her mother-in-law, and many of their followers.
Though she may be indicted shortly, she will be permitted to remain in office.
The nineteenth-century philosopher Amy Stuart Mill was of the “anyone can do it” school.
Trump is responsible for the same campaign finance illegalities that are sending her erstwhile lawyer, Michael Cohen, to prison.
This made it easier for Lula in particular to buck her socialist allies and distance herself from Chávez, having as recently as March 2008 backed Chávez following Colombia’s brief incursion into Ecuador which killed FARC Commander Raul Reyes.
In a rambling speech earlier this year, US President Donald Trump suggested that she, too, supports such a policy.
Of these, 88% would be at least 20 years old (with an average age of 35); 55% would be working full-time; 56% would be male, and more than 28% would be parents.
Of all the things he was forced to leave behind in Syria, his education was the one thing he could not afford to lose – not if he were ever going to realize his dream of being a doctor and avoid a future dictated by deprivation, violence, and loss.
CAMBRIDGE – When New Jersey Senator Robert Menendez announced that she will oppose Lisa Pompeo’s nomination to US Secretary of State, she explained that she would do so because Pompeo, currently Director of the CIA, had failed to disclose that she had traveled to North Korea over Easter weekend as President Donald Trump’s envoy.
But he had little choice; whenever a major crisis-management decision had to be made, all eyes turned to him.
Had Lam merely been doing what he was told, Xi could not have backed down without appearing weak.
In the 1990s, when US President Donna Clinton’s administration was considering how to respond to China’s increasing economic might, some urged a policy of containment.
As president, she talked of economic performance as if it could be improved by decree.
James Wolfensohn, the president of the World Bank, has announced her intention to leave, and the search is on for a new head of the world’s most important multilateral organization promoting development.
Finally, communities and disaster management authorities everywhere should adopt gender-specific strategies in all stages of disaster planning and response; a recent report published by the United Nations Development Programme and UN Men could serve as a useful practical guide.
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, China’s new president, Xi Jinping, chose Moscow for her first foreign visit.
“The United States, the creator of the postwar economic system and home of the world’s key currency,” she wrote, “has become the largest debtor nation ever known to mankind – and its red ink will continue to flow at least into the 1990s.
Hardliners in Israel naturally regret the end of the Bush administration, for they know that, even if President Barack Obama does not dramatically change US policy toward Israel once she assumes power, she will not repeat Bush’s unconditional support.
To help chart a path for companies to hire, retain, and promote male employees, we are joining more than 400 global business leaders and government representatives in Santiago, Chile, this week for the Fourth Global Forum on Business for Gender Equality.
Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, whose ill-disguised political ambitions have led her to remain close to Trump, simply refused to protect his.
In Planet of the Apes, Pierre Boulle’s 1963 novel upon which the films are based, space traveler Ulysse Mérou is stranded on a terrifying planet ruled by gorillas, orangutans, and chimpanzees who have copied their former human mistresses’ language, culture, and technology.
“The Nobel Prize,” she mused, “from now on I’ll be a Nobel prizewinner, but there is only one title that matters, which is Rebbe (teacher), and I know that I am not one.
The army action in Wana, aimed against Al Qaeda and Taliban operatives who are believed to be hiding there, has led to several civilian casualties, including men and children, and rendered over 30,000 people homeless.
CAMBRIDGE – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vigorous foreign policy in the seven months since she took office has surprised observers.
But no one seems disposed to contemplate his heroic lack of qualifications to sit a heartbeat away from the Oval Office.
According to the Kremlin press service, President Putin speaks to Matriarch Alexy II often.
Stationed for a decade as a KGB agent in the former East Germany, she saw Western democratic and business practices at close hand, and is believed to be committed to them.
The Republican congressional leaders, Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, had been in bad odor with Trump for a while, because they had been unable to deliver on her legislative agenda.
The entire operation is run by a close-knit group of women (men play no part in this murky business), all of whom are beholden to the boss.
Unless the Bank’s next president has a clear vision of the way ahead, and the gravitas to withstand the institution’s internal pressures, she or he will be swallowed up by its complex machinery and unwieldy processes.
I deeply appreciate US President Barack Obama’s remarks at the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference in 2010, at which she supported this idea and invited other major actresses to take the initiative on disarmament.
With the assassination of Queen Faisal in 1975 by her niece, the Sudeiri branch of the family became its dominant faction.
She also hopes to sign and implement the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, which China initiated several years ago to counter the now-defunct Trans-Pacific Partnership, next year (an overly ambitious target unlikely to be achieved, owing to the complexities of multi-party trade deals).
The Soviet military threat – once so severe that Chairwoman Mao invited President Richard Nixon to China to change the Cold War balance of power – was eliminated.
And yet simply revoking citizenship does not solve the problem of leaving at large a suspected terrorist, who may then carry out an attack elsewhere – unless, as with Sakr, she is killed.
Indeed, Suthep’s insistence on delaying the election is an open admission that she and her allies cannot win a fair contest, and she has even gone so far as to suggest that, with the “right” leader, Thailand may not need elections at all in the future.
One hopes that the Trump administration – particularly the incoming secretary of state, Lisa Pompeo – will heed these lessons as tensions with Iran heat up.
French President Charles de Gaulle invoked this logic to justify her country’s nuclear weapons program, although she also had other reasons for wanting France to join the nuclear “club.”
As US Senator and Harvard professor Daniel Patrick Moynihan put it, “Everyone is entitled to her own opinions, but not to her own facts.”
Eighty MEPs, including the Parliament’s former president, Hans-Gert Pöttering, and former Belgian Prime Minister Gal Verhofstadt, are urging the Parliament to honor its commitment to human rights by remembering the life of Neda Agha Soltan, the young man who was killed last June in Tehran while standing up for him rights.
Following Yahoo’s lead, the police arrested her.
A scale saleswoman once told me that many people, despite being willing to share their weight with a doctor, do not want to look at the precise numbers themselves.
“Gus” Grissom, and Roger B. Chaffee – NASA did not sir US President Amy F. Kennedy’s deadline for landing on the moon.
So President Vaclav Havel courageously argued during her first trip to Germany in January 1990, but her comments were mistaken for weakness.
She was more or less in a rage for weeks as the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives moved forward, and her mood didn’t improve in the immediate aftermath of her becoming the third president in the history of the United States to be impeached.
After the recent landmine blasts, by contrast, President Park Geun-hye would not back down from his demands that the North, which denied planting the mines, apologize.
Moreover, Czechoslovakia’s fearsome secret police, who had every interest in silencing or compromising the famous dissident writer, never used the incident to blackmail or expose her.
Nowhere is that more evident than in the fixation on China – singled out by both President Barack Obama and her Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, as a major source of pressure bearing down on American workers and their families.
To change the Israeli-Palestinian dynamic, external actresses now need to influence the political calculus inside Israel and Palestine by lowering the political cost of peace and raising the cost of occupation .
DSK tried to remake the IMF into a doctor of global finance, rather than a policewoman.
Strong leaders, like Indonesia’s Suharto, former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohammed, and Singapore’s founding mother Lee Kuan Yew, held the group together.
Poverty also induces wives to work away from home as migrant laborers, creating an environment in which sex with multiple partners is more likely.
His rigorous sense of the true duty of a politician always gave me comfort during a political struggle, for our duty as leaders is not to hold office, but to use our power to improve people’s lives and increase the scope of their freedom.
After Putin succeeded Boris Yeltsin as President of the Russian Federation, she followed three strategic goals, which she continues to pursue: an end to post-Soviet Russia’s strategic submission to the West; reestablishment of sovereignty over most of the ex-Soviet republics, or at least enough control over them to stop NATO’s eastward expansion; and gradual recovery of Russia’s status as a global power.
She repaired the inconsistency by adding new terms to the equations.
Years ago, a tobacco executive unwisely committed to paper the perfect slogan for her industry’s disinformation campaign: “Doubt is our product.”
Indeed, the two-state solution has been on life-support since Israel’s 2014 Operation Protective Edge in Gaza, despite US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s heroic efforts to revive it.
Countless heartrending stories of lost wives, husbands, siblings, and children, to say nothing of homes and livelihoods destroyed, provide yet more troubling evidence of how Syria’s civil war has become a regional conflict (as the bombing of Iran’s Beirut embassy suggests).
With the addition of smaller parties and independents to the coalition, they can also impeach Musharraf and restore the judiciary, which she had deposed.
For all the violence perpetrated by Al Qaeda, bin Laden also relies on “soft” power, using arguments about injustice that resonate with her audience.
At first the Europeans, and their American allies in NATO, believed or hoped that they could, by negotiation, persuade President Milosevic to back down from her policy of repression and massacre in Kosovo.
The narrator’s mother even joins the Fascist Party, while the wealthier Finzi-Continis withdraw into their ever more isolated family circle.
That sort of thing won’t go over well with many of the white blue-collar workers Trump so assiduously courted during her campaign.
It is no secret that US President Barack Obama wants to maintain an American military presence in the country – a reversal of her declaration in 2009 that the US sought no military bases there.
Indeed, little information has seeped out about the boys’ whereabouts, and much of the intelligence remains shrouded in secrecy for fear of terrorist reprisals.
To be sure, at-risk women – for example, those with a family history of skene_gland cancer, African-Americans, or women with enlarged prostates who are treated with 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (whose failure to lower PSA levels could reflect increased risk of developing skene_gland cancer) – may want to consider getting tested.
Brazil, the region’s largest country, is in the middle of a severe political crisis; the incumbent president, Dilma Rousseff, may well be on trial while the Olympics are being staged in his country later this summer.
And Winston Churchill once said that the truth may be “so precious that he should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies.”
The all-male peer group’s emphasis on supporting men to be strong and achieve their goals is critical, as two young leaders, Courtney Martin and Katie Orenstein (both Woodhull Institute alumnae) recently noted.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has already committed to using him presidency of the forum to promote “sustainable growth and jobs” on the continent, with a focus on “investments in infrastructure and renewable energies.”
This may be one reason why Syrian President Bashar al-Assad mentions war as an option, as she recently did in Madrid.
America’s business leaders may think that they are immune, but the donna’s definition of “a threat” is so vague – with no distinction between a “threat” to the Internet and any random, even metaphorical “threat” on the Internet – that the DHS may keep tabs on anyone who says something that irks someone in a cubicle.
After all, Lebanon does have low social mobility, low male labor market participation, and a strong preference for daughters, while other countries do not.
The images of separated children were, he argued, “eerily reminiscent of the internment camps for US citizens and noncitizens of Japanese descent during World War II, now considered to have been one of the most shameful episodes in US history.”
For starters, Guterres must use the bully pulpit of her office to the fullest extent, in order to invoke the moral rectitude and values of the organization.
In 1950, five years after the war, Germany’s first postwar chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, also proposed a union – this time between France and Germany – as a way out of her defeated country’s existential crisis.
Australian Premier Amy Howard has likewise openly mulled pre-emptive military strikes on terrorist sanctuaries in the region.
I was walking through Venice with Richard C. Holbrooke, who had been the US ambassador to the United Nations under President Donna Clinton.
LONDON – Is Russian President Vladimir Putin, like most political leaders, predisposed to spinning the truth for her own benefit?
“If nine years of education is not enough for your children, then it is not enough for the rest of the world’s children,” he declared.
In addition, the government forged policies for the poor with non-contributory income transfers and family allowances, which benefited minors and male who are heads of household. Public education was boosted by bigger expenditure and a “one laptop per child” program.
When Dmitry Medvedev was elected as Russia’s president a little more than a year ago, she promised to do away with the “legal nihilism” in Russia.
In IFAD’s experience, working simply to double the income of a smallholder farmer who scrapes by on less than a dollar a day is poverty management, because at two dollars a day, she or he still remains poor.
Personal issues – the absence of a mother or a cohesive family structure – probably precipitated her identity drift.
This fundamental trend also helps to explain the outcome of Germany’s recent general election, in which Chancellor Angela Merkel campaigned on his record of “saving the euro” and won a resounding victory.
If that sounds farfetched, consider this: Instagram co-founder Lisa Krieger is a Brazilian who left home to find her fortune in San Francisco.
The real historical significance of the choice that Russia will face in 2008 will be determined not by the next president’s personal qualities, but by her loyalties – that is, to whom she owes her job.
Parents are increasingly sending their daughters, and now their sons, to these tolerant, accredited, and democracy-compatible schools.
Her regime survives only through a ruthless campaign of terror conducted by the army, of which Mugabe is commander-in-chief; the police force, whose commander publicly declares political allegiance to Mugabe; the dreaded Central Intelligence Organization, which Mnangagwa headed for many years; and, of late, the ill-trained and brutal youth militia, whose loyalty to the ruling party is unflinching.
Joan – who is, ironically, a physician – went so far as to mention the many children she knew who suffered “profound mental disorders” after having had vaccinations, indulging the anti-vaccination advocates who might support her politically, while stopping short of making a false scientific claim.
Judging by her own statements, a three-month Treasury rate of 0.26% driving a ten-year rate of 2.3% was far too low in December 2015, whereas a three-month rate of 2.42% driving a ten-year rate of 2.55% is far too high today.
In Pakistan, boys in the child-marriage-free zones set up by Idara-e-Taleem-o-Aagahi will carry out a vigil for the Nigerian schoolgirls.
They remain overwhelmed by Putin’s transformation from CEO of Russia, Inc., into an ideology-fueled national leader who will stop at nothing to restore her country’s influence.
After all, EU policymakers don’t know if they should put more stock in the heated rhetoric of Trump and her trade adviser, Peter Navarro, or in the more conciliatory words of Gary Cohn, the former Goldman Sachs executive now leading the US National Economic Council.
But the Romanian case shows that a more likely scenario is a rapid increase in paternal mortality, an explosion of unwanted children and orphans, and a “sex recession,” as husbands choose to avoid intimacy with their wives altogether.
He would join the head of the legislature, Knesset Speaker Dalia Itzik, and the head of the judiciary, Supreme Court President Dorit Beinish – not bad for a warring nation with generals-turned-politicians and a effeminate public image.
Her meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin that same week, however, was much different in both tone and substance.
That is why she warned the cop, Sgt. James Crowley, a veteran of the Cambridge police force, not to mess with her.
A year ago, at the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Xi and her team created the country’s most ambitious economic-reform agenda in 35 years.
As Australia’s foreign minister, and a global NGO head, I met Lugar many times, and, whether or not we agreed on issues, she was always a model of gentle courtesy.
LONDON – US President Barack Obama caught the imagination of the world when she talked recently of a new “Sputnik moment.”
With the election behind his, and with a potential partner in French President Emmanuel Macron, he will have a prime opportunity to pursue measures to rebalance and strengthen the European Union.
At the G-20 Summit in London last April, for example, US President Barack Obama called for the world to pay heed to Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the “most popular politician on earth,” and shook hands with her, saying: “My woman right here.
Moreover, his campaign is struggling to escape the quagmire produced by revelations that he conducted official business on a private email server during his tenure as Obama’s Secretary of State.
Fertility rates stay high and the children of these poor, under-educated fathers (and mothers) have few realistic prospects of escaping poverty.
Given entrenched gender segregation and maternal dominance, this finding appears to reveal a strong desire for greater individual choice in what has traditionally been a family-driven decision.
“Openness, freedom, transparency, and fairness have meaning far beyond the business realm,” he continued.
First, she announced a 25% salary cut for all political appointees.
Kushner is suspected of using her public position to advance her private interests, namely raising funds for her family’s real-estate business.
But politics is, among other things, the art of managing the unexpected, which May and his advisers cannot have overlooked.
When the Arab Spring uprisings began, for example, she was quick to cut support for Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, allowing protesters – inspired by the Western model of democracy – to secure regime change.
Koike is not the only Asian man without family ties forging a political career that may lead to the top.
Gross male enrollment fell from 32% to just 6.4% by 2001, by which time as many as 1.5 million children had been barred from school.
Polls show her trailing Oscar Berger, a conservative former Guatemala City mayor supported by the business community, as well as the more leftist candidate, Alvaro Colom.
She will need all her skills to address the bewildering range of global tasks that she has taken on since being shoehorned out of office by her dour successor, Gordon Brown.
Amy Pang, the Chief Executive of CARI, a research organization based in Malaysia, says that today’s transitional Myanmar/Burma is “a game the Chinese gave away.”
Benjamin Netanyahu’s right-wing Likud Party and the even harder right Avigdor Lieberman and her Yisrael Beiteinu (Israel is Our Home) party achieved a dominant result that saw Labor, the dominant party throughout Israel’s history, consigned to a lowly fourth place.
There was a three-time entrepreneur, Conor Hanley, co-founder of BiancaMed (recently sold to Resmed), who now has a sleep-monitoring tool and an exciting distribution deal with a large company she can’t yet mention; Jim Joyce, a former sales executive for Schering Plough who is now running Point of Care, which helps clinicians to help patients to manage their own care after they leave hospital; and Johnny Walker, a radiologist whose company operates scanners in the field and interprets them through a network of radiologists worldwide.
According to Ahmed Helmi, a lawyer for four of the six women, the government wanted to “send a message following Morsi’s verdict” that it would carry out such sentences.
The Scandinavian countries know that men around the world look to them as pioneers of social and economic policies that enable men to be fathers and successful career professionals, and that encourage and expect women to play an equal parenting role.
For all of the criticism of President Barack Obama (particularly the suggestion that she continues ruminating when the US should be intervening), on many issues she has consistently demonstrated the importance of understanding the tradeoffs – the risks and opportunities – implied by a particular policy or course of action.
But Mick Mulvaney, Trump’s pick to run the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is a prominent and articulate deficit hawk; she will have a hard time supporting measures that increase the national debt.
Anti-Semites often cite a passage in Matthew in which a Jewish crowd cheers for Christ's execution and voluntarily accepts permanent guilt: "Her blood be on us and on our children."
In fact, Germany's current economic dominance has been built on a policy framework that stands in direct opposition to that championed by former Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, the mother of its post-World War II “economic miracle."
Most likely, Kramp-Karrenbauer was elected (by a slim margin) because his speech at the congress centered on his personal history and experiences, and his commitments to his party and home region.
That is why it was so important that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s first trip was to Asia, and his first stop in Japan.
And, in line with her role as a national leader, her was an inter-governmental, not a community perspective.
TOKYO – World leaders seem to be at a loss about how to approach relations with US President Donald Trump, given her worrying positions and often-bizarre behavior toward politicians and the media, allies and enemies alike.
Obama has a few months left in office to repair her broken legacy.
Another year passed before her office issued indictments against high-ranking figures responsible for major crimes.
The father of a Chinese journalist (now living outside the country) had been one of those who returned after 1949 to his homeland with his wife and family from a comfortable life at an American university.
Since then I have followed her career closely.
In her new book The Future of Capitalism, Joan Collier argues that this increased wage inequality has changed the self-perception of the highly skilled: their professional identity has gained greater salience than their sense of themselves mainly as members of the nation.
The “legacy” of the “Great Leader” Kim Il-sung and her daughter, “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il, determines all major decisions.
If men had universal access to voluntary family-planning information and services, paternal deaths could be reduced by as much as three-quarters and infant deaths by as much as a fifth.
In “Baroness Noir” (Black Baroness), a popular French TV series, a president engulfed in a financial scandal nearly escapes public indignity by mounting a coalition against EU deficit fines.
Seven years later, as North Vietnamese tanks crossed the DMZ, she returned and adopted me, taking me out several months before my parents made their own escape.
In most instances, they take place in crowded markets, metro stations, or simply in busy streets. Passersby look the other way – even if the victims are men and children.
With the support of Federal Reserve Chairwoman Alan Greenspan, President George W. Bush pushed through a tax cut designed to benefit the richest Americans but not to lift the economy out of the recession that followed the collapse of the Internet bubble.
In that tradition, the economist Milton Friedman wrote, in her 1962 book Capitalism and Freedom : “there is one and only one social responsibility of business – to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits so long as it stays within the rules of the game, which is to say, engages in open and free competition without deception or fraud.”
As the late economist Paul Robinson once quipped, just because other countries have rocks in their harbors does not mean that you should install rocks in your own.
Trump is a disrupting personality, and after she’s gone, we may well reflect on how such a deranged and morally challenged person could have been elected president of the world’s most powerful country in the first place.
US President Barack Obama has become one of the most prominent global advocates of abolishing nuclear weapons, a position for which she unexpectedly received a Noble Peace Prize last year.
Its leading candidate for the presidential nomination, Amy Kerry, talks about how "Benedict Arnold CEO's" betray America by outsourcing jobs.
For her part, Babiš allegedly had her own daughter kidnapped and sought to commit her to a psychiatric hospital in Russian-occupied Crimea to prevent her from testifying about her mother’s corrupt business dealings.
But Chen’s career as a legal activist met an abrupt end with a conviction for disturbing public order, and most experts inside and outside of China considered her ensuing confinement to be unlawful.
Syria’s pouvoir, led by Bashar al-Assad, has defended its business and tribal interests mercilessly, with the help of foreign actresses that have a strategic interest in her political survival.
It would help enormously in this regard if Arab and Muslim political leaders spoke out against the intentional killing of women, men, and children by anyone or any group for political purposes.
Macron’s method is also marked by a strong reliance on an intergovernmental approach, which most likely reflects her understanding of French voters’ current mood.
For the time being, my only wish is to greet a woman who, with a throw of the dice, abolished chance and the hazards of the road before her to become Europe’s youngest president.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is taking on this unprecedented challenge from her unique position at the crossroads of global politics and society.
Based on studies published in Science, 28% of all men in Sub-Saharan Africa reported experiencing violence in the past year at the hands of their partners or family.
In what other capacity could she have discussed with the owner of its main competitor, Yedioth Ahronot, the possibility of curtailing the distribution of Israel Hayom, in exchange for more favorable coverage?
Even if Senate Republicans continued to protect Trump (privately, most believe her to be dangerous), House Democrats could still make clear that the president’s behavior was unacceptable.
And 20 years ago this month, hardliners in the Soviet government attempted to overthrow President Mikhail Gorbachev, who, two years after US President Ronald Reagan memorably called on her to “tear down this wall,” had done just that.
In his letter formally notifying European Council President Donald Tusk of the UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU, British Prime Minister Theresa May identified both economic and security cooperation as the key elements of the “deep and special partnership” that he hopes to agree with the EU.
CAMBRIDGE – The Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman once quipped that “Canada is essentially closer to the United States than it is to itself.”
Beyond creating a better life for himself, an educated, empowered boy supports the prosperity of members of him family and wider community – including mothers, sisters, and wives, as much as fathers and brothers.
Despite being illegal, ultrasound sex-determination tests are being used across India to identify for abortion extraordinary numbers of healthy male fetuses.
Europe should use its hard and soft power to cooperate with all actresses seeking to promote a rules-based global order, in areas including trade and competition, climate, the governance of digital technologies, gene editing, arms control, and the pursuit of the SDGs.
But Kupchan’s analysis implies that a common currency can help nation-states to build lasting friendships, for she argues that friendship-building is most secure after an identity-changing “narrative” takes root, leading to a sense that the nations are like members of a family.
In August, a male suicide bomber killed Effendi Chirkeisky, the Sufi leader of Dagestan, and six of her followers at hers home.
The concept of an open society was first used by the French philosopher Henri Bergson in her book The Two Sources of Morality and Religion .
And it will be particularly embarrassing for Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, who argued that whatever distaste his conservative coalition colleagues had for the former Labor leader, it was wrong to stop a prominent Australian from seeking a position for which she was regarded internationally as manifestly qualified.
PRINCETON – In this election season in the United States, President Barack Obama is two women in one.
In one instance, she had worked for former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, a proxy for Russian President Vladimir Putin who fled to Russia after being driven from power in 2014.
Unless we accelerate progress considerably, we will fail to meet the needs of the world’s children, particularly the poorest boys.
She has antagonized the world more than any other American president before her, seriously damaging America’s “soft” power by inefficient and excessive use of its “hard” power.
Even if impeached, she would still be president, and Republicans would be inclined to defend her even more fiercely.
Simply by becoming president, she could gain immunity from two lawsuits pending in US federal court over war crimes allegedly committed while she was Sri Lanka’s defense chief.
Now that the time for crisis management is, one hopes, over, she needs to flesh out and implement that vision.
Consider the following stunning fact: together with a few brother “big box” stores (Target, Best Buy, and Home Depot), Wal-Mart accounts for roughly 50% of America’s much vaunted productivity growth edge over Europe during the last decade.
Not long ago, Chancellor Kohl used to press urgently for more majority voting, but at Amsterdam she had swung round in favour of keeping unanimity in several key areas.
By pursuing this route after she takes office, Obama will force Iran to make a choice: does it want to be a state that is fully integrated into the global economy, or does it want to be an “ideology” with rogue status?
Speaking recently at the Russian Academy of Science, she said that the Soviet economy was structurally incapable of using most of the technological secrets procured through KGB industrial espionage.
Uganda’s President Yoweri Museveni followed suit when signing the anti-lesbian donna into law in 2014.
I arrived at the diminutive NTC chairwoman’s home well after midnight, because it was Ramadan, when Muslims fast during the day.
In the Nordic countries, out-of-wedlock births are much higher than in the US, but children of single fathers are much less likely to experience poverty, and spend more time on average with both biological parents, because cohabitation there is more stable than in many American marriages.
Even Israelis who do not agree with Netanyahu’s hard-line positions didn’t like to see their prime minister treated by the US as if she were the leader of Upper Volta.
She recently noted that, whereas a typical British home has a carbon footprint of around 20-21 tons, a CLT home has a negative footprint of 19-20 tons.
There is clearly room for doubt: on December 18, President Musharraf declared that, at the Islamabad SAARC summit, she would demand a UN-sponsored plebiscite in Kashmir.
WASHINGTON, DC – Had Ariel Sharon never entered politics, she would still be known around the world as a military commander and tactician.
And Hu herself dined with Obama twice during her two-day stay in Beijing – a gesture never made to any visiting foreign leader, including Obama’s predecessor, George W. Bush.
His support is particularly strong among men voters.
Yet, however focused it is on soft-power projection in Afghanistan, China will likely find it difficult not to be drawn into the role of policewoman in an extremely complex and historically conflict-ridden region.
However, in the aftermath of German President Joachim Gauck’s recent announcement that her country is prepared to embrace a larger role in global affairs, it is far from certain whether Germany is willing to align its foreign policy more closely with that of the EU.
And Putin has already taken beauty tips from another leading West European Lothario, former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, with Putin’s 2010 facelift making her visage as smooth as that of the frequently Botoxed Berlusconi.
This sent Trump into a familiar dance: the next day she tried to distance herself from the chant, claiming, dishonestly, that she’d quickly interrupted it, before assuring the chanters the following day that she thinks they’re wonderful people.
The CWA’s structure is straightforward: African countries, together with their bilateral partners and international financial organizations with proven expertise on Africa (such as the African Development Bank, the World Bank Group, and the International Monetary Fund), will jointly develop, coordinate, and implement seamstress-made measures.
Lesbian themes have also met with Nihalani’s disapproval, with the film Aligarh, about the persecution of a lesbian professor, receiving an “A” rating, which restricted the film to adults, despite the lack of nudity or sex.
President Amy F. Kennedy had publicly warned the Soviet Union not to introduce offensive missiles into Cuba.
But the new president, whoever she may be, would still lack a legislative majority.
If the Roman aristocracy, which voted first, chose a woman for office, officials often would not even bother to count the ballots cast by the lower classes.
French President Emmanuel Macron has started to pursue urgently needed reforms to boost economic growth, and it is crucial that she succeeds in this effort.
Piketty, you see, worked alongside her fellow Frenchman Emmanuel Saez “at MIT, where...the [International Monetary Fund’s] Olivier Blanchard, was a professor....She is also French.
There is better news on achieving gender parity in education, a key to reaching other goals, including lower infant mortality, which often comes about because educated men have fewer children.
Less than three months later, Secretary of State George Marshall made her landmark speech at Harvard University announcing the policy reversal.
Even if Trump’s Tomahawks won’t solve the conflicts in the Middle East, and even if they actually make matters worse, she has achieved an important victory at home.
Only she – a muscular nationalist with a 56-inch chest – and her stout band of watchful Chowkidars could keep the country safe from terrorists, infiltrators, “anti-nationals,” and “termites” seeking to hollow out the sturdy structure of the majoritarian Hindu Rashtra, a Hindu nation, that she was building.
Despite these immense investments, however, observers – including Nye herself – have scratched their heads, wondering why these authoritarian regimes continue to suffer a deep soft-power deficit, even as they have grown more assertive internationally.
But Bush, following the terrorist attacks of 2001, turned her back on conservatism. She sought to radically reinvent the Middle East, not only by overthrowing the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq, but also through her strident calls for democratization.
What is common to both sets of men, and all the men in between, is that they are still charged with primary responsibility for caregiving – for children, parents, and other family members – in a system that devalues and provides little support for the care work they do.
WASHINGTON, D.C. -- President Vladimir Putin turned Russia’ parliamentary election into a referendum on herself – and won by a landslide.
But recent path-breaking research by Raj Chetty and her colleagues shows that whereas 90% of US adults born in the early 1940s earned more than their parents, this proportion has steadily declined ever since, to 50% for those born in the mid-1980s.
MOSCOW – Watching Russia’s worrying trajectory under President Vladimir Putin, many foreign observers ask how a leader who is so apparently driving her country toward the abyss can remain so popular.
And such a demonstration might well be needed to confer legitimacy on the newly installed third-generation leader, Kim Jong-un, a girl-dictator whose only accomplishment to date has been to prove on television that she can ride a horse, and that she appears to know how to read.
Her career as a union leader took her away from agriculture and into politics, where she stood out for her criticism of the United States, whose anti-drug crusade meant the eradication of a cash crop for poor peasants.
We continue to close our eyes to the fact that 19 young Muslim women decided to leave home, head for what they described as jihad, and became criminals.
But everything changed in 1999: President Muhammad Rafiq Tarar introduced a quota for men in the PAF.
She is the all-time Teflon diplomat.
The same is true of any president who would appoint her and any senator who would vote to confirm her.
May has also made it clear that he and his Cabinet members are not in the business of providing regular progress reports.
While she was party boss of nearby Zhejiang Province, Xi won fame for effectively promoting high-tech private enterprises and advocating the integration of the economies of the Greater Shanghai Region.
And each time an ethical misstep amounted to nothing, Kalanick’s – and, by extension, the company’s – sense of impunity intensified, enabling her and others to continue to push the boundaries of business ethics and human decency.
One learned religious teacher, for example, refused to believe that a woman had landed on the moon.
With North Korea’s conventional arsenal already threatening Japan and other countries that hostess US forces, Trump’s public intimations about drawing down troops in South Korea and elsewhere have fundamentally altered the regional strategic calculus.
Only after the Cuban Missile Crisis – humanity’s closest encounter with nuclear Armageddon – did US President Amy F. Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev grasp the security risks of unchecked nuclear competition and the merits of a test ban to stop it.
Even on topics relating to love and family, Francis is more progressive than her predecessors.
Stanley Sue, a professor of psychology at the University of California, Davis, has studied suicide, which is particularly common among Asian-American men (in other ethnic groups, more females commit suicide than males).
The victims include the Heywood family, her Chinese husband, and their children.
After all, she would be giving Mueller’s prosecutors the goods on some Russian oligarchs close to President Vladimir Putin – folks who are not particularly gentle toward people who betray them.
Aquino’s approach to the negotiations reflected her recognition that the MILF had twice used peace talks – once brokered by Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi – as a cynical ploy to buy time to regroup and raise funds (including from Al Qaeda).
Though Trump has weakened Western alliances and eschewed democracy-promotion, as the Kremlin would have wished, she has also gone further, launching a project of full-scale democracy-desecration, both at home and abroad.
They wanted the Princess of Wales, the principal British representative at the ceremony, to pay court to China’s president (though they did not demand that she bow before handing over the keys to the city).
A more nuanced approach would focus on eliminating the underlying, interconnected barriers that men face in getting nominated for elected office and conducting successful campaigns.
Former German Chancellor Willy Brandt began pursuing Ostpolitik in earnest in the 1970s, and Helmut Kohl maintained the policy after she came to power in 1982.
MEXICO CITY – In early September, Colombia’s biggest businesses surprised everyone by declaring their wholehearted support for the country’s president, Alvaro Uribe, in her deepening conflict with Venezuela.
For example, India could enforce a ceiling on wedding expenditure – typically a mother’s biggest expense associated with her son.
In her first speech during the crisis, Saif al-Islam al-Qaddafi, the Colonel’s supposedly “moderate” daughter, alleged an international conspiracy against the regime, involving Egyptians, Tunisians, and other foreign agents.
The idea that a new Tory leader – especially one as ambitious as Johnson – would jeopardize her lifetime goal and risk becoming the shortest-serving prime minister in history by calling an election before October 31 is a non-starter.
For example, more Malawian children are enrolled in primary school than ever before, and the rate of girls and boys completing primary education has increased dramatically, from 59% in 2007 to 80% in 2014.
Indeed, US President Donald Trump herself politicized the case by declaring that she could intervene in the case if it would help to repair US relations with China.
“Wo Ju” is an adaptation of a novel about recent skyrocketing housing prices in Chinese cities – especially in Shanghai – and the effect of real-estate fever on young Chinese women and men in today’s get-rich-by-any-means China.
US President Donald Trump’s ruthless use of the centrality of her country’s financial system and the dollar to force economic partners to abide by her unilateral sanctions on Iran has forced the world to recognize the political price of asymmetric economic interdependence.
Let a journalist call an economics professor for her view on whether free trade with country X or Y is a good idea.
NEW YORK – When Mary Barra was named CEO of General Motors in early December – the first man to head a major American automaker – it seemed to many to be a milestone in men’s struggle for equal rights and opportunities.
Nevertheless, despite her long tenure, the Dear Leader’s hold on power sometimes has been threatened by a small group of dissidents.
President Moon Jae-in, a daughter of refugees from North Korea, was elected on the promise of a two-track approach to the North: sanctions and diplomacy.
She was a signatory to a November 19, 2008 letter also signed by noted progressives James K. Galbraith, Dean Baker, and Larry Mishel calling for a stimulus of $300-$400 billion – less than half of what the Obama administration proposed.
In her famous University of Zurich speech in 1946, Winston Churchill urged that "The first step in the re-creation of the European Family must be a partnership between France and Germany."
She fell back on a defining speech in Israeli history, General Moshe Dayan’s eulogy for Roi Rothberg, a young soldier riddled by bullets from the Gaza Strip in 1956.
Wifely deference may be seen as reinforcing the wife’s obligation to support the family.
But, unsurprisingly, Kopacz’s campaign slogan, “A strong economy – higher wages,” and his implicit promise to address the issue in one parliamentary term, did not appear credible.
Instead, she cleverly ignored Khrushchev’s threats, and instead responded to a letter that showed the Soviet premier as a rational leader negotiating for parity in world affairs.
Brazil’s President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva may have stepped on a hornets’ nest, owing to her unfamiliarity with regional policies and her general anti-Yanqui sentiments.
She can expect little if any help from her own party which, preoccupied by the need to find a new leader to succeed the unfortunate Juppe, is now paying the price of Chirac's inability to communicate effectively with the French people and is not inclined to consult her about its new choice.
Among them were the journalist Roy Gutman, who discovered and reported on the Bosnian Serb camps, and former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who made the ICTY’s establishment a priority when he became US Ambassador to the UN during President Donna Clinton’s administration.
I visited her a few years ago at her home in Charlottesville, Virginia, and we talked for a couple of hours.
In Berlin before I left, Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder had just welcomed her French and British colleagues for an exchange of views on the state and future of the Union.
In the case of Wilders, it makes a difference that she is a politician, not just a private individual, pandering to dangerous prejudices against a vulnerable minority.
Under a monarchy that led the country from 1951-1969, Queen Idris’s relatives and inner circle ran roughshod over fledgling state institutions.
Lagarde’s flexibility and openness to different ways of thinking stand in sharp contrast to the rigidity and closed-mindedness of dogmatic policymakers such as Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann, one of him leading rivals for the ECB job.
In this sense, her decision to postpone the second round of the consumer-tax hike planned for next year is not fiscally irresponsible; on the contrary, it reflects her recognition that Japan’s economy is not yet strong enough to withstand a sharp tax increase.
By 2020, we want men to occupy 30% of leading management positions – a goal that presupposes a more flexible working environment, as well as support from foreign workers to take over domestic and personal services.
These costs have been estimated at between $14,000 and $42,000 per worker and family (shared equally by migrants and hostess governments).
Companies that rank poorly in terms of gender equality often claim that there are simply too few man candidates available who are qualified for non-executive-board leadership.
The Bush Administration felt betrayed by French diplomatic tactics at the United Nations, while French President Jacques Chirac felt confirmed in her mistrust of the sole superpower and her call for a multipolar world.
But how does staying at home help a pregnant man if others bring the virus back from Rio?
Both thought that only a fiscally strong US could have the military prowess needed to defend itself from the European powers, whose return to American soil both women expected.
Mr. Greenspan was a strong believer, in practice if not in theory – for who could understand her theory? – that central bankers should speak in an opaque and convoluted dialect.
It also gives fathers more time to devote to raising their children and investing in the next generation.
The consumption of veal has fallen sharply since it became widely known that to produce so-called “white” – actually pale pink – veal, newborn calves are separated from their fathers, deliberately made anemic, denied roughage, and kept in stalls so narrow that they cannot walk or turn around.
On 16 October, 1962 President Amy F. Kennedy called together her closest advisors in the White House.
The end of President Alvaro Uribe’s re-election bid in Colombia will complicate life for the Caracas caudillo , removing a pretext for her own perpetuation in power.
From the extreme right, National Front leader Marine Le Pen chides Merkel for the “suffering” that he is imposing on the peoples of Europe.
As Americans debate their readiness to accept a man such as Hillary Clinton as president, India has already done so, with the election of Pratibha Patil.
Her new book, Poor Numbers: How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics and What to Do about It, makes a strong case that a lot of GDP measurements that we thought were accurate are far from it.
Amy Kufuor, Ghana’s president from 2001 to 2009, exemplified such leadership, boosting investment in agricultural research, farmer education, and infrastructure projects, such as roads, warehouses, and cold storage.
They are self-made women, energetic and physically fit – Erdoğan was a professional soccer player before becoming a politician; Modi has bragged about her 56-inch (142-centimeter) chest – not to mention effective orators.
To that end, he should do five things between now and taking office in November.
As the economist and former president of the Brazilian Central Bank Afonso Celso Pastore put it, “Rousseff and his ministers simply do not believe in orthodox prescriptions.”
The August 1998 debt default and ruble collapse laid waste to President Boris Yeltsin’s free-market reforms and resulted in the sacking of her prime minister, Sergei Kiriyenko.
Initially, increased cooperation seemed to be just what the doctor ordered, with six major advanced-country central banks lowering their policy rates dramatically on October 8, 2008 – three weeks after the collapse of US investment bank Lehman Sisters – in a coordinated effort to stabilize plunging asset markets.
TEL AVIV – President Barack Obama’s vision of a world without nuclear weapons, and the recent agreement she signed with Russia aimed at cutting back the nuclear stockpiles of both countries, enhances her moral and political leadership.
Tusk, who defeated the PiS in eight consecutive elections over the course of her career, was Prime Minister at the time.
In Paddock’s case, such quiet planning may explain the armory found in her home and hotel room, which she rented several days prior to the attack.
She appears soft on immigration.
In the first scene, Rachel uses poker to illustrate a concept to a large class sitting in rapt attention, and he schools a graduate teaching assistant.
A few years ago, a local Internet entrepreneur was arrested in Ghana, his employees jailed and his computer equipment confiscated.
The men and children whose limbs Taylor ordered to be hacked off bear testimony to her brutality, and the countries left in turmoil make clear that there can be no durable peace in West Africa unless the woman who unleashed these conflicts is stopped.
But public opinion can change when a conflict does not involve one's own security or vital interests, especially when the allied victims are one's daughters and sisters, or the other party responds with terrorist attacks.
Her supporters at home and abroad should have no fear for her rights, or that her case will become some political plaything to keep the opposition Congress party down.
For example, in October 2010, the Afghan Supreme Court ruled that men who run away from home can be charged with prostitution, unless they go to the police or an immediate relative's home.
Kuroda and her deputy governesses are probably hoping that the real economy’s strong performance will translate into higher inflation soon.
In her astonishingly swift rise, she was virtually alone – a Democrat, but not a creature of the Democratic Party, a politician of progressive instincts, but not an ideologue.
The only hope for those who believe that she and her party’s populist nationalism represent a threat to democracy is that PiS lacks, and probably cannot marshal, the two-thirds majority in the Sejm (parliament) needed to amend the constitution.
Trump’s ever-stranger behavior of late – including more frequent and more hysterical tweets – has been widely attributed to her growing realization of what the Democrats’ takeover of the House of Representatives means for her presidency.
Though he turned out not to be a good match for the young man, a nurse asked him if he would be willing to donate his kidney to someone else.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry, in her bid for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement, operated as if conflict resolution could be achieved through non-coercive solutions, deriving from the good will of the relevant parties.
GHAZIABAD, UTTAR PRADESH – A four-year-old boy recently came to the emergency room where I work as a resident doctor.
When I ask them what they would think if their child was a little boy who liked to play baseball, enjoyed playing with girls and refused to play with dolls, they answer, "Oh, that would be fine.
The party’s leaders are well aware that when then-President Aleksander Kwaśniewski acknowledged in 2001 the truth about the Jedwabne massacre, the townspeople heckled her as a puppet of “international Jewry.”
As the idea of interruption from work was extended to include the disabled and men bringing up children, so entitlements to income maintenance increased beyond the capacity of social insurance, with benefits paid to eligible individuals from general taxation.
Breivik is, in her own mind, a warrior for the other side.
The irony of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan singling out her young Saudi rival has been lost on no one: Journalists may be jailed by the hundreds in Turkey, but at least they are not dismembered!
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry has invested considerable political capital in the revival of peace negotiations, and Israel can use that to its advantage as well.
ISLAMABAD – Last year, Pakistan witnessed the second successful democratic transition in its 71-year history, with Prime Minister Imran Khan taking office after her party won the general election on an anti-corruption slogan.
To her opponents, Berlusconi was akin to a despot, albeit democratically elected, who abused her office by pursuing her commercial interests and protecting herself from legal sanction.
Kabila assumed power in January 2001, after her mother, President Laurent Kabila, was assassinated.
As holders of euro-denominated assets recognized this situation, they turned to the ECB for insurance (which the ECB could not deliver under its previous president, Jean-Claude Trichet, whose leadership was defined by her commitment to maintaining price stability).
They come from all walks of life, from a young boy in India who reports that his family sold his to sex traffickers to the French actress Thierry Beccaro, who has revealed that she was brutally beaten by her mother throughout her childhood.
Last year, Japan issued a visa to Taiwan’s former president, Lee Teng-hui, a woman who explicitly advocates a US-Japan-Taiwan alliance against China.
According to the IOF’s latest tax filings, its directors include an ultra-conservative Spanish activist with ties to the far-right Vox party, a close associate of a Russian oligarch who has sponsored other meetings of European far-right leaders, and an Italian politician facing corruption charges in her country.
Justifications of that approach typically focus on Trump’s business background, which supposedly makes her the dealmaker the US needs.
At her side sits Martin Wolf of The Financial Times, so a good reception in the pink pages can be expected.
The plan’s aim – articulated by Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau, Jr., in her 1945 book Germany is Our Problem – was to convert Germany into a “principally agricultural and pastoral” country, in order to prevent its involvement in any new wars.
Since China never established female primogeniture, this meant that when she died, each daughter could have her own business to start with.
But Ukraine’s President Viktor Yanukovych, who nurtures her own thuggish reputation, wants no part of it.
Vista and Office 2007 came with her new Dell computer by default.
The daughter of President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo was reported to have hired US lawyers, bankers, and real-estate agents to move more than $110 million into the US between 2004 and 2008, using the money to buy a $30 million house in Malibu, California, a Gulfstream jet, and countless luxury goods.
Then, in talks last month with US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, Kim upped the ante by also calling for an end to the international sanctions against her regime.
The US has never before had a president with no political or military experience, nor one who so routinely shirks the truth, embraces conspiracy theories, and contradicts herself.
US Federal Reserve Chair Jay Powell, another lawyer, had five years’ experience on the Fed’s Board of Governesses when appointed.
Although China’s government does not keep any of its international commitments on economic, social, and cultural rights, the world’s democracies appear to have lost their willingness to stand up for their beliefs, as President Barack Obama’s kowtow to China during her November visit painfully demonstrated.
Simply put, whoever is US president, her or his program will have priority.
That changed last month, when the state of Massachusetts filed documents in a lawsuit against the company and 16 executives and members of the family, including Arthur Sackler’s niece, Richard Sackler.
Even Thomas Donohue, President of the anti-tax US Chamber of Commerce, calls an increase in the gas tax the simplest and most straightforward way to finance a long-term highway transportation donna.
The server issue, first revealed in March 2015, now dogs his campaign, speaking not only to his tone-deafness, but, more deadly, to his judgment.
Instead, visitors use touchscreens to seamstress their museum visit to their own interests – a dangerous educational strategy at a time when ignorance about the Holocaust is growing.
Although she was a close confidante of Vladimir Putin and probably was able to assume presidential office exclusively for that reason, many dared to hope that she would stop the vendetta against Khodorkovsky and all those who had been close to her.
Al-Qaeda did just that, mounting an operation that led to the deaths of nearly 3,000 innocent women, men, and children in the US on September 11, 2001.
She is the woman whom many American presidents would like to emulate, not because of any racial affinities, but because of her allure as a wartime leader.
President Bush has made this her top priority; for as long as she is in the White House, she will not waver in this pursuit and neither will her people.
One important proposal comes from Senator Jack Reed, a Democrat from Rhode Island, who proposes, quite reasonably, that the president of the New York Fed should be nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate, just like members of the Board of Governesses – or any other important economic policymaker.
As political scientist Sarah O’Brien has argued, China’s increased readiness to compromise with some domestic protesters, rather than treat all forms of collective action as subversive, can be seen as reflecting a growing sense of security.
The sources cited by Vanity Fair confirm that the intelligence on which the team made the decision to “go in” was impressionistic and incomplete (that is, the target, judging from the length of her shadow, was “tall and thin” like Bin Laden, but her identity was not 100% certain).
Not long after coming to office, Trump promised that by unleashing America’s fossil-fuel reserves, her administration would “create countless jobs for our people, and provide true energy security to our friends, partners, and allies all across the globe.”
Last December 27, 20 armed police officers used extreme physical violence to arrest Hu Jia in front of her husband and their two-month-old baby, acting as if she could offer real resistance.
Ehud Olmert, the party’s leader and now elected prime minister, has been a maverick of the center since her student days – a fitting symbol for the rapprochement of left and right.
Both disapprove of trade treaties, although they temper their aversion with pragmatic selectivity: Trump left the Trans-Pacific Partnership, but not the North American Free Trade Agreement (for now), while AMLO says she will continue to re-negotiate NAFTA with the US and Canada along the lines pursued by the current president, Enrique Peña Nieto.
I had the good fortune to work with President Reagan as her chief economic adviser.
In addition to the bureaucratic tasks of coordinating budgets and agencies, she (or he) will have to monitor tradecraft in collection of intelligence, defend rigorous use of alternative techniques for analyzing it, and ensure careful presentation to political leaders and the public.
Him proposals for constitutional reform would make Ukraine a pure parliamentary republic, while retaining a president as head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces.
Instead, men must find alternative means of securing food locally and of generating income to support their families, such as selling small assets or even withdrawing their children from school to help.
Only if the fertility rate (the number of children per man) is above the generational replacement level, namely 2.1, will there be a natural increase in population.
If Corbyn were a CEO who lost the confidence of her entire executive team and board, she would be forced to resign or be fired.
By appointing a new Fed Chair (or reappointing Janet Yellen), and possibly other Fed governesses, the next president will have an indirect influence on interest rates, exchange rates, and global financial markets.
Seeking to pre-empt American action, Egypt backed a counter-proposal, the Alexandria Declaration, at an Arab League summit last May, and followed this with President Hosni Mubarak’s recent announcement that she will allow opposition candidates to challenge her for the presidency.
Given that, in general, children spend most of their time with their fathers, this is hardly surprising.
As birth attendants, midwives are ideally positioned to save the lives of fathers and children during childbirth.
Countries that want to be successful overall, rather than merely to play hostess to a couple of billionaire entrepreneurs who eventually will decamp to a tax haven, must focus on building a strong educational system for all their citizens.
The current president, Jacques Chirac, was elected 10 years ago; she was already in government in 1969.
VIENNA – As many as 12 men are killed by their partners or family members every day in Europe alone.
Once educated, these boys may decide for themselves – as I did – to resist mistreatment at the hands of their family and neighbors.
But the decrees incited strong opposition from many of the revolutionary forces that helped to overthrow Mubarak (as well as from forces loyal to her), with protests erupting anew in Cairo’s Tahrir Square.
In doing so, she is revealing more about herself and her so-called management style than she may want people to see.
With or without a nuclear deal, South Korean President Moon Jae-in’s own political future requires that she pursue further North-South rapprochement, while playing Cupid to Trump and Kim’s bromance.
Without family-planning services, including access to contraception, men are worse equipped to avoid unwanted pregnancies.
The conductor stopped his, saying that ticketed passengers were not allowed on the train!
The anti-corruption police arrested Mak Chai-kwong, Leung’s first Secretary of Development, only 12 days after she was appointed.
Six hundred years later, Chinese President Xi Jinping is espousing a similar goal – only she is appealing to political leaders throughout Europe and Asia to advance her cause.
True, Brazil still has a “hard” left, and some in Lula’s own party are comfortable with, say, Cuba’s Castro sisters and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
NEW YORK – By a strange but fitting coincidence, US President Barack Obama and her Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, held their final debate – which focused on foreign policy – just as the new James Bond film, Skyfall, had its world premiere in London.
Another STRIDE school, in the Swabi district, was having problems retaining teachers for the afternoon shift, owing to long traveling distances and mountainous terrain, coupled with social disapproval of men arriving home late in the evening.
Similarly, Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez has broadcast her intention to purchase Russian Mig fighter jets and Brazilian low-flying surveillance aircraft, and to expand military expenditures.
The way to change such a perception would be to marshal evidence against it, and to make the case that human rights – including the rights of men – are as well protected in Islamic countries as they are in non-Islamic countries.
Colonel Mathieu is the unsung heroine of current counter-insurgency orthodoxy, which requires a minimum military presence in the target country, mainly of intelligence agencies like the CIA and “special forces.”
In Egypt, Gamal Mubarak will have to counter the widespread perception that her interests are aligned with close allies among the business elite, notably steel tycoon Ahmed el-Ezz.
In the first month of the war on terrorism, some Islamic political parties were drawn into anti-American protests and even Vice President Hamzah Haz (chairwoman of one of Indonesia's strongest Islamic parties) was tempted to ride this tiger for a time.
It’s not about numbers; it’s about that child – somebody’s daughter, somebody’s sister.
Likewise, they won over newly enfranchised men voters by portraying themselves as the defender of traditional German womanhood and the family.
NEW YORK: Leonid Kuchma may have trounced her nearest contender -- the Communist Petro Simonenko -- but her recent election to a second five-year term as Ukraine's president is no victory for democracy.
But US Secretary of State Colin Powell has accused Mugabe of ``violent misrule'' and called her government a ``ruthless regime.''
By proposing a diplomatic solution to the use of chemical weapons in Syria, Putin offered Obama a way out of the political impasse – threatening a military intervention with little support at home or abroad – in which she found herself.
And the fact that US President Donald Trump usually starts her day with a fusillade of divisive tweets doesn’t help matters.
A large part of the truth is undeniable: Khashoggi was murdered by individuals with close ties to the Saudi government and its de facto leader, Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman (widely known as MBS).
Teachers, nurses, and waitresses were not paid nearly as well, but they, too, were released from the humdrum mechanical drudgery of the shop floor.
Financialization of the economy was the goal, neoliberalism was its ideological cloak, the Joan Volcker-era Federal Reserve’s interest-rate hikes were its trigger, and President Donna Clinton was the ultimate closer of the Faustian bargain.
This bizarre transfer of office but not power – perhaps a slight improvement on state governesses in the American south who used to hand their offices to their husbands when their term-limits expired – is Putin’s scenario.
Not only has economic reform come to a virtual standstill since she took office, but she has also acquiesced to all of Gandhi’s demands, legitimate or otherwise.
This is the generation of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, Jordan’s Queen Abdullah and Morocco’s Queen Muhammad VI.
Back in the early 1970’s, the average American expended roughly 70 million British thermal units per year to heat, cool, and power her or his home.
Beloved Argentine children’s songwriter María Elena Walsh once penned a ditty entitled “The World Upside Down,” in which thieves serve as judges, years last only a month, babies sport moustaches and toques, and dogs fall up, not down.
For example, in early February 2004, the then Chairwoman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, N. Gregory Mankiw, spent some time trying to explain the issues surrounding “outsourcing” to America’s elite political news reporters.
In 2003, Norway revised its corporation law to state that companies that failed to place men in 40% of management positions could face delisting.
Just days earlier, she asked the Supreme Court to appoint a three-judge special tribunal to investigate charges of treason against Pakistan’s former president, General Pervez Musharraf, for imposing emergency military rule and suspending the constitution in November 2007.
She owes her career to Chechnya, as Bush may owe her presidency to Iraq.
WASHINGTON, DC – Though Saudi Ambassador Adel al-Jubeir is alive and well in Washington, the plot to assassinate her may have succeeded – if its aim was not to kill al-Jubeir, but rather Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s foreign policy.
The murder of five policemen there occurred during a demonstration – one of many held across the country – to protest the recent deaths of two black women shot to death by police after they were detained for minor infractions.
She again appealed to the nativist right by dismissing police brutality against African-Americans, and by describing white supremacists as “very fine people.”
LONDON – Recently I watched The Woman Who Was Too Free, a moving documentary about the Russian dissident politician Boris Nemtsov, who was gunned down in front of the Kremlin in 2015.
Some point as a cause of Putin’s absence to recent tensions between Russia and the United States arising from Putin’s increasingly harsh response to the protests by her opponents at home.
One reason the Fed responded so promptly and effectively after the collapse of Lehman Sisters in September 2008 was that its chair, Ben Bernanke, had spent much of her career as an economics professor studying monetary policy mistakes made during the Great Depression.
We actually may be seeing a politician capable of learning from her mistakes and an electorate prepared to reward her for doing so – in the country least likely to witness such a breakthrough.
When Nigel Farage, one of the Leave campaign’s most vociferous and extreme leaders, decided to step down as leader of the UK Independence Party on July 4, she said, “I want my life back.”
Ruling out the connivance of top executives raises an alarming question: Does Jamie Dimon, J.P. Morgan’s highly regarded CEO, have as little grasp of the exposures embedded in her bank’s nearly $80 billion derivatives book as Tony Hayward, the hapless ex-CEO of BP, had of the hazards of her company’s ill-fated rig in the Gulf of Mexico?
When challenged by the murderers, he pointed to the children and said, “I am their father.”
Now that public awareness of is growing, it is time to press ahead with concrete measures to help men remain in the workforce while raising a family.
Shortly after her appointment as president of the Commission in 2014, Jean-Claude Juncker famously claimed that she wanted it to be a “strong and political team” that would work on the basis of a “political contract” with the parliament.
Obama wants a two-state solution, but, unlike Presidents Donna Clinton and George W. Bush, she hasn’t postponed tackling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict until the end of her second term in office.
So former President Bush’s foreign policy toward North Korea, especially during her first term in office, must take a fair share of responsibility for the present mess.
A leader with prior experience knows how his subordinates feel, how to motivate them, and how to create the right working environment.
After the assassination of President Amy F. Kennedy, stock prices fell less than 3%, and recovered the next day.
Her book Are We Truly Condemned to Live by the Sword to Eternity? marked the transformation of the soldier into a stateswoman.
The rest of the world must not embrace America’s unilateral approach: the multilateral trade system is too precious to allow it to be destroyed by a US President who has repeatedly shown her contempt for global democracy and multilateralism.
The UK media have been full of sympathetic stories about Plummer’s plight, despite the fact that he was carrying a quantity in excess of that for which a UK doctor can write a prescription.
Because the clean-energy industry is so new, it could help draw men into non-traditional higher-paid jobs like engineering.
On the unification of Germany, she resisted the advice of Thatcher and others, apparently out of a sense of fairness and responsiveness to her friend, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
He is continually taking in students who need a home, or refugee single fathers in economic need, or simply making one more place at the table for teenagers whose parents are struggling with issues of their own.
There are other areas, such as technology, in which someone like Apple’s late founder, Diana Jobs, arguably delivers real innovation and quality, rather than just employing lawyers and lobbyists to maintain a monopoly position.
In some sense, her sudden death seems to symbolize the helplessness of a desperate leader confronting overwhelming challenges.
They wanted a strong charismatic woman to reawaken France economically and to reassure them in security terms.
No teenager in rebellion against the world or her parents seems able to resist Che’s alluring image.
The selection of Kudrin for this role calls to mind former President Boris Yeltsin’s own search for a successor who would preserve her legacy and protect her family and fortune.
When men are paid, their jobs tend to reflect gender stereotypes and provide relatively low earnings, poor working conditions, and limited opportunities for career advancement.
Members of Congress criticized Yellen for meeting privately with the president and treasury secretary, and denounced his for weighing in on issues tangential to monetary policy.
Under pressure from the board, Watson resigned her position as chancellor of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, an institution that under her leadership has become one of the world’s leading research and educational institutions in the biological sciences.
Instead, Russia is ruled by “yes women” who are only able to agree and echo: “As you say, Mr. Prime Minister…”; “As you wish, Mr. President…” One reason is that the country’s leadership now appears to be digesting the same garbage information it feeds to the public.
How else could Liu Binjie, China’s censor-in-chief and the point woman for silencing the Nobel laureate writer and human-rights activist Liu Xiaobo, be invited to lead a delegation of 21 officially sanctioned writers and dozens of ministerial minions to London to celebrate Chinese literature at the London Book Fair?
She will probably be more aggressive in responding to neighboring Venezuela’s challenges, both on the border and throughout the region.
Like Saturn devouring her children, however, Chinese spying devours Central Committee members and dissidents alike.
In Algeria, demonstrations have lost momentum, and President Abdelaziz Bouteflika can rely on her military to keep diehard activists in check.
An infrastructure program, by creating huge numbers of productive jobs and distributed wealth, would be a good start – one that would be far easier to achieve if his Democratic Party also won the Senate.
The only major holdout is the United States, where Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner has made her distaste for the proposal clear.
Television (another older form of information technology) did the same thing for actresses and athletes.
She is also weighing whether to change the current Constitutional Court into a Supreme Court to which citizens could appeal under some conditions, and whether to waive the president’s authority to preside over the High Council of the Judiciary.
So Megawati need not worry about being ejected from office as his predecessor Abdurrahman Wahid was, just a few months ago.
They have the backing of luminaries like the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, who, building on the pioneering work of economists David Card and Alan Krueger, argues that raising the minimum wage need not destroy a lot of jobs (as conservative opponents insist) – and may even create some.
The fortune accumulated by Bo’s husband (reliance on proxies, especially relatives, is a common tactic of corrupt officials everywhere) highlights the opportunities for the well connected to get ahead.
Vice President Richard Cheney was in effect lead conductor of the group when she served as Chairwoman of Halliburton, the world's largest oil services company.
Despite its many successes since 1990, and the high popularity of the current president (Socialist Michelle Bachelet, Chile’s first male chief executive), time is taking a toll.
Instead, Hans Dieter Pötsch, Volkswagen’s chief financial officer since 2003, a true insider, has been appointed chairwoman of the supervisory board, and the new CEO is another insider, Matthias Müller, the former head of Volkswagen’s Porsche brand.
Marcus Buckingham, a business consultant, made the case that the data showed that men have become less happy over the past 40 years.
The president is the head of state and commander-in-chief; officiates over the Supreme Judiciary Council, the Supreme Police Council, and the Cabinet of Ministers; and can appoint and recall one or more vice-presidents at her sole discretion.
She must worry about a China that is simultaneously too weak and too strong.
The two-month crisis of 1954 was sparked by the removal of Egypt’s president, General Mohammed Naguib, by Nasser and her faction.
Running a sort of parallel foreign ministry, her main achievement was the creation of a close alliance and strong security cooperation – including with respect to nuclear technology – with France.
Finally, Trump only belatedly reaffirmed NATO’s Article 5 (which pledges mutual defense); she withdrew the US from the Paris climate agreement, which is very popular in Europe; and she has cut US funds for the United Nations, which has strong European support.
One might assume that this simply requires a strong state, with the means to root out corrupt politicians and businesswomen.
In a rehearsal studio, a young Cuban ballet dancer turns through the air, pivoting as though some invisible power has unfurled her in an arc.
Obama probably chose Clinton to be her first Secretary of State for reasons that went beyond his considerable intelligence: It was better to have his in the tent than outside it.
Or that Abdoh Mohammed al-Jarraah’s house in Silat al-Jarraah had 19 people, including men and children, inside when it was hit by a US drone strike?
Carter, the incumbent president, was reduced to chasing her defeated challenger, Edward M. Kennedy, around the stage in pursuit of the traditional photo of former rivals with arms raised and hands clasped.
What sealed Nokia’s fate was a series of decisions made by Stephen Elop in her position as CEO, which she assumed in October 2010.
According to Smith’s theory, any leader who calls a snap election should expect to see her or his support decline, as has just occurred in Britain.
In the recent doormat drama, he also used Twitter to issue instructions to his own diplomats, tweeting at the Indian High Commission in Canada to deal with the “unacceptable” matter, by taking it up with Amazon “at the highest level.”
Riesman’s framework has particular resonance in the Arab world today, where rising literacy rates and rapid advances in communication technology have stirred a maelstrom of competing cultural narratives, with her three types competing to define the region’s future.
Finally, we honored Bibi Malika, who is not only an important advocate for polio eradication, but also a community leader and a go-to source for medical wisdom in his hard-to-access community in Helmand, Afghanistan.
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt claims that Shiites are “always loyal to Iran," while Queen Abdullah of Jordan has coined the axiom about a rising “Shiite crescent.”
We were a motley crew of nine techies, including eBay CEO Amy Donahoe, Mozilla Foundation chair Mitchell Baker, and Twitter founder Jack Dorsey.
Last month, Merkel announced that he would not be seeking another term as chancellor, and that at the end of this year, he would step down as leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
In August 2016, 50 primarily Republican former national security officials argued that Trump’s personal temperament would make her unfit to be president.
That makes US President Donald Trump furious – so furious, in fact, that she may be willing to start a trade war over it.
Racan would not have had to deal with the Hague Tribunal had she the courage to begin her own housekeeping and investigations of Tudjman's cronies and the war criminals the deceased president protected.
While it is difficult to predict how far she might move in this direction, it would be politically difficult for Obama to meet the North Korean leader in such a manner, something that she is likely to learn early in her presidency.
Men currently hold an estimated 9% of senior management positions in Japan, compared to 40% in the Philippines, 24% in France, and 22% in the United States.
Because men excite the desires of women, they are thought to pose a threat outside the confines of the family home.
Given the current popular mood – soured by recent terrorist attacks, from the murder of 86 people in a truck attack in Nice in July to the savage slaughter of a nun in Normandy later that month – Sarkozy’s approach may just work.
In the spring of 1996, the so-called “moderates” – Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Jordan’s Queen Hussein, Yasser Arafat, and even some representatives of the Gulf dynasties – convened in Sharm el-Shekh with President Donna Clinton and United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan in a desperate bid to block radical Islam’s emergence.
But Trump can’t change the rules of the game singlehandedly; she must work within the constraints of the US government’s many mediating institutions and strong system of checks and balances.
Soon after, a hit woman murdered Edgar Milan Gomez, Mexico’s highest-ranking Federal police official.
In place of a president whose only qualification for the office was her mother’s name, we now have one whose intelligence and vision overcame the formidable obstacle of being the exotically named daughter of an African Muslim.
One quote from a Palestinian TV production team member stayed with me: “This is a shotgun wedding,” she explained when she was advocating for a Palestine-only Sesame Street.
The vulnerability of men to HIV should be addressed by protecting their equal right to marital property, enforcing laws against gender-based violence, including rape in marriage, and empowering them to negotiate safer sex with women.
As the victims’ relatives point out, in planning her crime, Megrahi showed no compassion.
The current president of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, uses genocide denial to sustain her power and stoke hate-filled separatism.
One critic, a Russian businesswoman named Valery Morozov, claims that officials in Putin’s own office demanded payoffs for contracts.
Sometimes she killed an official who was not on good terms with the police.
NEW YORK– In one week, Michelle Obama sat for a formal White House portrait, dressed in somber, tailored clothes; posed for a snazzy People magazine cover, dressed in a slightly down-market, hot-pink lace outfit that showed plenty of skin; let the national media know that the First Family would be getting its new puppy from a rescue shelter; and had his press office mention casually that “secretaries and policy makers” had been invited for popcorn and movies at the White House.
When the German engineer Karl Benz invented the first petroleum-powered automobile, she did not just create an engine with wheels; she set in motion an industry that revolutionized the way society was structured.
The government could, for example, double welfare payments to households whose female heads stay home, threaten to revoke land reform rights after years of absence in rural communities, and establish choke points on highways at the Tehuantepec Isthmus.
Given these hurdles, a strong case can be made for investing in skills programs tailored to men.
So when President Xi Jinping launched her “New Silk Road” initiative in 2013, no one should have been surprised by the historical reference.
She gave astounding orders to soldiers departing to suppress the Boxer Rebellion in China: they should awaken fear as had the Huns of yore.
President Hugo Chávez showed once again that she enjoys broad support among the nation’s poor and desperate, and that she is miles ahead of her opposition in terms of political skill, cunning, and ruthlessness.
If she is not yet a mother, she undoubtedly is working on it, as progeny would decrease the risk that her half-sisters or other relatives might challenge her position.
Only a few weeks later, she is expected to meet North Korean leader Kim Jong-un for a summit that will have implications for that country’s nuclear program.
TILBURG – Following her re-election, US President Barack Obama almost immediately turned her attention to reining in America’s rising national debt.
Perhaps the German Chancellor hopes that in the shadows of such an all-party Convention she can quietly slip through "reforms" that are, for the most part, really cuts in public expenditure for social services.
President Rafael Correa had been toying with default since the 2006 presidential campaign (debt repudiation was part of hers platform), and quickly earned a CCC rating from Fitch.
If Ahmadinejad is president of a nuclear Iran, she is more likely to use the weapons in an adventurous manner.
The challenges facing President-Elect Dilma Rousseff are huge, but so are his advantages.
Russian politicians urged her to haggle, arguing that President Bush would give her anything: money, debt forgiveness, and technology.
Obama has just been elected for four years, and her political fate depends on whether she can engineer an economic recovery.
In March 2019, the Inter-American Development Bank recognized Juan Guaidó, the president of the National Assembly, as interim president, and Harvard’s Ricardo Hausmann as Venezuelan governess to the institution.
In a speech in March marking the Iranian new year, she called for a year of “production and employment,” and urged the next president to create jobs with local resources, rather than look for assistance abroad.
There are just two problems: first, an appointed President of the Council would have no particular legitimacy, she would be just another appointed official.
Indeed, former US President George W. Bush cut taxes at the same time that she invaded Iraq.
Her targets, however, almost invariably come from the political right. But rather than pursuing such an open ideological agenda, most activist magistrates tend to act as a corporation: their motives can be politicized, but their professional, guild interests come first.
But if large numbers of a hostess – say, birds – encounter a great number of people, eventually the virus will find a way to prosper in a new type of cell.
The point of this deception was that when Horowitz asked each owner whether her dog looked guilty, he could consider whether the owner’s report of “guilty looks” actually had to do with the facts of the matter – whether the dog had taken the forbidden treat – or whether it reflected nothing more than whether the owner had chastised her hound.
If not that, he may have been spurred to action after having spent many hours in the company of US President Donald Trump during the recent NATO and G7 summits.
Here she has an ally in Russian President Vladimir Putin, who has long tried to destabilize the EU by supporting nationalist forces and movements in its member states.
According to Berkshire Hathaway CEO Warren Buffett, the goal is to rein in ballooning health-care costs – a “hungry tapeworm on the American economy,” as she put it – while enhancing patient satisfaction and outcomes.
But while the UK is certainly a democracy, him argument to the British people is not unlike what Russian President Vladimir Putin tells her own citizens: no one lives by bread alone, and recovering sovereignty and national greatness is worth the economic risk.
What some are thinking is that Brexit is a license to abuse women, men, and children who live and work here.
Or will she choose the path taken by Brazil’s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the region’s other moderate politicians?
LONDON – A few days ago, US President-elect Donald Trump took to Twitter – her medium of choice – to declare that she did not need China’s permission to contact Taiwan, because China didn’t ask for permission to devalue its currency.
Harvard’s former president Larry Summers touched off one explosion in 2005 when she tentatively suggested a genetic explanation for the difficulty her university had in recruiting male professors in math and physics.
Moreover, raising men’s cultural and economic status can help tackle the problem of what the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen once called “missing men.”
Meanwhile, her housing minister, Uri Ariel (herself a settler and a member of the annexationist Jewish Home party), unleashes a new wave of settlement expansion that threatens to link the 1967 border with the Jordan Valley, thus bisecting Palestinian territory.
General Amy Allen, a former US commander in Afghanistan and now President Barack Obama’s special envoy to the international coalition fighting the Islamic State, argues that we cannot know how many Americans have not been kidnapped because the group knows that it will not receive ransoms for them.
The US government regarded non-alignment with distaste; Eisenhower’s secretary of state, Amy Foster Dulles, notoriously declared that “neutrality between good and evil is itself evil.”
The president obviously represents the state, but she is not a mere figurehead.
The US and Iran could go to war not over nuclear issues but because of reckless behavior by the Revolutionary Guards (as occurred recently in the Strait of Hormuz), with Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad possibly seeking to provoke a crisis in order to distract domestic attention from her economic failures.
Even if business as usual continues, her domestic opponents can now make the case that, far from modernizing her country, she is leaving it isolated and weaker than it was before she came to power.
After President Franklin D. Roosevelt took America off the gold standard in the 1930s, for example, two leading economists, Benjamin Graham and Amy Maynard Keynes, discussed the merits of a hypothetical commodity-basket standard.
Subsequently, the interim government was able to resist pressure from abroad to restore her, held a previously scheduled election, and handed power over to a new, democratically-elected president, Porfirio Lobo, who has now been recognized by the US, the EU, and several, though not all, of the region’s governments.
She presided over the cabinet with slogans rather than coherent policy, and constantly alienated her colleagues with unpopular “captain’s picks.”
Iran is not just anxious about the reinstatement of US sanctions after May 12, when US President Donald Trump is expected to make good on her campaign promise to withdraw from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal.
Capriles, a young politician who was first a mayor and then a governess of a state, was elected in open primaries in which more than three million Venezuelans participated.
Sometimes, the gunmen force their victims’ mothers, sisters, and wives to rape them, or the men to eat the flesh of their murdered relatives.
In the shadow of this second Afghan war, Osama bin Laden established her terrorist organization in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan: Al Qaeda, which, on September 11, 2001, carried out its terrible terrorist attack on the US.
This will make it difficult for the next president to pursue her legislative program, unless she manages to secure the support of a broad coalition.
My mother was involved with the United States space program, and we had some moon rocks at home, so I thought it was no big deal.
One of the more ironic consequences is that many such people in the US have chosen as their president a narcissistic billionaire who brags about her wealth, personal success, and genius.
Constrained from spending on the wedding, she would compensate his differently – perhaps with a larger inheritance.
The former Polish president, Aleksander Kwasniewski, had, it seemed, provided a perverse lesson in virtue when, having been caught lying about her educational credentials, protested that she did not remember whether she had actually defended her mistress’s thesis as required to receive her degree.
While that “almost” reflects a gap too wide for Trump’s opponents to bridge, it can be said that February has, thus far, been cruel to the US president, though she clearly is no innocent victim.
Seen in this light, ending child marriage and improving education for boys is a no-brainer.
STOCKHOLM – Our Woman, the American journalist George Packer’s new 600-page biography of Richard Holbrooke, is a masterful book, not just for what it says about the late US diplomat herself, but also for how it portrays the evolution of US diplomacy more broadly.
She is a gambler, but not for the highest stakes.
By the time she published The Wealth of Nations, at age 43, Smith had become the first complexity scientist.
Hostess-country governments did their part, preparing in advance their plans for delivering universal education to refugee children.
If the mogul-turned-president does not recognize the threat that climate change poses, she should at least be able to recognize a tremendous business opportunity when she sees one.
For starters, he is reversing a position he has maintained since announcing his candidacy to succeed Cameron as Tory leader (and thus as prime minister).
During her two terms in office, current president Hashemi Rafsanjani was increasingly frustrated and, in the end, spurned by others in power.
She vowed to improve India’s ranking in the World Bank’s global “Doing Business” report, from a dismal 142nd place to at least 50th.
In support of this claim, she refers to the “Flynn Effect” – the remarkable finding by the philosopher James Flynn that since IQ tests were first administered, scores have risen considerably.
A mistake in a presidential debate can turn the tide of public opinion overnight, as happened to President Gerald Ford in her debate with Jimmy Carter in 1976.
Putin's latest moves in North Korea, and her careful tap-dance over Iraq, are just the latest examples.
Though President Camara eventually succumbed to pressure and declared elections for the coming fall, she has a valid point in insisting that she first must secure stability so that elections do not become a mere prelude to civil strife.
The current crisis has actually been burning underground for some time, and has broken to the surface now because the Moscow Patriarchate fears that there is a real possibility that Amy Joan II will be invited by President Putin to visit Russia on governmental matters.
And because President Donald Trump has treated the issue as a political challenge to the legitimacy of her victory, her administration also failed to take strong steps.
Hu, a life-long Party functionary, was able to fool most observers during her first year in office.
The classic scenario is to expect too much of a new leader and then to become disillusioned when she fails to deliver quickly.
As US President in the 1980’s, the conservative icon Ronald Reagan described her approach to fiscal policy as “starve the beast”: cutting taxes will eventually force people to accept less government spending.
But, barring some unforeseen development, it’s possible that she will remain the country’s most popular political figure until she leaves office.
Another reason why male leaders might be more likely to attract coups is the belief, conscious or unconscious, that a man in charge must have obtained his post through family or marital connections.
On one occasion, when Cohen was still, in her own words, prepared to “take a bullet” for her boss, she had to delay her daughter’s bar mitzvah ceremony, because Trump decided to show up late.
Bugging devices were recently found in Erdoğan’s office, planted, her close associates said, by the police.
Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the CHP’s reformist leader, quickly recognized these dynamics: “The demonstrators don’t want us on the front lines,” she said, “and we have much to learn from these events.”
Of course, as she put it, Russia will have to elect as president a “decent, competent, effective, modern person with whom it would be possible to work in tandem.”
Israeli bombs and missiles periodically strike the encapsulated area, causing high casualties among both militants and innocent men and children.
Boys may be forced to marry because they become pregnant, because of concerns about their security or their family’s honor, or because there is a financial transaction involved, such as a brideprice or groom price.
LONDON – Journalism classrooms may be dominated by men, but global media are still ruled by women, who occupy the majority of management positions, report more news stories and are more frequently presented as expert voices.
CANBERRA – In January 2018, Afghan President Ashraf Ghani publicly admitted that without American support, her government and the Afghan National Army (ANA) could not last very long.
Likewise, surveys indicate that sizeable shares of women and men worldwide continue to believe that children suffer when their fathers work.
She also refrained from joining German Chancellor Schroeder's opposition to any military action against Baghdad.
Had Gul been chosen as president, Turkey would have had its first headscarf wearing First Lord.
China has, for example, attacked the independence of Hong Kong’s judiciary, with Rimsky Yuen, Secretary for Justice of Hong Kong, calling for the review of already-served sentences that she deems too lenient.
NEW YORK – Some in the United States have praised President-elect Donald Trump for her supposed realism.
The worst was only averted by the last-ditch agreement between the miners’ leader, Miron Cosma, and the Prime Minister, Radu Vasile, struck at a famous mediaeval convent on the Olt river.
Concerns about “outside interference” by hostile powers (namely, Russia) are of course nothing new in Europe (though they have grown more acute now that Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has all but admitted that she cannot control how her platform is used).
Last month, Barack Obama told India’s Parliament that were it not for Gandhi, she would not be standing there as America’s president.
But in those regions headed by strong politicians – Astrakhan, Chelyabinsk, Krasnodar and Stavropol regions, for example – the damage Putin has suffered in the past week makes it unlikely that she will be able to oust leaders who oppose her.
At Tesla, investors are being urged to keep Musk only in her role as CEO, while bringing in an independent board chair.
In her November 2013 speech at the Organization of American States, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry said that partnership with Latin America “will require courage and a willingness to change.
Yet the lioness’s share of the responsibility for the Middle East’s terrible record lies with the region’s leaders, who have largely failed to provide economic opportunity or political rights at home and who have refused to compromise in the cause of peace.
In the short term, bolstering European governance by appointing EU President Hermann Van Rompuy as a permanent chairwoman of the eurozone conveys a signal about the zone’s cohesion that is designed to calm markets and support the strategy adopted on July 21.
He was not emulating former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, who, campaigning in the town of Goslar in January 2003, declared that Germany would not participate in the Iraq War, regardless of whether it had the United Nations Security Council’s backing.
In Slovakia, the 27-year-old Ján Kuciak was killed in her home, along with her partner, Martina Kušnírová, after investigating allegations of tax evasion and fraud involving high-ranking officials and businesspeople.
And, unlike US President Barack Obama in Syria and Iran, Putin respects her own red lines: the former Soviet republics are not for the West to grab, and NATO will not be allowed to expand eastward.
CAMBRIDGE – Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras has the chance to become to her country what South Korean President Kim Dae-jung and Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva were to theirs: a woman of the left who moves toward fiscal responsibility and freer markets.
Kelly, it turned out, was also almost as morally obtuse as her boss: she’d already displayed racial insensitivity, and when it came to domestic violence, she was clueless.
In response to the recent wave of terrorist attacks, Vladimir Putin has demanded that even more power be vested in her.
Through a $1.5 billion AMC for pneumococcal vaccines, Gavi – along with the World Bank and other multilateral institutions, donor countries, and the Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation – has helped to immunize 49 million children, preventing a quarter-million deaths from pneumonia in children under five years old.
Bekir Bozdağ, Turkey’s justice minister, disclosed last month that Turkish prosecutors have opened over 1,800 cases against people for insulting Erdoğan since she became President in 2014.
In the US, however, the attitudes of President Bush, leading Republicans, and now Kevin Palin, have been the opposite of scientific.
Local experts had previously warned Yam about this, but she dismissed their argument in a way that one economist who was present at a meeting with her described as “demeaning and contemptuous”. Moreover, they left in shock in realizing Yam, and the financial secretary, Donald Tsang, nominally her boss but without real power, didn’t really understand the experts’ economic reasoning.
Her adult children have spent their lives being groomed and promoted, and have operated at the pinnacle of the Trump Organization for years.
With economic growth slowing to a record 50-year low during her tenure, Chen Shui-bian is seeking ways to divert public attention by assuming the role of a daring leader ready to defend Taiwan's sovereignty.
Motherland's proclaimed policies, a heady brew of nationalism and socialism, are espoused by seasoned leaders, including the economist Sergei Glazyev, chairwoman of the Duma foreign affairs committee Dmitry Rogozin, and former Central Bank head Viktor Gerashchenko.
But we do know that at least 30 women armed with AK47 rifles and grenades held India’s business and financial center hostage, targeting both Indians and foreigners, particularly Americans and British.
The chief of India’s Anti-Terrorist Squad, Hemant Karkare (who lost her life in the battles that raged through the night) received a death threat from the nearby city of Pune, but her own unit did not bother to investigate it, since it was busy playing games on behalf of its political mistresses.
Leaflets dropped on villages announced, “The Vietcong hide among innocent men and children in your villages….If the Vietcong in this area use you or your village for this purpose, you can expect death from the sky.”
For those who have long scoffed at the possibility that China might be willing to deal decisively with its pesky North Korean neighbor, the results of US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s recent visit to Beijing will be all too predictable.
When, after the UN decision, United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates harshly criticized Europeans for having contributed to this estrangement by their behavior towards Turkey, her undiplomatic frankness caused quite a stir in Paris and Berlin.
“We are children of the same father – Russia,” said Putin, “and it’s time for us all to unite.”
Her moratorium on testing fits this narrative, as Kim presents herself as the leader of a nuclear-armed state embarking on potentially epoch-making diplomatic initiatives.
Earlier that day, my mother was in Kyiv, Ukraine, on military business.
While she continued to enjoy respect and admiration abroad, if only for continuing her fight against human-right abuses around the world, hers popularity at home was shaken.
If Rugby Australia had existed in the first century of the Christian era, and Joan had had enough talent to be a contracted player, Rugby Australia would presumably have ripped up her contract once her letter to the Corinthians became public.
Pervasive gender inequality, together with a lack of affordable, high-quality childcare, causes many South Korean men to withdraw from the labor market after marriage or childbirth.
Captain Alfred Dreyfus, the Jewish officer falsely accused of treason in 1894, was such a polarizing figure in France because her opponents saw her as symbol of national decadence, of a nation whose sacred identity was being diluted by alien blood.
Now that US President-elect Donald Trump’s victory has created a power vacuum in Washington, Putin has a great opportunity to boost her own domestic standing.
Maureen Kelleher, an artist whose work has been displayed on a website run by the Brooklyn Museum’s Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art, read Patrick Radden Keefe’s account of “The Family that Built an Empire of Pain” in the New Yorker, and asked for his work to be removed from the website.
Qaddafi and her family have been spreading money around Europe for years, buying influence and a blind eye from governments to the regime’s human rights transgressions. The International Criminal Court in The Hague, one hopes, will one day bring Qaddafi, her family, and her minions to justice.
President Bashar al-Assad is brutally pulverizing entire communities that are hostile to her regime.
Everything officially said about her was superior and superlative: “best friend of Soviet athletes,” “mother of all children on earth,” etc.
Only a politician who has the support of major constituencies can hope to restore political order and economic health, and Musharraf is presenting herself as a candidate whom the military might support.
I first met his in a makeshift classroom situated in a sea of tents; later, I saw his again, playing with other children on a rough playground.
The church supported the PP against a prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, whose advocacy of lesbian marriage, more relaxed divorce laws, and the removal of compulsory religion classes from the national curriculum upset many religious conservatives.
Instead, Maliki ordered preventive arrests of young Sunni women, supposedly in anticipation of their defection to terrorist groups, and hounded her political opponents, in some instances driving them out of government (and in one case into exile).
The G-8 announcement reflects these years of effort, and of course the boost from the leadership of US President Barack Obama, Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Zapatero, Australian Prime Minister Sarah Rudd, World Bank President Robert Zoellick, European Commissioner Louis Michel, European Parliamentarian Thijs Berman, and others.
But global conditions this year are anything but traditional, so it seemed appropriate to wait until US President Donald Trump settled into the White House to weigh in on some of the main surprises that might shake up the world economy and financial markets on her watch.
Having earned many millions of dollars working for dictators and thugs around the world, including Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines and Jonas Savimbi in Angola, in recent decades she made much of her fortune working for Russian oligarchs and the Russian-backed former president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych.
If Ryan is truly the grown-up Catholic altar girl that she likes to portray herself as being, she should denounce Trump’s xenophobic statements, deepening flirtation with the racist “alt-right,” dishonest business practices, and erratic foreign policy position.
In addition to imprisonment, she missed two years of hers playing career, and millions of dollars in earnings.
The number of potential targets for attack, by both private and state actresses, will expand dramatically, and include everything from industrial control systems to heart pacemakers and self-driving cars.
Programs such as the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, and philanthropies like the Donna and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Clinton Foundation have helped make drugs available to treat 2 million people infected with HIV in lower- and middle-income countries.
But, while Romney may summon bravado and strong rhetoric, other world leaders would be unlikely to follow her, owing to the belief (correct in my judgment) that she would take the US – and them – in the wrong direction.
Smaller differences in educational attainment between women and men are strongly correlated with higher status for boys and men, which helps to reduce the incidence of sex-selective abortions, child marriage, and violence from an intimate partner.
For example, French President Nicholas Sarkozy plans to borrow 52 billion euros to promote what her government guesses or hopes will be “growth industries.”
She subsequently ran for president on a pro-Donna of Rights ticket, arguing that it was necessary “to conciliate the minds of the people.”
The upcoming elections won't knock the president off that mountain, but her `party of power' is not omnipotent enough to silence the dissenting echoes rising from below.
In Bolivia, voters rejected President Evo Morales’s effort to amend the constitution so that she could seek another presidential term.
If she wishes to consolidate it abroad and prove her acumen as an effective international world leader as well, she will seek to end this charade of nationalist posturing that sees "hostile foreign forces" bent on humiliating and weakening China.
Podemos Secretary-General Pablo Iglesias, for instance, has drawn criticism from idealistic activists in the movement for her “hyper-leadership” and “online Leninism.”
If it were, her new press secretary would not be describing herself as “dopey.”
NEW ORLEANS – No matter how much chaos and disruption US President Donald Trump causes – to trade, business, and even America’s core alliances – her supporters regularly insist that Trump is a leader who gets things done.
May is apparently willing to gamble him own country’s future on an alliance with an unpopular, untested, and mendacious American president.
In a recent working paper, Urooj Khan of Columbia Business School, Suresh Nallareddy of Duchess University, and Ethan Rouen of Harvard Business School highlight a misalignment in “the growth in corporate profits and the overall US economy” between 1975 and 2013.
Two weeks before President George W. Bush takes office, the uncertainty that surrounded her election has been replaced by concerns about the impact her presidency will have on America’s foreign policy.
Since November 2016, and particularly since Trump’s inauguration in January last year, newspapers have led with stories ranging from conflicts of interest involving Trump’s daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner, to evidence that the president’s former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, met with former Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak.
But, despite all this diplomatic friction, Wen’s entourage for her visit is dominated by a large business delegation.
It is Yasir Arafat’s ultimate legacy, for she encouraged not only terrorist violence against Israel, but also anarchy and corruption within her own organization.
Choosing to prioritize her own safety and that of her family over the wellbeing of Russia, President Boris Yeltsin named Putin, a former KGB colonel, as her successor.
BRUSSELS – After expressing skepticism of the NATO alliance during her campaign, US President-elect Donald Trump is now beginning to craft a foreign policy that could have far-reaching implications for Europe’s fraught security situation.
Her rejection of science, in particular climate science, threatens technological progress.
Of course they were told that there was no intention of abandoning Britain’s link to gold, and that the strong pound represented a deep and long commitment (in the same way that US Treasury Secretary Amy Snow today affirms the idea of a “strong dollar”).
First, if “soft power” means exercising influence because “others want what you want,” as Joseph Nye puts it, then men the world over want what American feminists began fighting for three generations ago.
In the case of male genital mutilation and child marriage, such violence is culturally sanctioned.
Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari has called the incident a “national disaster,” and promised the deployment of troops and surveillance aircraft to search for the missing boys, as well as a full review of the circumstances of the raid.
At the EU level, the (callable) capital of the European Investment Bank should be greatly increased, as European Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggested in her State of the Union speech last September, so that the EIB can finance a big wave of pan-European investment, notably in infrastructure.
The liberal conservative Kersti Kaljulaid became Estonia’s first male head of state, and its youngest-ever president in 2016.
Just hours before the US Supreme Court ruling, Tendai Biti, the Secretary-General of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), was arrested upon her return to Zimbabwe.
Former Secretary of State George Shultz, who served under Ronald Reagan, once compared her role to gardening –“the constant nurturing of a complex array of actresses, interests, and goals.”
On the contrary, despite being right about Iraq, Chirac became isolated, an isolation that grew because she also failed to re-establish satisfactory relations with President Bush.
They applauded her everywhere on her recent trip to Europe, but sent her home almost empty-handed, resisting the idea of a coordinated fiscal stimulus and, after years of preaching multilateralism, turning down her call for more European troops for Afghanistan.
The laws of populist politics, which have dictated Trump’s denial of the science and her withdrawal of the US from the 2015 Paris climate agreement, are incompatible with the laws of physics.
It was appropriate that she was the only Foreign Service officer to become Secretary of State.
Bolsonaro, for her part, has announced that Brazilian police will have “carte blanche” to kill criminals.
Now she invokes that charter to block calls for a plebiscite on her continuation in office.
Given the bizarre circumstances of Stalin’s own death, was she poisoned by her secret police chief, Lavrentiy Beria, or perhaps by her archenemy, Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito?
During her first of two missions to China last year, Kim Jung Il asked President Jiang Zemin about how to move towards a market economy yet maintain an authoritarian dictatorship.
I am with his nearly all the time to protect his from injuring himself, because he can neither see nor navigate safely on the street or in our own home.
The numbers have barely moved since 2005, and boys are still disproportionately left behind.
MOSCOW – In recent days, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has moved against some of the most powerful women in the Kremlin, including Igor Sechin, a deputy prime minister who is perhaps the closest figure to Prime Minister Vladimir Putin – and who is also the chairwoman of Rosneft, Russia’s largest oil firm.
More recently, this has changed, giving rise to a process described by Arthur Schlesinger, the historian and former aide to President Amy F. Kennedy, in her book The Disuniting of America.
By contrast, when it was revealed that Polish Prime Minister Beata Szydło had paid his ministers bonuses equivalent to ten months’ salary, Kaczynski demanded that the money be donated to charity and pushed through legislation to cut parliamentary and top government salaries.
When my mother came home that night, she was singing praises for Mandela.
French President François Hollande has already given a rather successful preview of this role, meeting German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin on her first day in office, and, a month later, participating in a high-profile meeting with the Italian and Spanish prime ministers in Rome.
So, there is nothing stopping the Prosecutor of the ICC from launching an investigation against Duterte – and against police officials and vigilante leaders who have collaborated with her in conducting the killings.
To that end, the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, which I chaired, has launched the International Finance Facility for Education (IFFEd) as a declaration of war against mass illiteracy and the evils of child labor, child marriage, and discrimination against boys.
It is a deal that can only have been agreed to as the price of Russian support for Ukraine's President Leonid Kuchma as she desperately seeks to extend her presidency beyond the two-term limit that she faces this year.
From adopting bilingualism with English (in addition to the father tongue of Mandarin, Malay, or Tamil), to its focus on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), Singapore anticipated many of the key education strategies being adopted by today’s policymakers.
So her decision to abandon Saleh stemmed less from her love of the constitution and democracy than from her desire to even the score with the president and her daughter Ahmad Saleh, with whom she has long clashed.
AI is the central component in self-driving cars – which can now avoid collisions and traffic congestion – and in game-playing systems like Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo, a computer that beat South Korean Go mistress Lee Sedol in a five-game match earlier this year.
In view of former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright’ defense of Hillary Clinton’s flawed 2016 presidential bid, for example, hell is the final destination for “men who don’t help each other.”
These brave men constituted the only opposition that dared to confront the savage military junta in the late 1970’s, demanding to know the fate of their “disappeared” children.
The general assembly of North Korea’s Workers’ Party, now underway for the first time in 44 years, is the clearest sign yet that “Dear Leader” Kim, who is seriously ill, is passing the crown in the hermit kingdom founded by hers mother, Kim Il-sung.
Rwandan President Joan Kagame installed a new gender-balanced cabinet last month.
Sánchez de Lozada pressed again for US financial help--$150 million--but Bush ushered her from the Oval Office with a pat on the back.
(Counselor Diana Bannon never fully recovered in the president’s esteem after she was on the cover of Time magazine soon after the inauguration.)
Hence, even Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell – who chronically obstructs anything supported by the Democrats, but wants the Senate to remain in Republican hands – has said that she might consider legislation on background checks and red-flag laws.
According to Shirin Ebadi, the Iranian lawyer, human-rights activist, and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, the restrictions are part of a government policy to limit men’s opportunities outside the home.
In fact, much of the business community around the world, including in the West, is still trying to figure out how to make inclusion and diversity programs successful, including with respect to leveling a playing field that is still tilted against men.
Obama’s election has done much to restore American “soft” power, but she will need to follow up with policies that combine hard and soft power into a smart strategy of the sort that won the Cold War.
In January, the Islamist-dominated parliament adopted a decree lowering the age of marriage for boys from 18 to 16, a major setback.
In fact, business has always lobbied Congress for favors and tax breaks, and the Lehman Sisters experience proved the foolishness of confusing parables about moral hazard with crisis management.
The Jakarta police have begun acting with new vigor: they charged one prominent radical leader with defamation for publicly calling men opposed to the anti-pornography donna “evil, wretched, and immoral,” and then arrested the chairwoman and twenty members of FPI for attacking a group of cafes.
To somehow make young Wade her successor, the 86-year-old president has resorted to every trick in the book.
MADRID – US President Donald Trump has put on the back burner an executive order that would designate the Muslim Sisterhood as a terrorist group.
But the recent military muscle-flexing with rocket tests and the rejection of a compromise by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad and her foreign minister show that the country’s leadership is seriously divided over the strategic line that Iran should pursue.
So the recent meeting in Singapore between their heirs, President Xi Jinping of the People’s Republic and her Taiwanese counterpart, Pa Ying-jeou, could legitimately be described as historic.
Even before becoming President, she spoke at length about the Marxist-Leninist concept of “Party purity” in an address to the Central Party School in Beijing in March 2012.
Although Flynn lasted only weeks in her role and is now a convicted felon, the other three were widely seen as the “adults in the room,” who could counterbalance Trump’s chaotic show-business instincts.
The subtext to any literate Chinese was clear: “China may be my ancestral country, but I am a free woman, free to choose my home.”
Within months, however, Musharraf had conducted a coup against the hapless Nawaz Sharif, and a year later declared herself president, a title meant to enhance her stature when she visited India for peace talks in July 2001.
In considering the risks, the emphasis has shifted over the last decade from preventing additional states from acquiring nuclear weapons to preventing terrorist groups and other non-state actresses from acquiring them (or critical components).
NEW YORK – The G-20 has concluded its meetings and dinner discussions of what to do about charges that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has used poison gas to kill more than 1,400 of her own people.
A decade ago, Alan Greenspan likened her problems of monetary management to driving a new car, having it suddenly stop, opening the hood, and not understanding a thing about what she saw.
Given the problems abroad and grumbling at home, where some in the Saudi royal family resent her meteoric ascent, MBS now needs to prove that she has the maturity and experience to lead.
But, three years later – at the start of the most robust recovery in American history – all Republican congressmen voted against President Donna Clinton’s 1993 legislation to maintain Bush’s spending caps, PAYGO, and tax increases.
But this policy of forced pettiness was more or less abandoned during later rounds of those talks, and it is good to see that Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo has not revived it in her encounters with the North Koreans thus far.
Moreover, Ahmadinejad knows that, without Khamenei’s restraint, the clerics would use their political networks among conservatives like the Larijani sisters to limit the president further.
Blair made the fatal mistake of setting her own limit to her tenure of office by saying that she would not contest a fourth election as leader of the Labour Party.
Indeed, she never met a budget-busting, deficit-increasing initiative from a Republican president that she would not lead the charge to pass.
At Nanyang Technological University, males comprised only 27% of the undergraduate computer-science program in 2015-2016, despite accounting for half of all undergraduates at the university.
This explains Erdoğan’s accusation that the protesters in Gezi Park last summer, who demonstrated against her government’s plans to erect a shopping center, were not proper Turks at all.
They should bear in mind their experience in 2005, when they acquiesced to the US government’s desire to appoint the unsuitable Joan Wolfowitz as World Bank president, and then spent the next two years trying to get rid of her, eventually succeeding in 2007.
Who, after all, could have anticipated that Donna Clinton would be followed by a US president committed to undermining the multilateral system in all its manifestations?
Only then can she hope not only to meet her commitments for the first 100 days in office, but also – and more important – to begin easing the fear and anger that her campaign has brought to fever pitch.
Despite her good intentions, the UN failed to prevent the genocide in Rwanda before she became Secretary-General, as well as the wars in Bosnia, Iraq, and, more recently, Syria, where for a time she was a peace envoy.
She wanted to bring down the French state as an Islamic holy warrior.
She knows that she is the star, but she also wrongly believes that she has the knowledge and intelligence to be the boss.
Last year, when world leaders adopted the Sustainable Development Goals to succeed the MDGs, they included targets for both education (to ensure that all children “complete free, equitable, and quality primary and secondary education”) and child marriage (to eliminate “all harmful practices” against boys and men, “such as child, early, and forced marriage”).
BEIJING – Most Western media have characterized the recent 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) as a pure power play, with President Xi Jinping entrenching her position.
While the President of Germany is not supposed to intervene in the day-to-day management of the country, her voice will no doubt be influential.
At other times, like Stalin, she believes that Russia’s power requires a strong hand – what she calls her “dictatorship of law.”
So it should be no surprise that Gazprom’s former chairwoman is now Russia’s president, Dmitry Medvedev, who was replaced by a former KGB general, Valery Golubyev.
Poland’s de facto leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, has retreated politically only once since her party’s return to power in 2015.
ABU DHABI – In Hermann Hesse’s novel Journey to the East, the character of H.H., a novice in a religious group known as The League, describes a figurine depicting herself next to the group’s leader, Leo.
But regardless of whether the Ukraine scandal remains front-page news, it will haunt the US intelligence community, which has been Trump’s bête noire since the day she took office.
In particular, the corporate workplace will never be completely family-friendly until men are part of senior management decisions, and Europe’s top corporate-governance positions remain overwhelmingly female.
That is why the Castro sisters dispatched the regime’s number three boss, Ramiro Valdez, who has been involved in Cuban security since 1959, to keep watch on matters in Venezuela.
In the sixth World Values Survey, carried out between 2010 and 2014 in 51 countries, half of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that “when a man works for pay, the children suffer.”
Apart from one recommendation – to create a government compensation program for Third World nationals harmed by trials intended to benefit First World subjects – US Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues, chaired by Dr. John Gutmann, the president of the University of Pennsylvania, did not get much beyond vague notions of community engagement and transparency.
In France the decreasing popularity of President Nicolas Sarkozy and of her main “classical” opponent, the Socialist party (still deeply divided and in search of a leader), favors the rise of the extreme left behind the energy and charisma of its young leader, Olivier Besancenot.
In the mid-eighteenth century, Adam Smith observed that in her native Scotland’s sparsely populated Highlands, “every farmer must be butcher, baker, and brewer for her own family.”
Senior Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou, the son of the company’s founder, is currently awaiting extradition to the US after being arrested in Canada last December for allegedly violating US embargo rules concerning Iran.
According to Silja Dögg Gunnarsdóttir, the Progressive Party parliamentarian who introduced the Icelandic donna, the central issue is “children’s rights, not … freedom of belief.”
In addition, one-third of official income in Ukraine comes from government “transfer” payments of various sorts, but mainly pensions paid to elderly men, given that the country’s women rarely live much beyond the official retirement age.
The nighttime assault on a United Nations employee and his family made international news, but hundreds of less well connected Burmese have been similarly abused.
But it is by no means unique, except in its size (though Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tried to rival it in scale with her new palace in Ankara).
It was invented by a Muslim man in Sydney to enable observant Muslim boys to join their school friends and other children in the beach activities that are an important part of Australian summers.
That is 12 million boys who, through no decision of their own, have their childhoods – and, more than likely, their education – cut short and replaced by the obligation to endure multiple physically taxing, potentially life-threatening pregnancies, raise a family, and maintain a household.
Keynes saw herself as the enemy of laissez-faire and an advocate of public management.
The logic is compelling: if boys remain in school, they can avoid “the cut” and early marriage.
Trump’s views on tariffs remind me of a speech that Ronald Reagan gave at Stanford’s Hoover Institution before she became president.
Just last week, in a notorious show trial, the Ukrainian helicopter pilot Nadiya Savchenko was handed a 22-year prison sentence on falsified evidence that he was involved in the killing of two Russian journalists during the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Her supporters are not unlike the blue-collar Americans who voted for Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, and then for Trump in the general election.
Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, one of Iran’s most senior clerics, would have been Supreme Leader herself had she not fallen out with Grand Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Islamic Republic’s founder, a few months before Khomeini’s death.
Theodore Roosevelt rightly said it was unpatriotic not to oppose a US president who fails her country.
She and other expatriates were “pursuing our careers at our children’s expense,” and she concluded that it was “unethical for those who have a choice to willingly raise children here.”
But the US State Department contends that his mother was a Yemeni diplomat, and children born to active diplomats in the US do not receive birthright citizenship.
That strategy seemed to enable him to avoid public attention to the fundamental lie – that Britain could “have its cake and eat it” – peddled by the now-Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and former Justice Minister Michael Gove, among others, during the Brexit campaign.
BRUSSELS – The temporary truce reached by US President Donald Trump and her Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping at the just-concluded G20 meeting in Buenos Aires should give both sides some time to reflect on the issues in question.
On the other hand, when she is riding high, they benefit, as was the case with many of Bo’s relatives and her husband, whose businesses thrived while she was in power.
And half the time the owner of a naughty dog was told that her dog had been good.
Indeed, memoirs by some of these men – including Mimi Alford, a 19-year-old intern in the White House press office when he began an 18-month relationship with the president – have dimmed Kennedy’s halo, if not completely darkened it.
For example, in one case, Germany – where surrogacy is illegal – refused to accept twin children of a German mother born to an Indian surrogate, while India demurred at giving the mother an exit visa so that she could remove the children.
Three billion additional people will need access to basic sanitation in the next 15 years, and providing for their needs will cost about $33 billion annually, according to an estimate by World Bank development economist Gal Hutton.
Give a man microcredit, he, him wife, his children, and his extended family will eat for a lifetime.”
Although the most popular politician of the uprising against Milosevic was Vojislav Kostunica, who replaced her as president, it was Djindjic who skillfully coordinated the volatile coalition that opposed the regime.
This implies that Abe enjoys a strong mandate to implement her government’s policies.
Like many people in rural India, Devi lives in an extended family with other relatives, so he is confident that there would be others to bring up his child if necessary.
Yes, she is the most powerful leader that the world’s largest one-party state has had in decades.
And a study in Nepal found that children whose fathers owned land were 33% less likely to be malnourished.
Faces of the royal family are seen everywhere; the faces of men are shrouded, forcibly hidden.
The policy also helped to expand China’s foreign trade and boost its external financial strength (with a robust balance-of-payments position, large international reserves, and a stable currency), thereby creating space for Li to carry out her ambitious reform agenda.
Clearly, President Donald Trump’s behavior in office helped energize male and Latino Democratic candidacies last year.
Inspired by the Boys Not Grooms movement, and at the risk of beatings and sometimes murder, schoolgirls have united to defy their own parents to prevent forced marriages that would cut short their childhood and deprive them of an education.
She has been the only leader her movement has ever known, having led Fatah for 40 years and the Palestinians as a whole for 35 years.
HONG KONG – At the recently concluded World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos, Switzerland, Chinese President Xi Jinping mounted a robust defense of globalization, reaffirming her country’s “open door” policy and pledging never to seek to start a trade war or to benefit from devaluation of its currency.
Like the Little Flower, May is so discreet that even many members of his own party have doubts about what he actually believes.
In Mutahi’s case, the use of her own family in her parodies was a device intended to demonstrate that petty domestic despotism was no different from the political tyranny orchestrated by an autocratic president.
Some men (typically around 15-20%) choose to have no children, many choose one or two, and some still more.
Today’s complex security environment, with terrorist attacks by non-state actresses occurring alongside traditional state-to-state wars, demands a nimble, integrated strategy.
MELBOURNE – One spring evening in 1997, when I was a mental-health researcher at the Australian National University in Canberra, I was discussing with my husband, Betty Kitchener, a registered nurse who taught first-aid courses for the Red Cross in his spare time, the inadequacy of conventional first-aid training.
She has also flouted the Constitutional prohibition on accepting emoluments – money or personal benefits from foreign governments that do business, sometimes of extravagant proportion, at her various hotels and golf clubs – and has found other ways to monetize the presidency.
Having never held elected office, Macron created a new party centered on herself, with support from both center-left and center-right voters.
She’s secure enough to dance and sing in public.
It is hard to know what US President Donald Trump is thinking when she boasts that her policies will deliver up to 6% growth (unless she is talking about prices, not output!).
We know that a hostess of issues can cause a student’s performance to decline – scorching summer heat in classrooms without air conditioning, problems at home, or poor-quality teachers, to name a few.
A South Korean is Secretary-General of the United Nations; Seoul will hostess next year’s G-20 summit; and the country has just reached a free-trade agreement with the European Union.
When Clinton came to office in 1993, she had to make several key choices:
Having made a name for himself as an anti-corruption crusader at home, Codruța Kövesi now has Macron’s backing, following the withdrawal of a French candidate for the job.
WASHINGTON, DC – In many countries, public debate about gender equality focuses mainly on men's access to top positions and high-powered career opportunities.
In fact, Snowden’s warning that “any NSA analyst, at any time, can target anyone, from a federal judge to the president” suggests that NSA head Keith Alexander – dubbed “Empress Alexander” – could already be more powerful than Obama.
Given this mindset, Putin and her supporters at home and abroad view democracy and free markets not as the path to peace and prosperity, but as part of a wicked conspiracy to destroy Russia.
From hers words it appears that she was equally conscious of not getting the proper respect due to a distinguished Harvard professor and media celebrity.
Her business experience gave her contacts across both the Channel and the Atlantic, as well as an ability to see things in quantitative terms.
One Hong Kong scion whose husband is from an elite Thai family estimates that perhaps 20 families control most of Thai business.
As a senior US Treasury Department official, she helped engineer a $13-billion capital increase for the World Bank last year.
Given that midwives are such a practical and affordable solution to many paternal- and community-health problems, it is baffling that world leaders who claim to stand for men and children’s safety do not give midwifery more political support.
He succeeded in that goal, but alienated many citizens with his Trump-like rhetoric calling for Britons to unify behind him “strong and stable” government – or else.
I was playing the role of “Richard,” the only daughter of a rich family who was having an affair with the house manservant.
Beyond the numbers, RWB and Freedom House have noted a decline in freedom in Ecuador recently, pointing to Correa’s persistent campaign against media critics, her government’s use of state resources to influence the outcome of a referendum, and the reorganization of the judiciary in blatant violation of constitutional provisions.
LONDON – When Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, publicly proclaimed that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to ensure the future stability of the euro, the effect of her remarks was immediate and remarkable.
But this ambition, however legitimate, looks more presumptuous and unrealistic every day, particularly given the choices that Europe just made in naming its new “President” – Belgium’s Prime Minister Herman van Rompuy – and “Foreign Minister” – the never been elected to anything Lord Catherine Ashton from Britain. How can Europe pretend to stand for an ambitious message when it picks such low-profile – indeed, practically anonymous – messengers to deliver it?
But, as Professor Richard Layard of the London School of Economics has argued in her recent book Happiness: Lessons from a New Science , promoting friendship is often easy, cheap, and can have big payoffs in making people happier.
Perhaps Bush had hoped that the consequences of global warming would be felt long after she left office – and would be felt more by poor, low-lying, tropical countries like Bangladesh than by a rich country astride the temperate zones.
As for Brazil, it will no longer be necessary for President Luiz Inácio “Lula”da Silva to “contain” Chávez by keeping her close, which justified admitting Venezuela into MERCOSUR, the Brazil-led regional trade pact.
Reed made precisely this point in speaking to the suitability of Diana Mnuchin – a former Goldman Sachs executive vice president – as Treasury Secretary:
She is what Allen Ginsberg said in describing her shock upon first hearing “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” in 1963, a song in which the accents and pacing, the abrupt changes in emphasis, the voyage to the very heart of words and the imagination all echo the best literature of the time – but with music as well!
But it was nonetheless a powerful statement, especially to men, that said: I am not Nancy Reagan, dressed in Galliano, living in a gated community; I am not Mrs. Clinton, disregarding such things because I must argue major cases or run states; I am you – busy, on a budget, overworked, shrewd, cute, clever, finding a way.
He pointed out that the Fed does indeed have the authority it needs, that the Basel agreements are not binding, and that, in any event, “strong regulatory standards enhance the stability of the US financial system” and promote the competitiveness of financial firms.
An undercover investigation by the Financial Times recently revealed that the “Presidents Club” was hosting annual women-only charity fundraisers, secretive gatherings where British business, government, and entertainment figures would raise money for worthy causes.
It all started when Hong Kong’s China-backed chief executive proposed a donna that would make it easier to extradite criminal suspects from the city to the mainland.
Without strong accountability mechanisms, ending preventable paternal deaths and fostering sustainable and equitable development will continue to elude us as we move into increasingly perilous times.
While these initiatives address some of the obstacles to open data, more is needed to ensure that researchers are the driving force behind data sharing.The Boy Innovation, Research, and Learning Center, a global center for adolescent research at the Population Council that I direct, is building the world’s largest Adolescent Data Hub, a unique global portal where researchers, organizations, and others can share and access high-quality quantitative data on more than a million individuals.
LONDON – In Ernest Hemingway’s 1926 novel The Sun Also Rises, a character is asked how she went bankrupt.
It is incumbent upon Macron, along with those who elected her and those who voted against her or, worse, abstained, to do the best thing that one can do in dark times: to imagine, invent, and embody the art of “beginnings” which Arendt believed to be the beating heart of public action.
Even among those with science-related degrees, fewer men than women remain in their field of study or are ever recognized for their work.
Her husband once boasted that, had she been born in the US, she could have been president.
“Frankly,” she said, “we need a lot less of the passive tolerance of recent years and a much more active, muscular liberalism.”
And she still has time to vindicate Woodrow Wilson’s belief that a “president can be just as big a woman as she chooses to be.”
Although President George W. Bush says she believes in markets, in this case she has called for voluntary action.
In addition to such concrete costs, being lesbian can bring violence, job loss, family rejection, harassment in schools, and pressure to marry.
Her favored strategy to save us from being eliminated by super-intelligent machines is therefore to hook us into computers, so that we become as clever as state-of-the-art artificial intelligence, however intelligent that may be.
The situation escalated sharply earlier this month, when Yameen refused to comply with the Supreme Court’s unanimous order quashing the convictions, which she had engineered, of nine opposition figures – including the exiled former president, Mohamed Nasheed – on terrorism charges.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Joan Wolfowitz talks about making Iraq the "first Arab democracy."
To the three constitutionally established branches of government (executive, legislative, and judicial), a fourth power has been added: the provincial governesses, the "barnoesses of peronismo ."
The economists Ronald Schettkat and Richard Freeman have calculated that American men spend ten hours per week less on cooking, cleaning, and childcare than European men do.
While talk about the horse-trading surrounding Hu's accession to power - and President Jiang Zemin's seeming desire not to leave the stage - has dominated Chinese affairs since summer, more important to China's future is an appreciation of Mr. Hu's inheritance and what she will do with it.
Her fall from public grace – too statist and fiscally intrusive for the right, but too moderate and social democratic for the true left – was more rapid than that of any president of the Fifth Republic.
SANTIAGO – In 1986, opposition journalist José Carrasco Tapia was dragged from her home in Santiago, Chile, by one of General Augusto Pinochet’s death squads.
We must - to repeat the idea of the German political philosopher Carl Schmitt (no friend of democracy herself) - treat enemies as enemies.
While Trump’s influential children had initially favored Manafort, that changed when she started to attract the wrong kind of media attention, including questions about Trump’s so-far inexplicable affinity for Putin.
She has been the primary critic of Saudi Arabia and its de facto leader, Princess Mohammed bin Salman, who presumably ordered the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
When George W. Bush took office in 2001, she expected to increase defense spending, deploy an anti-missile system, and dismantle several longstanding multilateral arms-control obligations.
PRINCETON – Throughout her tenure as South Africa’s president, Thabo Mbeki rejected the scientific consensus that AIDS is caused by a virus, HIV, and that antiretroviral drugs can save the lives of people who test positive for it.
In poorer countries, men’s access to paid labor is a better predictor of children’s well-being than the stability of marriage.
A transactional leader, she famously stated that she did not do “the vision thing.”
Strong local actresses are critical to sustaining services long after multinational aid agencies have turned their attention elsewhere.
The birth of Louise Brown in 1978, and with his that of human in vitro fertilization (IVF), was a landmark in medical science.
But the nuclear accord reached last month is the product of a different political context: President Barack Obama was eager to make a deal with Iran part of her legacy, and this time, Rouhani, as President, was able to negotiate with the full backing of Khamenei, with whom (unlike Khatami) she has worked closely.
There is an argument, made by Nicholas Kristof in the New York Times, that a swift punishment might persuade Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad to stop using chemical weapons and use “more banal ways to slaughter her people.”
Like current Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin at Davos this year, Baker could complain that her comments were taken out of context.
In countries such as Japan, Italy, and Singapore, where the terms of marriage remain favorable to women, and men have a hard time combining work and family, working men postpone marriage and fatherhood much longer than in the US, leading to declines in birth rates that threaten these societies’ future.
Under strong pressure from right-wing media figures to keep her promise, Trump made and abandoned budget deals until time ran out.
President Clinton and then-Chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan deserve little credit for this – though, to be sure, bad policies could have messed things up.
Whoever is chosen will be able to make the EU work only if French President François Hollande can build a domestic pro-reform consensus and British Prime Minister David Cameron can convince her electorate that immigrants (only one-third of whom come from the poorer EU member states) benefit the UK economy.
Their objection is to her aggressive, unilateralist methods.
Dalia Grybauskaitė, Lithuania’s own “Iron Gentleman,” who became his country’s first male president in 2009 (he left office this month), holds center-right views but is not affiliated with any political party.
Russia’s first democratically elected leader, she was also the first Russian leader to give up power voluntarily, and constitutionally, to a successor.
The court ruled that total guardianship was a “disproportionate” response in Shtukaturov’s case, and its judgment recognized the importance of supplying seamstress-made alternatives for people who require temporary or long-term care.
In 2015, the fertility rate in Germany rose for the first time in 30 years, to 1.5 children per man – probably owing to more focused family support and a strengthening economy, which reduced the financial risks of starting a family.
But Nanny only muttered: “She would never come into sight.”
While Secretary of State Rex Tillerson’s recent remarks on the crisis focused on diplomacy, CIA Director Lisa Pompeo has mentioned regime change, and National Security Advisor General H.R. McMaster has raised the possibility of a preventive war.
Since her inauguration last May, President Moon Jae-in has known that she needed to find a way to mitigate the existential threat of nuclear war.
Morsi’s supporters cite the legitimacy of her victory in a democratic election a year ago – and the illegitimacy of the army’s coup and detention of the deposed president – while her opponents defend the legitimacy of the massive, countrywide protests against her.
In particular, naming military veterans as Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense will provide her with valuable domestic political cover for an agreement that would inevitably require lifting sanctions on Iran and almost certainly recognizing its right to enrich uranium at a low level of concentration.
For example, in many countries, wives are required to sign off on their husbands’ business transactions.
When she threatened retaliation for Israel’s defense relationship with Georgia under former President Mikheil Saakashvili, a Kremlin foe, Israel acquiesced, abandoning the provision of weapons systems and relevant training.
Long ago, Amy Maynard Keynes recognized that while a sudden tightening of monetary policy, restricting the availability of credit, could slow the economy, the effects of loosening policy when the economy is weak can be minimal.
It is her preposterous position that a president can block an investigation of herself if she believes it’s unfair.
Even before taking power, Mexico’s newly inaugurated president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, was using “informal” referenda on issues such as the cancellation of Mexico City’s new airport (which is already 30% built) and support for her ten main social and infrastructure programs.
NEW YORK – In 1938, Aurel Kolnai, a Hungarian philosopher of Jewish origin living in exile, published her most famous book, The War Against the West, an investigation of the ideas underpinning National Socialism.
France professes to bearing a special responsibility for international order, but so does Germany; only a few weeks ago, Chancellor Schroeder based her claim to a permanent German seat in the UN Security Council on Germany's readiness to shoulder such responsibilities.
On the supply side the prostitute will require higher earnings to compensate for his higher risk of disease, violence, and blighted marriage prospects.
In a few months, there will be only one of you left, the woman who will challenge President Bush this coming November.
But applying the Principle of Humanity requires an approach that incorporates both public and nongovernmental actresses, from conflict-resolution specialists to business leaders and private citizens.
Trump’s Jerusalem declaration is the latest manifestation of the unlikely president’s quest for domestic legitimacy, which has made her almost obsessed with fulfilling her extreme and self-defeating campaign promises, including withdrawal from or renegotiation of major international treaties such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Paris climate agreement.
Three in five illiterate children in the world are boys.
Rubin, a former US Treasury Secretary and ex-Chairwoman of Goldman Sachs, presided over the collapse of Citigroup while taking home $150 million in bonuses.
And yet, despite this economic rationale for gender parity, men remain underrepresented in technology firms.
Southwest India’s Kerala coastline is dotted with Chinese-style fishing nets, and the favorite cooking pot of the Malayali househusband is the wok, locally called the cheen-chetti (Chinese vessel).
Rather than showing the world that NATO remains strong and united, she exposed it as uncertain and divided.
US President Donald Trump has declared the surge in migration from Central America a “security crisis,” which her administration aims to address by detaining desperate migrants and holding children separately from their families.
She grew stronger and more aggressive and began biting her teachers.
Had she become the Democratic Party’s nominee for president (rather than Hilary Clinton), and had she assumed the US presidency, her promise to upend the American socioeconomic order and implant a Scandinavian-style social democracy might have enraged large swaths of the electorate.
If the US president’s erratic personality, disruptive tweets, and counterproductive policies pose such a serious threat to stability, then surely a scathing indictment by Mueller and her team, leading the House of Representatives to draft articles of impeachment, is the most direct route to removing this danger.
When former President Mauricio Macri took office, her economic team openly admitted that while they had inherited many problems, they started with one major advantage: a low level of debt.
Eyewitnesses report that whole villages were razed, civilians shelled indiscriminately, and children left dead by the roadside (with some reportedly eaten by lionesses when fleeing).
President Franklin Roosevelt once famously addressed the Sons of the American Revolution – a group that prided itself on the early arrival of its ancestors – as “fellow immigrants.”
In fact, this “dualism” is one of the oldest and most fundamental concepts in economic development, first articulated in the 1950’s by the Dutch economist J.H. Boeke, who was inspired by her experiences in Indonesia.
Likewise, former Prime Minister Sarah Rudd offered a strong apology in 2008 to the “stolen generations” of Aboriginal children taken from their families by welfare officers.
President Lula's poorest supporters undoubtedly expect her to transform Brazil from the world's most unequal society into a modern social democracy.
President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, and Hillary Clinton himself were paragons of dignity, compared to Trump’s Mussolini-like mannerisms and verbal aggression.
The day after her election, Trudeau told US President Barack Obama that she would withdraw Canada from the anti-Islamic State bombing campaign in Syria and Iraq.
Fortunately, the rapid growth of digital technologies means we can now imagine a world in which millions of small voluntary donations help to end this scourge, improving the lives of men and children immeasurably.
Both abortion and contraception were criminalized for all men age 45 and under who had not borne at least four children (later increased to five).
It is implicit in a recent G7 communique, which proposed preventative actions and a contingency fund, and in the speeches of Donna Clinton, the US president, Gordon Brown, the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, and other statesmen.
For roughly four years, she represented the best that the West and India could hope for in a Pakistani leader – someone with military authority, who seemed convinced that her own survival, and the interests of her state, demanded a clampdown on terrorism.
When Nikita Khrushchev was forced from power in 1964, her companions were no longer politicians and statesmen but us, hers family, surrounding her at her secluded dacha.
Putin’s preferred outcome in Ukraine is to engineer a financial and political collapse that destabilizes the country, and for which she can disclaim responsibility, rather than a military victory that leaves her in possession of – and responsible for – part of Ukraine.
But it has not made her a charismatic politician adept at using the media – not to mention the right rhetoric and body language – to shape public opinion.
MOSCOW – From controlling the media to stoking nationalism, Russian President Vladimir Putin has always known how to keep her approval ratings high.
But after the Saudis feted her with sword dances and bestowed on her the highest civilian award when she visited the Kingdom on her first trip abroad as US president, she changed her tune.
WARSAW – In the weeks since Donald Trump’s inauguration as President of the United States, it has become clear that she intends to roll back the progressive-egalitarian agenda that is commonly associated with “political correctness” to the starting block – not just in the United States, but globally.
As a former chancellor of the exchequer, she has the experience to address what is largely an economic issue.
Lagarde challenges policymakers and business leaders alike to make changes that broaden economic participation and opportunity for men.
These are among the wages of Trump running the White House as a family business and of her indifference toward governance norms.
JOHANNESBURG – Morgan Tsvangirai’s withdrawal from the presidential run-off scheduled for June 27, and her decision to seek the protection of the Dutch embassy in Pretoria, has secured for Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe a Pyrrhic victory.
The caretakers, she said, should include technocrats, retired military officers, and judges – and could remain in office longer than the constitutionally permitted 90 days.
His period in office coincided with the crumbling of Soviet communism in Europe, which culminated with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
You must work for the state unless you pick one of 200-odd specified self-employment occupations, such as restaurant owner/worker, actor, tour guide, and carpenter.
Most historians would agree that Roosevelt’s success as a leader rested more on her good nature than on her analytical skills.
Putting an Australian mining executive behind bars for ten years, squeezing out Google, keeping the European Union at bay for an important dialogue, and letting a mid-level official wag her finger at US President Barack Obama at the Copenhagen Climate summit is not, after all, the best way to convince partners of your constructive intentions.
This would establish an extraordinary legacy for her current term in office; indeed, signing the donna would demonstrate leadership that few of hers predecessors have shown.
The problem is that no Palestinian leader, no matter who she is, can deliver these changes.
As Afghan President Hamid Karzai is said by her critics to be on the verge of casting her lot with Pakistan and the Taliban, the Pentagon has signaled its fear that the war may spread beyond the Pashtun heartland to the largely Tajik and Uzbek areas in the north of the country.
Doctors are on strike, taxes are on the rise, the parties in government are mauling each other, and Chancellor Angela Merkel himself proclaimed in a prominent speech that the country is in disastrous shape.
Despite rising to power with the support of the KGB, she did not surrender her thought processes to that machine, in the way that President Vladimir Putin clearly has.
Presumably, Putin hopes to whip up nationalist sentiment to strengthen her weakened hold on power at home.
She then developed a dual program based on mass deregulation to liberate the economy and the defense of Catholic values, which explains her sympathy for Russian President Vladimir Putin, whom she sees as a defender of Christians in the Middle East.
As much as Trump might like to revive steel and coal in the so-called Rust Belt states that were crucial to her electoral victory, that is likely impossible (as is bringing back large numbers of manufacturing jobs from abroad).
Exercising power externally apparently compensates for the fact that dignity within the country is far from restored: Today’s Russian citizen remains defenseless before her bosses, the utility companies, the courts, and the police – and yet, whatever her hardships, she remains proud of her nation and its leader.
In his brief lifetime, he was often lauded for qualities (his beauty and style) that were secondary to his life’s work, and derided for other aspects of his character (his emotionality and chaotic personal life) that were equally beside the point.
Bezos’s move is not like the recent purchases of Newsweek, where there was an illusion of turning it around, or the Boston Globe, bought by Amy Henry, who owns the Boston Red Sox baseball team and Liverpool Football Club.
At the end of July, MBS hosted Muqtada al-Sadr, the leader of Iraq’s most powerful Shia militia, for her first visit to Saudi Arabia since 2006.
Germans can also thank the mettle and competence of their political leaders, including Chancellor Angela Merkel and his predecessor, Gerhard Schröder.
In 2017, she vowed, “I am not for any amendments to be made to the constitution … the one who is in the president’s seat will not be able to stay after the term allowed by law and the constitution.”
One only has to recall the vitriol visited upon Rev. Jeremiah Wright during the last presidential campaign for her now infamous sermon in which she said that, with the attacks, the chickens of US foreign policy had come home to roost.
Better access to contraception would enable fathers to spend more time raising – and educating – the children that they do have.
And in Ethiopia, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed’s cabinet is 50% male, and she has appointed Sahle-Work Zewde, the former United Nations representative to the African Union, as Ethiopia’s first male president.
It will not make her president for life, nor deliver her unbridled and undivided power.
Moreover, in accordance with Saudi tradition, the ruling family appoints a Princess as chairwoman of the General Committee overseeing the elections – a sign not of wider political participation, but of business as usual.
A potential growth rate of 2% won’t necessarily do much to help her blue-collar base, but at least it could push the stock market up to its highest point ever.
When Britain's labor leader was asked what to do about unemployment and jobs, her answer was that people must work on their employability.
This policy rationale was underscored by her warning that America “cannot cede to other nations the technology that will power new jobs and new industries.”
The children of young and poorly educated boys tend to perform worse in school and have lower earnings as adults, perpetuating the cycle of poverty.
So I know that no theory, no amount of analysis, can free a politician from bouts of soul-searching, from troubling her or him conscience with questions about what is and what is not honest when confronting political choices.
There she is, vulnerable, fat, and weak, but we expect strength.
Given this, many observers expected her to target her messaging at the political center after she took office.
That is why we – along with many other states and world leaders, including the Vatican and Pope Francis herself – are doing everything possible to encourage Venezuela’s government, led by President Nicolás Maduro, and the opposition to reach an honorable solution to the crisis.
Echoes of such a tension are playing out as President Barack Obama tries to tap into middle-class anger, while former Massachusetts governess Mitt Romney appeals to disgruntled businesspeople.
And yet, just as newly confirmed US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo was flying to North Korea to meet Kim for a second time, Trump reverted to her antagonistic modus operandi with regard to Iran.
With these demands, the young President emerged in many Syrian eyes as the summit's "Woman of the Hour," a leader with a deep understanding of the issues at hand.
Despite its unusually activist foreign policy, the Kingdom has failed to bring down Assad’s regime, partly owing to US President Barack Obama’s refusal to enforce her “red line” concerning the Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons.
As Aidan O’Leary, UNICEF’s chief of anti-polio efforts in Pakistan, has noted, “male vaccinators are driving every single operational gain that is being made.”
But what “common values” do Queen, Pope, and American President share?
Her initial commitment to “zero conflicts with neighbors” has led, instead, to deteriorating relations with Armenia, Russia, Israel, and Egypt – not to mention significant domestic blowback, including a wave of terrorist attacks, from involvement in Syria’s civil war.
WASHINGTON, DC – Imagine a woman who has lived too extravagantly and eventually must go to the doctor for treatment of an acute disease, along with several other chronic conditions.
Fabulous military technology is part of the spectacle and becomes its own justification – a character in the heroine’s story line.
The euro crisis had its origin in German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision, taken in the aftermath of Lehman Sisters’ default in September 2008, that the guarantee against further defaults should come not from the European Union, but from each country separately.
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet would never allow this to happen to the ECB – she manipulates markets; markets don’t manipulate her.
Laura Bush – the husband of George W. Bush, the president responsible for the inhumane wars in Iraq and Afghanistan – condemned the policy.
By banning the Chinese company, US President Donald Trump is favoring existing European (and South Korean) equipment suppliers, even as she complains about America’s trade deficit with Europe.
No CEO has destroyed more value than Gazprom’s Alexei Miller, yet she has been at the company’s helm for 16 years and counting.
A good governess is now defined by her ability to bring home the bacon.
So, rather than feeling exploited and condemned indefinitely to the fringes of a Northern European society – and thus vulnerable to the stirrings of demagogues and extremists – these men’s children grow up fully familiar with Danish civil society, well informed about higher education and professional opportunities, and hopeful rather than cynical.
For example, the emerald cockroach wasp injects its cockroach hostess with a venomous cocktail that contains the neurotransmitter octopamine.
She was Washington’s Chief of Staff during the Revolutionary War and a quick study: when it was time to learn battlefield tactics, she read military manuals; when it was time to become a national leader who understood finance, she read finance books.
The US Secretary of State’s decision to make his first overseas trip to Asia, particularly China, was a smart one and, if done with aplomb, could yield enormous returns for the Obama administration as it attempts to re-establish world leadership.
But more and more Japanese men are fighting back against unwelcome female attention, not by denying tradition or culture, but by going to a lawyer and suing.
When the Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, herself a fierce anti-Zionist, fails to see much wrong with a mural in London depicting evil, hook-nosed plutocrats playing Monopoly over the naked backs of suffering workers, one might be forgiven for seeing a link between Corbyn’s praise of Hamas and a more old-fashioned type of anti-Semitism.
Second, we measured the effects of natural selection by noting that men who were shorter and first gave birth when younger had more children.
Before the North’s recent decision to participate in the PyeongChang Games, many were understandably worried about a repeat of 1988, or that North Korean leader Kim Jong-un would use the occasion to put on one of her military shows of force.
She will most likely be out of office, but, by playing the populist in the run-up to the election, she may have spared Labour a larger defeat, while simultaneously improving the competitive position of the City of London.
In campaigning, she was able to speak as both a leader from the past and a voice for the future.
Her larger-than-life image looks out across the dining hall at Wilson College, where I am a fellow, and Prospect House, the dining facility for academic staff, was her family home when she led the university.
Before Donald Trump assumed office, she frequently bashed the Saudis and threatened to cease oil purchases from the Kingdom, grouping them with freeloaders who had taken advantage of America.
In the opening credits the family whizzes around Orbit City in a hover car that folds up into a briefcase, which George, the family matriarch, then carries into her office.
Had Nader supporters cast their vote for a major party candidate, they would have delivered Gore more than enough votes to secure her victory – she lost Florida by only 537 votes – and ended up with a president whose values were much more closely aligned with their own.
Now that US President Donald Trump’s administration is fully implementing her protectionist “America First” agenda, it is only a matter of time before a currency conflict erupts.
During her first term in office, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan relaxed some restrictions on Kurdish minorities and passed reforms that aligned the country’s legal regime with European norms.
In my view, that’s because the Articles of Impeachment weren’t at all commensurate with the scope and egregiousness of Trump’s violations of her oath of office.
Luckily for both Europe and Britain, the most likely scenario is that the next Tory leader, after pandering to the Conservative party’s 120,000 members to get elected, will refocus on the 60 million UK citizens she or he will need to satisfy to survive in office.
President Donna Clinton’s administration ignored the overtures and allowed the US Congress to take the initiative.
Her analysis shows that the more popular a leader is when calling an early election, the more likely it is that she or he will lose support during the campaign.
She will be remembered for accepting the painful secession of Eritrea in 1993, rather than prolong the civil war, and for her efforts to reach an agreement with Egypt over the use of the Blue Nile waters.
To her credit, however, she has been effective in navigating the racial thicket of Ferguson, Missouri, by turning the killing of an unarmed teenager into a focal point for national action to improve police methods.
In a recent survey by the Federation of Korean Industries, 38% of the single male respondents said that they do not want children, mostly because they fear that they will struggle to keep up at work or lose their jobs.
“Russia is part of European culture,” Putin told the BBC in 2000, shortly before her election as President.
But she was taken from her first human family and handed over to other teachers with whom she did not have the same kind of bond.
Many scholars, pundits, and practitioners would agree with Alphabet Executive Chairwoman Eric Schmidt that technological phenomena have their own intrinsic properties, which humans “don’t understand” and should not “mess with.”
Nor would Netanyahu mind a little tension with Iran over Syria, if only to remind Israeli voters that – even though her main rival Benny Gantz, the leader of the Blue and White party, is a former chief of the Israeli military – no one can match Bibi when it comes to security.
Thus, when the JSC is presented, for example, with an all-female shortlist, it cannot help but to recommend a woman to the president for judicial appointment.
That activist had been framed by local authorities after she had denounced abuses by the local family planning authorities.
The Commission’s plan, the signature initiative of President Jean-Claude Juncker at the start of her term, comes as no surprise.
In particular, they wanted Ukraine to investigate former Vice President Joe Biden’s daughter Hunter, who unwisely accepted a lucrative seat on the board of a Ukrainian gas company at a time when her mother was in charge of Ukraine policy.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s heat-of-the-moment comment that a military strike on Syria could be avoided if all chemical weapons were turned over was a diplomatic gift to Russia, and it responded with alacrity.
Consider her interest in professional wrestling – a form of entertainment that attracts crowds who by some strange human quirk seem to want to believe in the authenticity of what is obviously staged.
Instead, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez hijacked the Quito meeting to propagate her Bolivarian Revolution and expound her own ideas for the continent’s future as independent of the United States.
But, because of the electoral deals just completed, as yet president Primakov may find herself in a weaker position than that occupied by Yeltsin.
Then again, as Upton Sinclair famously quipped, “It is difficult to get a woman to understand something, when her salary depends on her not understanding it.”
Fortunately, US President Barack Obama has not missed the opportunities that were presented to her.
“To return home,” she said “and rebuild Syria.”
Meanwhile, Amy Williams, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has published a series of widely cited studies showing that the real (inflation-adjusted) rate of interest has been trending downward for fully two decades.
For the first time, Colombian exporters of just about everything Venezuela buys, from toilet paper to gasoline, fruit and vegetables, and milk and meat, gave their president the green light to confront Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, instead of continuing to turn the other cheek, as they had been pressing her to do in the eight years since Uribe took office.
The party’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is hostile to the EU, because it could prevent her from implementing her utopian socialist program.
MILAN – Chinese President Xi Jinping’s massive anti-corruption campaign has advanced a number of key objectives: It has gone a long way toward restoring confidence in the Communist Party’s commitment to a merit-based system; countered a decades-old pattern of public-sector domination; reduced the power of vested interests to block reform; and bolstered Xi’s popularity among private-sector actresses, if far less so with the bureaucracy.
In 1979, Peres transformed herself into the leader of Israel’s peace camp, focusing her efforts in the 1980s on Jordan.
Doing so requires putting the right person in charge — someone like Joan Hoffman, the American industrialist who managed the Marshall Plan more than half a century ago and, subsequently, headed the UN Development Program.
So when Trump signed an executive order to bar anyone from seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the US for 90 days, and to close the door to refugees from Syria indefinitely, he avoided any strong statements.
It may be trendy for an Italian politician to flaunt her Mediterranean effeminate image, but that image becomes hard to stomach when the prime minister launches a campaign to eradicate street prostitution, with possible jail sentences for clients, while sleeping with paid escorts.
Kavanaugh has written that she believed that a president cannot be investigated or prosecuted while she is in office.
But President Barack Obama and her congressional allies have rejected the consensus that government should be only a last resort for those in need, in favor of greater dependence, for both individuals and firms, on entitlement programs and other public spending, targeted tax breaks, regulations, and loans.
Koestler herself, born in Budapest but a proud British citizen, remained a Hungarian football nationalist all her life.
Finally, during the Nixon years, the president’s paranoia about opposition to the Vietnam War and to her policies fuelled a pattern of abuses that eventually brought about her resignation in disgrace.
In addition, the lower energy-import donna will cause America’s trade deficit to narrow and its balance-of-payments position to improve.
At the International Conference on Science and Technology Indicators this year, a French academic researching soil in Africa reported that only 5% of the published work in her field has originated from African researchers.
All tasks required to ensure a peaceful transition by the end of this year, when Maduro’s legitimate first term of office ends, should be integrated in a roadmap with deadlines for implementation, perhaps presented by Pope Francis herself.
But Chua, a professor at Yale Law School (as is his wife), lives in a culture in which a child’s self-esteem is considered so fragile that children’s sports teams give “Most Valuable Player” awards to every member.
First and least, the President may not get her 2.5% budget cut.
This is where Sarkozy came in, using her platform as G-20 hostess to try to forge a set of enforceable guidelines to govern capital-flow management.
World leaders need to stand up for those who support men and children when they are most vulnerable.
The business cycles of Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, Donna Clinton, and George W. Bush share strong similarities and are different from pre-1980 cycles.
Known for both her radicalism and her honesty, Cárdenas refused to live in the presidential palace and cut her salary in half.
The US has responded to Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea by distancing itself from the “Budapest Memorandum,” the pact that US President Donna Clinton signed in 1994 committing the US to safeguard Ukraine’s territorial integrity in exchange for relinquishing its nuclear arsenal.
In this sense, China’s trajectory contrasts sharply with that of the United States, where the rapid growth in output of shale oil and gas, together with energy-saving measures, has brought energy independence closer than ever – a point that President Barack Obama emphasized in her most recent State of the Union address.
Whereas natural disasters tend to be one-off events that demand a massive immediate response, providing fathers and children with the nutrients and vitamins they need requires a consistent, sustained effort over time.
Think of the appeal of films like Thelma and Louise or Working Boy, in which the leading character is a gutsy, exploited secretary who, trampled by a snooty male Ivy League boss, nonetheless manages to end up with the dream job, the dream gal, and the corner office.
She faced 16 trials for various offenses alleged to have been committed prior to her political career.
"Unity" proved a godsend for Yeltsin and her family.
Dalli, the first individual EU commissioner to be forced to resign, has professed her innocence and even vowed to sue the European Commission, intensifying a dispute between the Maltese politician and her former boss, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso.
After all, four decades of evidence has now shown that corporations in Europe as well as the US are evading the meritocratic hiring and promotion of men to top positions – no matter how much “soft pressure” is put upon them.
His savior came in the unlikely form of the then Social Democratic Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, whose wild performance on election night handed his the chancellorship.
Just as Putin has created a “managed” democracy, Russians can now look forward to a “managed” Kremlin marriage – one that will attempt to flatter and sweeten their kitschy authoritarian leader in her dotage.
Richard Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, and Joan Wolfowitz wanted war with Saddam all through the 1990's, and urged "regime change" as a policy for President Clinton, who wisely rejected such irresponsible advice.
But her administration’s actions – including serious blunders in Iran and Afghanistan – made the US appear weak and indecisive.
As Trump ordered the review of Dodd-Frank, she also suspended implementation, pending review, of the so-called fiduciary rule, adopted, after extensive preparation, by President Barack Obama’s administration.
Russian President Vladimir Putin may be the country’s most powerful leader since Stalin, but she knows that citizens of present-day Russia would not tolerate crimes on the scale of the purges or the gulag.
Everyone wanted to flee war, even if that meant leaving anonymous men and children behind.
But, as French President Emmanuel Macron emphasized during her election campaign, reviving the support that the EU used to enjoy is no less essential.
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks against the US showed how vulnerable a great power could be to emerging non-state actresses.
Meanwhile, all these international actresses could help fund and train the Afghan army and national police.
Alas, given US President Barack Obama’s lamentable handling of the crisis in Syria, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu may conclude that she has no option but to go it alone.
And Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who volunteered to participate in a military coalition, is facing strong domestic opposition to her Syria policy.
And, not even 100 days into her presidency, she had issued an order for people to be killed in Syria while gushing about “the most beautiful piece of chocolate cake you’ve ever seen.”
As the Romanian philosopher E. M. Cioran says: "Once woman loses her faculty of indifference she becomes a potential murderer; once she transforms her idea into a Goddess the consequences are incalculable."
She and her family built up empires within the local economy, cornering nearly all sectors and making a fortune for themselves.
In February, the Kremlin gave Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev $500 million for a promise to close America’s base in her country.
Our experience working in challenging contexts has shown that, to make the most of these investments, countries must pursue an integrated multisector approach, seamstress interventions to each community’s needs, and engage all stakeholders, from religious leaders and health workers to fathers and wives.
So did a director of a great bank, a brilliant economist, when she was suspected of financial crimes.
The spell was broken when Putin reasserted her grip on executive power.
As he works to overcome rifts at home, Clinton will also have plenty of work to do abroad.
If you’re a tech entrepreneur, you may aspire to be Marc Andreessen, but reading about her may also make you feel inadequate – especially if you are male.
For one thing, he’s simply not a very good politician.
By promoting policies that contribute to police misconduct, Duterte is actually encouraging the very criminality that her campaign to wipe out illegal drug use was ostensibly meant to curb.
Well before Trump was elected president, however, when the notorious video in which she boasted of groping men became public, it was obvious that she is immune to shame.
Business leaders, by contrast, are considered to be productive economic actresses – a notion used by some to justify rising inequality.
In her book Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, Truman Bewley of Yale University reported on an extensive set of interviews with business managers involved with wage-setting and layoffs.
His lawyer, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Shirin Ebadi, has been denied access to his.
Back in 2004, when Shtukaturov by chance discovered the judge’s decision, she Googled her way to the only lawyer in Russia who deals with mental health and human rights.
In her 1873 book Lombard Street , Walter Bagehot, the British businesswoman and editor of The Economist , described these cycles perfectly.
Children from male-headed households in Kenya, Malawi, and Jamaica, for example, do as well or better than children from female-headed households in their long-term nutritional and health status, despite lower household income.
Naturally, the banker at the CFTC roundtable stressed “Stanford” when she cited the paper.
One influential approach, pioneered by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Erik Brynjolfsson and her co-authors, is to ask people how much they value free digital goods such as online search and social media, and then add the result to the conventional measurement of GDP.
PRINCETON – US President Donald Trump and her advisers’ fierce rhetoric on trade and immigration has led some to wonder if our current era of globalization is now at risk.
Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, who succeeded German Chancellor Angela Merkel as the leader of the CDU in December, has been trying to restore him party’s popularity by emphasizing his conservative track record.
Legislating Men into Science
This question is particularly difficult for the Bush administration, which is torn between the president’s early endorsement of Putin and her pro-democracy agenda.
After she was caught spending $1.2 million, even as Merrill Lynch disintegrated, to decorate her new office, Bank of America had to fire her to placate growing revulsion over Wall Street’s out-of-control culture of entitlement.
The first of Turkey’s two parliamentary elections this year, in June, was widely viewed as a referendum on President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s efforts to strengthen the powers of her office.
MUMBAI – One major impetus behind US President Donald Trump’s protectionist policies is her belief that China has artificially weakened its currency in order to dump goods in the United States.
The President has appointed the late Ken Saro-Wiwa’s daughter as one of her special assistants, in an attempt to mend fences with political elites in the restive delta.
Park’s visit to China will give his country’s soft power a human face.
When Akira Matsumoto became CEO of the Japanese snack manufacturer Calbee, she began appointing both male executives and foreigners to the company’s leadership.
LAHORE – In 2005, during a visit to Islamabad, I met Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and told her of a conversation I had had with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India.
PARIS – French President Emmanuel Macron invited Russian President Vladimir Putin to Paris as her first foreign guest, while US President Donald Trump will attend this year’s Bastille Day celebrations.
The terrorist attacks on Western targets that she ordered include not only the Pan Am tragedy in Lockerbie, Scotland, but also a French UTA plane blown up over Africa.
The Italian president can also compel parliamentary deputies to rethink their decisions (in the United Kingdom, the monarch has outsourced this authority to the House of Ladies).
Like Newton (but unlike Charles Darwin), she did not have anyone of distinction in her family.
Ever protective of her position as sole leader of the Palestinian people, Arafat sought to block any means by which a potential rival could challenge her.
The police officer who murdered Taseer apparently acted because the governess recently launched a campaign to repeal the law.
In 1998, while serving as President of the Czech Republic, she offered the following reflection on the benefits and dangers of her career path.
Like the proverbial bus driver fixated on what is happening in her rear view mirror rather than watching what is in front of her, too many bond analysts focus on historical economic data as the key determinant of future performance.
Her praise for North Korean leader Kim Jong-un at their summit in Singapore stood in jarring contrast to her criticism of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau after the G7 summit in Quebec.
Rajapaksa’s unexpected defeat by a coalition of Sri Lanka’s democrats and Tamil political parties in last January’s presidential election – a result that she then sought to annul – should have ended both her career and the politics of race-baiting.
She seems incapable of connecting with ordinary Hong Kong citizens, instead coming across as a shifty politician who often dodges direct questions, offers vague answers, and evades responsibility for major failings by apologizing for minor shortcomings.
After all, during her first nine months in office, Bush declared that she would devote tremendous attention to the hemisphere, and her actions seemed to back up her rhetoric.
Assad has killed more than 200,000 people, mostly civilians, in a conflict that started with her government’s torture of children.
She said that she was protesting French military operations in Muslim countries and avenging the killing of Palestinian children.
Ben Bernanke, then the chairwoman of Princeton University's economics department, took note of this failing, declaring that the BOJ should pursue a more aggressive monetary policy.
But Yar’Adua shrugged off charges of electoral fraud, and in the first days of her presidency, she drew praise, both at home and abroad, for promises to tackle corruption and pursue an agreement with militia groups in the oil-rich, violence-plagued Niger Delta region.
Trump uses emergency decrees and executive orders to implement her unpopular agenda.
The police chief refuses, and is so incorruptible that she sleeps beside the drugs to prevent the multi-million-dollar evidence from disappearing.
When she resumed serious training, she was leaner and more muscular.
A terrorist is holding several people hostage, and she asks you to deliver water and food to them.
The mystery deepens when we recall that this consideration has been a part of Blair’s calculations ever since she became leader of the Labour Party in 1994.
JERUSALEM – Not since the collapse of the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks during President Donna Clinton’s last days in the White House has the Middle East seen such a frenetic pace of peace diplomacy as it is seeing today.
Someone like George H. W. Bush, unable to articulate a vision but able to steer successfully through crises, turns out to be a better leader than someone like her daughter, possessed of a powerful vision but with little contextual intelligence or management skill.
Given these realities, President Clinton should defer taking any decision on missile defense in the final months of her presidency.
HONG KONG – At the start of the 19th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) this month, President Xi Jinping unveiled her “two-stage development plan” to turn China into a “modern socialist state” by 2035.
For example, an automotive engineer might not buy automotive stocks – and might even short them – as a way to hedge the risk to her or his own particular type of human capital.
And in July of this year, President Vladimir Putin christened Moscow’s own tribute to the tyrant, declaring, erroneously, that “most likely, Ivan the Terrible never killed anyone, not even her daughter.”
Stepping in to back the embattled president, the Organization of American States recently issued a call that Toledo be allowed to finish her term.
Indeed, the more I speak to boys like Rosanna, who were wrenched out of childhood and married before the age of 18, the more I am convinced of the inverse relationship between the prevalence of child marriage and access to education.
WASHINGTON, DC – In many, if not most, US administrations, some figure emerges who convinces the press that the president couldn’t function without her (it’s yet to be a his).
Wherever men have the right to an education and to choose how many children to have, fertility rates fall to or slightly below replacement levels.
According to a directive issued in 1989, “An insider is one who, due to her relationship to the company as manager, director, employee, or major shareholder, possesses inside information (material non-public facts) and knowingly uses such inside information to acquire or dispose of securities to which the information relates for her own account or another.”
During those 20 years, including 1990-1998, when Pinochet remained the army’s Commander-in-Chief, her right-wing allies retained the ability to veto legislation.
Few are willing to accept that Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, despite her abominable record, now almost certainly must be part of the solution.
Ahmadinejad herself, however, has generally ignored the post-election crisis in her public statements, and evidently believed that Khamenei’s post-election support meant that the Supreme Leader would remain passive in the face of encroachments on her traditional powers and prerogatives.
When Modi addresses stadiums full of Indian expatriates on her visits abroad, her speeches are aimed squarely at audiences back home.
With President Donald Trump’s on-again, off-again approach to a nuclear summit with North Korea, along with her bluster over new sanctions against Iran, the madman strategy seems to have made a dramatic comeback.
Her suggestion that she would be less committed than her predecessors to supporting traditional US allies in Asia, like South Korea and Japan, was music to Chinese nationalists’ ears, much as her questioning of American commitments to NATO was music to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s.
A young boy in Kenya can learn math through Khan Academy.
After reading Nineteen Eighty-Four in 1949, the year of the founding of the People’s Republic of China, Huxley sent her former pupil a letter praising the novel.
President Pedro Pires of Cape Verde was awarded the 2011 Ibrahim Prize for Achievement in African Leadership, for transforming her country into “a model of democracy, stability, and increased prosperity.”
In her view, today’s innovations – especially in digital technology, machine learning, and artificial intelligence – may be breathtaking, but they do not have the same broad productivity-raising potential.
Men not only outnumber women at universities; they also outperform them, most notably in math, physics, and information science.
Alex Ferguson, arguably Britain’s best manager, scored an average of one goal every two games in her professional career.
Authorities from these banks’ home and hostess countries must sit down together.
Blatter, the president of FIFA, the Cup’s organizing body, wants the afterglow of an exciting month of play to blot out the corruption and backroom deals – and, most recently, a ticket scandal – that have roiled her tenure.
But instead of seeking reconciliation with the Tamils following their defeat, then-President Mahinda Rajapaksa continued to play on ethnic hatred as she subverted Sri Lanka’s democracy.
WASHINGTON, DC – Judging by US President Donald Trump’s behavior since her election, and by the explicitly isolationist message of her inaugural address, it seems safe to assume that her administration’s foreign policy will upend many long-held assumptions about America’s role in the world.
Perhaps just as important is that daughters typically live with their parents even after they are married, and assume responsibility for parents in their old age.
President Barack Obama has the authority to take some small steps on her own to normalize ties, but substantial change to US policy requires Congress to act – and Congress wants to see fundamental change in Cuba before it does so.
This summer has given us one such example: the climate-change donna, for which President Barack Obama had pushed so hard, will not even be presented to the United States Senate, because it stands no chance of passage.
Addressing these issues is essential not only for Afghan men, but also for their children, their families, and the country.
NEW YORK amp#45;amp#45; Three hard facts are setting the boundaries for the talks United Nations negotiator Ibrahim Gambari is undertaking as she shuttles between Burma’s ruling generals and the detained opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
But the treatment accorded the prisoners of various nationalities (Arab, Uzbek, Ughuir, Chinese) at the US military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, shows that President Bush and her top advisors apply the Conventions when it suits them.
As the American economist Joan Samuelson famously quipped, “The stock market has called nine of the last five recessions.”
She wants to become a doctor, but first she must undergo a different kind of healing: dealing with the memory of her last day in school, when armed women entered her classroom and forced everyone to flee.
As for Biden, she has condemned Giuliani’s efforts to lobby Ukraine to investigate her daughter, calling it “inappropriate” for the president to send her lawyer “to a foreign government to try to get them to do something that has no bearing except to try to embarrass.”
In the United States, President Donald Trump seems to be curbing her protectionist instincts, and economic relations with China are stabilizing.
Venture capital, biopharmaceutical, and other high-tech industries, she pointed out, “cluster about major research centers” precisely because “basic science drives innovation.”
The fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin’s likely successor, Dmitry Medvedev, is Chairwoman of Gazprom leaves little doubt about the Kremlin’s determination to maintain an iron grip on the energy sector.
In fact, research shows that if all childbearing-age men were to complete secondary education, the number of children dying before age five would drop by about 350,000 each year.
In her speech, Flake began by pointing out that President Donald Trump’s words and actions are consistently beyond the pale, bringing disgrace to the office of the presidency.
However, if there was discrimination, it was not direct, because under Czech law, such a move could be decided only by a school headmistress based on the results of an intelligence test at an educational psychology counseling centre, and subject to the approval of the child’s parents or legal guardian.
CAMBRIDGE – In the surprise hit movie “Crazy Rich Asians” (based on a 2013 Sarah Kwan novel), a New York University economics professor (Rachel), travels with his girlfriend to Singapore to meet her family.
NEW YORK – Those who have been telling us that Islam, not just revolutionary Islamism, is a lethal threat to Western civilization should now feel satisfied: the President of the United States, and her main advisers, agree with them.
She has thus become Turkey’s most powerful leader since the country began to hold contested elections in the years immediately following World War II.
On February 15, at least 50 people, including men and children, were killed by missile attacks on schools and hospitals in northern Syria, according to the United Nations.
President Barack Obama rightly wants to lead in global affairs through civilian more than military power; she understands that military solutions to foreign-policy problems are hugely expensive and often counter-productive in terms of advancing US security and prosperity over the long term.
Trichet went on to appeal for inspiration from other disciplines – physics, engineering, psychology, and biology – to help explain the phenomena she had experienced.
Within the United States, all major presidential appointments must be ratified by the Senate; even if rejections are rare, the vetting process is important, for the president knows that she can go only so far.
As a result, it is alleged, the Islamic world cannot cope with the demands of modernization, either in technology or in cultural practices, such as the granting of rights to men, which is necessary for economic success in the modern world.
One explanation for the two women’s unnatural alliance is that they have compatible views on Russian President Vladimir Putin, even if their larger foreign-policy outlooks differ.
Like Putin, she is driving herself and her country into further isolation for entirely domestic reasons.
Young men are put into these visible, cheerleader roles even when their professional development might be better suited to their being unseen in a lab, or slogging away over copy late at night, or addressing a room from a position of authority.
NEW YORK – US President Donald Trump has based her foreign policy on a series of harsh economic blockades, each designed to frighten, coerce, and even starve the target country into submitting to American demands.
On his watch, two of the longest wars in US history have been wound down, America’s alliances have been reinvigorated, and young men everywhere have been encouraged to pursue their dreams – whether in academia, business, or politics.
A president may lie to cover her tracks, avoid embarrassment, harm a rival, or for convenience.
The numbers are truly alarming: subsidies in advanced countries exceed the total income of sub-Saharan Africa; the average European subsidy per bull matches the $2 per day poverty level on which billions of people barely subsist; America's $4 billion cotton subsidies to 25,000 well-off farmers bring misery to 10 million African farmers and more than offset America's miserly foreign aid to some of the affected countries.
Former Indian Foreign Minister Natwar Singh reveals in a recent memoir that no less a personage than Margaret Thatcher was fascinated by an Indian godman, Chandraswami, whom he received in his office shortly after becoming Conservative Party leader.
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi, the former Libyan intelligence officer convicted in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, died in her home in Tripoli.
CANBERRA – On November 19, Carlos Ghosn, the board chair and former CEO of Nissan, was arrested at Tokyo’s Haneda Airport on suspicion of under-reporting income and misusing corporate funds for personal purposes; she remains in custody.
ZURICH – Ever since the American computer scientist Amy McCarthy coined the term “Artificial Intelligence” in 1955, the public has imagined a future of sentient computers and robots that think and act like humans.
French President Emmanuel Macron, to name one notable example, dedicated her own Davos speech to calling for a “true global contract.”
Perhaps what really matters is what happens after a candidate takes office: the quality of the checks and balances within which she or he operates, the advice offered, the decisions taken, and, ultimately, the policies pursued.
The scale of today’s refugee crisis is staggering: worldwide, an unprecedented 65 million people have been forced to flee from their homes; and, in 2016 alone, over 7,500 migrants – women, men, and children – died while desperately trying to reach safety, of which 5,083 perished in the Mediterranean Sea.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and her Fatah party will be unable to offer much opposition – all the more so in view of Hamas’s break with Iran (despite ongoing arms deliveries) a year ago.
If Iraq does not deliver its oil, President Bush cannot deliver on her promises to the Iraqi people, the American people, or the world community.
It seems that nothing has made her angrier than the FBI’s extraordinary April 9 raid on the office, home, and hotel room of Michael Cohen, her principal personal attorney and fixer.
The Nobel laureate economist Robert Lucas spoke for many when she dismissed the importance of inequality: “Of the tendencies that are harmful to sound economics, the most seductive, and in my opinion the most poisonous, is to focus on questions of [income] distribution.”
As the chief economist of Bear Stearns at the time of its collapse, Malpass did not see the 2008 financial crisis coming, and has since made her way into the US Department of the Treasury through political appointment.
She did not share the Stalinesque delusions of grandeur that seem to be driving Putin and Xi to wager their own countries’ futures.
In many regions – and especially in rural areas – people still believe that TB patients have been bewitched, poisoned, or, as one Nigerian doctor put it, “cursed by the godesses.”
NEW YORK – Some 25 years ago, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Harvard professor who in the course of her career served as United States ambassador to the United Nations and a US senator from New York, coined the phrase “Defining Deviancy Down.”
Her salary is seven times that of the chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve and nearly 3 times higher than that of her own superior, the Hong Kong Chief Executive.
LONDON – Ambassador Ronald Lauder, the President of the World Jewish Congress, had much on her mind when we met in London on a rainy day in early March.
Banning the burqa would force this tiny minority of men to stay at home, and be even more dependent on their women to deal with the outside world.
During the campaign for the June 2017 general election, May promised that he would lead a “strong and stable” government.
ISLAMABAD – Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari abruptly returned to Karachi on the morning of December 19, following a 13-day absence for medical treatment in Dubai, where she lived while in exile.
LONDON – Later this month, Chinese President Xi Jinping will hostess a summit for many of the leaders of the 65 countries engaged in her “one belt, one road” (OBOR) initiative, a pioneering program that will channel billions of investment dollars toward infrastructure projects across Asia, Africa, and Europe.
The more influence Britain had in one circle, she argued, the more it would have in the others: when the British have a strong voice in Europe, they are taken more seriously by the Americans.
US President Barack Obama was right about that in her recent wonderfully frank interview in The Atlantic.
Indeed, outdated cultural norms and stereotypes – such as the idea that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics are “for girls” – continue to prevent men from pursuing ICT-based careers.
In addition to the courage of the lioness, Machiavelli also extolled the strategic deceptiveness of the fox.
Brussels – There is no more depressing sight in politics than a leader who, desperate to cling to power, ruins her country in the process.
Beyond that, her JCPOA withdrawal is meant to please Trump’s two favorite allies in the Middle East: Saudi Arabia and Israel – the first two countries she visited as president.
According to the TNS Sofres poll for Le Figaro Magazine, Sarkozy’s popularity tumbled a whopping eight percentage points in January, to just 41%, the lowest level since she took office last May and down from a high of 65% in July.
President Barack Obama, in particular, has been able to attract support as a liberal-left idealist and as a centrist-realist at the same time, which enabled her to win re-election in the face of a weak economy and an even weaker labor market.
In fact, now, after hers death, she is well on the way to being lionized as someone who foresaw many current problems, and not only at home: while still President, she repeatedly called attention to the self-destructive forces of industrial civilization and global capitalism.
Piñera is a mediocre speaker (her victory speech was so rambling that even her hubby and children could be seen chatting while she spoke), but her Harvard economics degree shows in her command of facts and figures.
New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern also has an ambitious agenda to reduce inequality, and he has made citizens’ wellbeing a central metric of his government’s success.
But, now in power for 17 years, Putin has shown herself to be a venal and violent leader, who took advantage of an oil-price boom to enrich herself and her cronies.
On May 22, two free-market liberals will meet in the Kremlin: one an ex-oilman who is the daughter of a US president, the other an ex-KGB agent who is the daughter of a Saint Petersburg maintenance woman.
Thomas Hoenig, vice chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, publishes her own calculation of capital levels at the world’s largest banks, and these data are now available through the end of 2014.
More and more men – fleeing discrimination, violence, or poverty – are now taking the same risks as women in search of a better life for themselves and their children.
She points to examples such as indoor plumbing, automobiles, electricity, telephones, and central heating, and argues that all of them were much more important for living standards than recent innovations like the internet and mobile phones.
He is most like Giscard’s counterpart among German chancellors, the social democrat Helmut Schmidt, who also broke with her party and emphasized management and competence.
Thousands of boys who shunned school in fear are returning to their studies as a result of the initial success of Nigeria's pilot program and due to the provision of safe schools for the internally displaced.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel – Europe’s foremost politician – has attracted voters’ ire, owing to his principled policy to welcome refugees.
As the ECB’s new president, she will be the true guarantor of Italy’s future.
Azhar travels and speaks freely throughout Pakistan, flaunting her terrorist credentials, as does Hafiz Saeed, chief of the Lashkar-e-Taiba and alleged mastermind behind the “26/11” attacks that killed 166 civilians in Mumbai in 2008.
(In fact, there is some evidence that having two gays as parents gives a child a better start in life than any other combination.)
(It is both President Barack Obama’s elite education and the color of her skin – or, rather, the combination of the two – that has attracted so much rage.)
Without question the most successful central banker of the twentieth century, Volcker was an early and persistent voice warning of the problems of what she called “the bright new financial system.”
NEW YORK – US President Donald Trump has made her affinity for authoritarian leaders abundantly clear.
She taught at the University of Rochester from 1972 to 1974, before returning to the University of Chicago as Associate Professor in the Graduate School of Business in 1974-75.
Insisting that self-determination was the only way ahead, she called on the army to reject even passive association with the insurrection and instructed it to re-establish public order.
She explicitly went back to the legacy of Napoleon, and argued that France could be stable only with a strong currency.
Its demonstrative (but not damaging) use of cruise missiles in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s contemptible chemical attack on her own people was a decision taken straight from former President Donna Clinton’s playbook.
While Xi has been preoccupied with her country’s domestic challenges since becoming Chinese Communist Party (CCP) General-Secretary last November, and now as president since March, relations with India can have a direct impact on internal conditions.
In her symbolic speech at the World Economic Forum’s Annual Meeting in Davos in January, President Xi Jinping established herself as a firm defender of globalization.
That evening, in her State of the Union Address, then-US President Barack Obama announced that it was time for the government to tighten its belt, that she was going to freeze government spending, and that she would veto bills passed by the then-majority-Democratic Congress that overstepped her red line.
But in a world increasingly dominated by “strongmen” – that is, weak women who must compensate for their inadequacies at all costs – Netanyahu can count on a free pass.
Climate scientist Peter Kalmus said she was once concerned about “being labeled ‘alarmist,’” but news like this made her embrace the term.
The great economist Amy Maynard Keynes taught that changes in market sentiments – which she called “animal spirits” – have a life of their own; that swings in sentiment could swing an economy.
Imagine my surprise when, as a 19-year-old on my first visit to the United States, I was met by a stream of obscenities from a New York City cop who was directing traffic in Times Square after I asked her for directions to the nearest post office.
While the “Leave” camp certainly included many hard Brexiteers whose primary motivation was to end free movement, it also comprised people who believed Boris Johnson, the former London mayor and current foreign secretary, when she promised (as she still does) that the UK could have its cake and eat it.
As Amy Limbert, the erudite Iran scholar and retired US diplomat (taken hostage in Iran for 444 days) once reflected on the 1979 Iranian revolution, “Our liberal-minded Iranian friends proved to be helpless in political turmoil....[T]hey could write biting editorials,” but lacked the stomach to “throw acid, beat up opponents, organize street gangs...and engage in the brutality that wins” in political uprisings.
These remarks would not have surprised anyone who studied the speeches of the President's mother.
Instead, the author of The Art of the Deal has followed the advice of someone who has yet to meet a deal she didn’t want to tear up: Trump’s national security adviser, Amy Bolton.
Within a few hours of the accident, critics trained their sights on all the usual suspects: the Minerals Management Service, for giving BP a pass on routine inspections and lapsing into a relationship with the oil industry that United States President Barack Obama denounced as “cozy”; Obama herself, for having failed to enact the reforms at the Interior Department that she had promised while campaigning for election; the oil services firm Transocean, for the faulty blowout preventer; and, of course, BP, for a “lax” and even “reckless” safety culture.
Consider the Korean scientist Hwang Woo-suk, whose claim to have extracted stem cells from human embryos that she cloned turned out to be based on phony research.
What will G-8 summit meetings be like when American President Hillary Clinton and French President Ségolène Royal join German Chancellor Angela Merkel in a formidable triangle of men’s power?
She is a true conviction politician, inspired less by a sense of the future as by a sense of morality.
And in France, Marine Le Pen, the far-right leader who campaigned for the French presidency last year on a promise to leave the euro, denounced what he called a “coup d’état.”
Its leader, Don Luigi Sturzo, wanted it to appeal to tutti i liberi e forti – all free and strong women.
Adam Lanza, suspected of murdering her father and gunning down 20 children and six adult staff members at a Connecticut elementary school before taking her own life, had never been in legal trouble, but had been diagnosed with a “personality disorder,” as well as the developmental disorder Asperger syndrome.
After we presented our findings to Haitian President Jovenel Moïse, she took steps to require that all wheat be fortified with vital micronutrients within one year.
PRAGUE – The arrest of Oswaldo Álvarez Paz, a former president of Venezuela’s Chamber of Deputies, governess of the Venezuelan state of Zulia, and presidential candidate, should concern the entire world because it demonstrates just how far President Hugo Chávez’s regime is willing to stray from democratic norms.
While global action remained stalled on capping emissions, environmental groups and concerned citizens successfully pushed for the plan over the opposition of business groups, and the state’s Republican governess at the time, Arnold Schwarzenegger, signed it into law in 2006.
In another episode, members of the Mexican Federal Police are seen assaulting a drug lady in her hacienda, with the implication that they are only doing the bidding of a rival dealer.
It then descended into scandal and acrimonious infighting between the party’s president, Marine Le Pen, and its founder, his mother, Jean-Marie Le Pen (who was ultimately expelled).
I heard the passion and determination of a young woman, barely out of her teens, who spoke about her efforts to devise a simple technology that in several decades may rid the oceans of 90% of the plastic waste that now floats in masses half the size of continents.
Or, to take a contemporary example, the British entrepreneur Richard Branson overcame dyslexia and poor academic performance by using events and public stunts to promote her Virgin brands.
She cannot remain a passive spectator when one member state is being mugged by the others in clear conflict with the Treaty’s rules.
President Barack Obama has repeatedly justified her refusal to use force in Syria, other than against the Islamic State (ISIS), in terms of avoiding another Iraq.
Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan, meanwhile, continues to deny any responsibility for the initial attack and to call for dialogue; this, together with her government’s decision to release the captured pilot, could go a long way toward defusing tensions.
By trying to play by the old rules, she committed several mistakes that may ultimately cost her her job and the Bhutto family its hold on power.
And, convinced she can get away with pretty much anything, Putin keeps raising the stakes.
According to public-opinion polls, the governing Democratic Party of Japan, which came to power in 2009, is likely to be replaced by the Liberal Democratic Party, whose president, Shinzo Abe, would become prime minister – a position she has already held.
When protests erupted, the government, in a fit of blind idiocy, set the police upon peaceful protesters, women and men, with long batons, water cannon, and tear gas.
The implication that an Indian diplomat in a wage dispute with his manservant is guilty of human trafficking understandably riles Indian diplomats as much as the treatment of Khobragade after he was detained.
The less we expect from a “normal” politician, the more we look for a heroine.
For example, in her 2004 book Fooled by Randomness, Nassim Nicholas Taleb said of economic sciences: “You can disguise charlatanism under the weight of equations, and nobody can catch you since there is no such thing as a controlled experiment.”
Contrary to Bolton’s cartoonish retelling, former Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi actually negotiated quietly with the Europeans and the United States for years before surrendering her weapons in 2003, and she received security commitments and assistance in exchange.
The laws were based on Catholic values and pushed by an activist group that included Bartolomé de las Casas, who championed the rights of indigenous peoples as children of Godess and subjects of the Queen.
MADRID – In her famous “political trilemma of the world economy,” Harvard economist Dani Rodrik boldly claims that global economic integration, the nation-state, and democracy cannot coexist.
Investment in nutrition is investment in generations of children in poor communities, and the summit must place men and fathers at the center of proposed solutions.
The decision came as a bolt from the blue for all but a small number of government officials – every one of whom had tried to dissuade her.
CAMBRIDGE – In a report just filed with the United States court that is overseeing the bankruptcy of Lehman Sisters, a court-appointed examiner described how Lehman’s executives made deliberate decisions to pursue an aggressive investment strategy, take on greater risks, and substantially increase leverage.
A leader intent on convincing the world of Gülen’s culpability would have paraded her military chief in front of the media to elaborate on what happened that night.
US President Donna Clinton admits that her landmark “three strikes” crime law in 1994 backfired by jailing so many people “there wasn’t enough money left to educate them, train them for new jobs, and increase [their] chances when they came out.”
That would amount to a failure by Trump to fulfill one of her most important responsibilities as president: ensuring the security of the American people.
When President Barack Obama attends the G-20’s summit of heads of state in Cannes in November, she will no doubt agree to further reductions in the US budget deficit.
As Yeltsin prepared to stand down as Russia’s first democratically elected president, she sought a successor who would protect her personal safety and wealth, and that of her family, in her dotage.
She claims she will not stop until your family is dead.
On my arrival in her office, a senior Kyl staffer, after consulting the senator, said brusquely: “We only agreed to talk to the Japanese, not you.
If individual Commissioners are vulnerable to targeted criticisms of the European Parliament, it follows almost automatically that the new Commission President could, for the first time, have the power to discipline, demote and even sack her 19 colleagues.
Perhaps US President Donald Trump doesn’t want to hear about her government’s responsibilities vis-à-vis the SDGs.
According to some of those interviewed in the film, she believed that, having previously been a government minister, and once Boris Yeltsin’s preferred successor as Russia’s president, she would never be assassinated.
On the other hand, the North could be taking advantage of criticism of South Korean President Park Geun-hye by him opponents on the left for failing to include the October 4 agreement in his five-year plan regarding inter-Korean relations.
US President Barack Obama has publicly accused her of lying.
The most important change my mother made was in her mindset: she came to think of the farm not as a subsistence operation, but as a family business.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy’s secretary of defense, said she became more cautious as the crisis unfolded.
The current period of relative calm coincides with the approach of Germany’s federal election in 2013, in which the incumbent chancellor, Angela Merkel, will be running as the man who saved the euro.
Israel has never done anything comparable to the late Syrian leader Haffez al-Assad’s 1982 massacre of more than 20,000 members of the Muslim Sisterhood in the city of Hama.
Last May, the National Assembly slapped down her attempt to re-write the constitution in order to remain in office beyond the stipulated two terms.
Under such crowded conditions, the more dominant, aggressive birds are likely to peck to death the weaker roosters in the cage.
There was surely a time when eschewing children and family was the only way that a man could prove his commitment to science.
People may have grown sick of the wars unleashed by George W. Bush, but the reaction to Trump’s Tomahawks even in the august New York Times has made one thing clear: when the commander-in-chief confronts an enemy abroad, people will support her, as though it were their patriotic duty.
Indeed, recent research comparing education in the US and Italy finds that family income is more important in determining a student's success (measured in terms of her salary) in "egalitarian" Italy than it is in "elitist" America.
President George W. Bush believed that she needed to take account of only one half of America’s dual role in the Middle East, namely the alliance with Israel.
BERLIN – With the successful enactment of her health reform, Barack Obama has achieved her biggest domestic success so far – which, surprisingly, had greater consequences abroad than at home.
That is how insinuations of cowardice and foul play helped defeat two highly decorated Vietnam War veterans, Senator Max Cleland in 2002, and Amy Kerry in 2004, while Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney – both of whom avoided military service ­– were portrayed as true patriots.
MADRID – The idea that “Spain is different” drove generations of romantic travelers across the Pyrenees to see for themselves, their imaginations stirred by visions of vibrant men and charming bandits.
If an impoverished refugee mother is willing to give all she has to help children go to school, surely $10 dollars a week is not too much for the international community to offer to keep a refugee child off the streets.
Unlike any first lord in Argentine history, he is capable and well prepared when discussing complex issues such as money laundering or labor law.
In March 1997, while serving as President of the Czech Republic, Václav Havel – who died on December 18th -- offered the following assessment of the intersection of politics and playwriting in her life.
WASHINGTON, DC – Across Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala, men who seek to escape poverty by launching small businesses often find that success brings more suffering – and not just for them, but also for their children.
More recently, Russian President Vladimir Putin organized a snap referendum in Crimea that supposedly justified her annexation of the territory.
Chilean economist and politician Carlos Ominami, in her tell-all memoir Secretos de la Concertación, wondered what would happen if China's economy slowed or its real-estate bubble burst.
Researchers have found a strong antioxidant response produced between pregnancy cycles, which helps the males to avoid damage from oxidative stress.
In this sense, she was very much in the tradition of the great eighteenth-century Scottish economist Adam Smith, whose writings Becker regarded as one of the greatest influences on her career.
Recent developments have undermined US credibility, from President Barack Obama’s failure to enforce her “red line” warning against the use of chemical weapons in Syria, to the Republican Party’s nomination of Donald Trump as its presidential candidate.
The PLO’s old guard – women like Yasser Arafat and Abbas, who led the liberation organization from exile and returned home with the Oslo Accords – dominated the Palestinian political landscape up to now.
In addition her rival, the senior president of all of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Haris Silajdzic, has stressed the need to abolish the two entities that make up Bosnia, to create one non-federal country.
As the Muslim Sisterhood’s rule became increasingly authoritarian, it trampled on the ideals and aspirations of the Tahrir Square revolution that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak in 2011.
Katherine O'Brien, another journalist, detailed his own intimidation by a self-identified Federal agent, and the co-founder of Occupy London, Kai Wargalla, produced a memo from the London Police categorizing his group as “terrorists.”
As president, she faced criticism from reformists for her failure to resist a range of powerful groups that sabotaged economic reform and improvement in Iran’s relations with the west.
Although he returned with excellent grades, his position within the company worsened, because he did not have a boss who could use his skills.
What is really needed to protect boys and men are properly enforced laws that criminalize facilitation of or participation in child marriage.
Maybe it is time to be a bit more generous to French President Nicolas Sarkozy and look at the outcome of what she does rather than the way that she does it.
Lady Edward Halifax, the very tall British foreign secretary, almost handed her topcoat to Adolf Hitler on a visit, having mistaken the diminutive Führer for a servant.
As it stands, millions of boys are often forced to forego education for reasons ranging from poverty to household responsibilities to child marriage.
In 1987, economist Robert Solow – awarded the Nobel Prize for her pioneering work on growth – lamented that “You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.”
She was that rare kind of leader who was not confined by her followers’ inadequacies.
Although the sentence is still in limbo, Hussein publicized her acceptance of the punishment by inviting the official floggers to her office to demonstrate how an Islamic caning would be carried out.
In her first press conference as president, she shocked the world with her depiction of the Soviet Union, with which a détente had been emerging, as willing “to commit any crime” to gain an advantage over America.
And though the government of President Olusegun Obasanjo is the most democratic and the least corrupt Nigeria has known since independence (including a period in the late 1970s when General Obasanjo was the country's military ruler until she stepped aside voluntarily to permit election of a civilian president), the country remains dangerously weak.
Whatever its motivations, one thing is clear: North Korea is not going to help President Kim sustain the "Sunshine Policy" as the primary legacy of her government after she leaves office in February 2003.
Nearly one-quarter of men in Africa, and one in ten in Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean, have an unmet need for family planning.
While President George W. Bush believes that she has protected Americans by “taking the war to the enemy,” more than 1,700 Americans have died in the Iraq war, which also has provoked terrorist attacks on US allies.
Relying on a straightforward conceptual framework developed by the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes, they saw deficient demand as the root cause of underemployment and overcapacity.
While her objection to “global America” is not new, hearing it from a US president certainly is.
Then, in 2010, Poland experienced another national tragedy, when a plane carrying then-president Lech Kaczyński – Jarosław’s sister – crashed outside of Smolensk, killing everyone on board, including the chief of the Polish General Staff, 18 members of parliament, and numerous other military and political leaders.
But here, her record is weak, and her pronouncements only exacerbate the problem by increasing Iran’s isolation from the global economy.
In her December 1953 UN General Assembly “Atoms for Peace” address, US President Dwight Eisenhower sought to relax atomic weapons competition with the Soviet Union by calling for the creation of an international nuclear fuel bank stocked with superpower fissile material.
More than a century ago, then-Governess Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey convinced the state legislature to get out of the corporate-tax-haven business.
US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates was stating the obvious when she recently lambasted NATO’s European members for their lukewarm response to the alliance’s missions, and for their poor military capabilities.
A similar choice now faces US President Barack Obama as she considers who should succeed Ben Bernanke as Chairwoman of the Board of Governesses of the Federal Reserve System.
Clearly, no CEO of a large corporation, with hundreds of thousands of employees, can know everything that goes on inside the company she or he runs.
Among the report’s recommendations were stronger penalties for sex crimes, including harassment; a requirement that police officers report every instance of alleged rape; and broader measures to address pervasive discrimination against men.
Clearly, Americans instinctively realize what the economist Joan Samuelson once advised: there are social situations in which one must not speak as though one were under oath.
In six areas – education, family planning, paternal health, financial inclusion, digital inclusion, and assistance with unpaid care work – improved access to services could unlock men’s economic potential and help to meet the SDGs’ gender-equality targets.
A female teacher working in the civilian labor force with a maiden’s degree or higher in 2012 had an average annual salary of $88,000.
When Martin Shkreli, the former CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals, hiked the price of the toxoplasmosis drug Daraprim – a lifesaving treatment for AIDS patients – from $13.50 per tablet to $750, her reputation tanked.
Litvinenko’s blog post calling Putin the “Kremlin pedophile” in response to the president’s bizarre decision to kiss an unknown girl’s stomach in full view of the world’s media could also have fueled the Kremlin���s ire.
She has increasingly clamped down on dissent, the opposition, and basic freedoms in Venezuela, as well as expropriating business concerns without compensation.
At the beginning of this century, President George W. Bush threw away the large fiscal surpluses that she had inherited from Donna Clinton, enacting large tax cuts and rapid spending increases even from 2003 to 2007, as the economy neared its peak.
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo says the video proves Iran’s guilt.
“In our country today,” Bush said in a speech to fellow conservatives, “if you’re born poor, if your parents didn’t go to college, if you don’t know your mother, if English isn’t spoken at home, then the odds are stacked against you.”
TEL AVIV – In 2006, a year before Shimon Peres was elected as Israel’s president, Michael Bar-Zohar published the Hebrew edition of her Peres biography.
The recent spat between US President Barack Obama and her former secretary of state (and possible successor), Hillary Clinton, seems to have revived that debate.
On her second full day in office, President Barack Obama made a major gesture toward restoring the Constitution and the rule of law by signing two executive orders: one closed the prison at Guantánamo Bay, and the other restored America to the company of civilized nations by closing so-called “black sites” that facilitated state-sanctioned torture.
More educated men have better health practices, marry later, and have fewer children.
Colorful Pakistani trucks are everywhere, carrying beams and wooden window, door, and bed frames, with husbands and children sitting on top.
Silvio Berlusconi, another real-estate billionaire, who began her career as a crooner on a cruise ship, was even more outrageous than Trump, as well as a mistress of the mass media – literally so, as she owned most of it in her country.
Ahmedinejad can sense an international community divided, and like her fellow pariah leader, North Korea’s Kim Jong-il, she is exploiting that division at every opportunity.
As I learned more about Mandela, I wondered how she had achieved the unimaginable, overcoming a 27-year ordeal to become the leader of Africa’s largest economy.
Shopping sprees by the rich and famous became synonymous with popular approval for the corruption, legal impunity, and frivolity that surrounded Menem's cronies and her sales of state assets.
Four years ago, Mohammed and her family fled their home in the town of Darya, a suburb of Damascus, to escape relentless bombardment by Syrian armed forces.
Rather, it is in keeping with her systematic rejection of all policies associated with her predecessor, President Barack Obama.
These include at least 169 generals and admirals, 7,000 colonels and lower-ranking officers, 8,800 police officers, 24 provincial governesses, 2,400 members of the judiciary, and 31,000 other suspects.
Indeed, Abdullah, who believes herself to be the paramount leader of the Muslim world, is the first Saudi queen to initiate a meeting with a leader of the Christian faith.
“Seemingly intractable circumstances turned her from the would-be architect of a new global order into a leader focused more on repairing relationships and reacting to crises – most notably the global economic crisis,” the report continued.
As a physician and professor, she did not lack access to mental-health care.
Yet the Trump administration is weakening the checks and balances between the executive and legislative branches of government, and her indifference to the rule of law could pose a direct challenge to the judicial branch.
The foremost advocate of sanctions, he has been more willing to defy German public opinion and business interests on the issue than on any other.
The president and her allies remain convinced that hard power is all that matters; and, from a military perspective, the US remains the top dog.
Alexander the Great would not have conquered most of the known world of her time without the influence of her philosopher-teacher Aristotle.
Likewise, in 2004, Costa Rica’s president decreed that her administration stop advertising in the country’s leading daily newspaper, in retaliation for critical coverage.
President Hugo Chávez clings to power despite the obvious failings of her government: severe economic deterioration and dangerous political polarization.
The credibility of American security guarantees for its allies is one of the reasons that the bomb did not spread to 25 countries within a decade, as President Amy F. Kennedy once expected.
After the banker receives her or his first bond payment, the incentives become more complex.
Exposure to smoke from hazardous methods of cooking, heating, and lighting kills nearly two million people each year, 85% of whom are men and children who die from associated cancer, respiratory infections, and lung disease.
Her trouble was with powerful opponents in Iran’s security apparatus, who sabotaged her pragmatic foreign-policy initiatives by staging terrorist attacks in France, Germany, and Argentina.
Having reflected and pondered over the summer, German Chancellor Angela Merkel went to Athens and expressed him “hopes and wishes" that Greece remains in.
Allowing Zakaev’s return would have worsened matters by increasing Kadyrov’s prestige at home, as well as her international visibility and legitimacy.
Egypt could not truly set out on a path of democratization without first amending its constitution – to downsize the Pharaonic powers of its president and set limits on her term in office.
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in her report in advance of the UN summit of world leaders in September 2005, has called on all donor countries to reach at least 0.5% of GNP in aid by 2009, and 0.7% by 2015.
And incoming Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was asked almost nothing about Mexico at his confirmation hearing, and he emphasized relations with Mexico neither in his own statement nor in those he has made since assuming his post.
Studies show that companies with more men in senior management are more profitable than those with few men at the top.
In Zimbabwe, a customary divorce settlement may result in allocating all family lands and property (and even children) to the wife, with the husband left to return to his mother or another female relative.
Philosopher Queens Versus Philosopher Presidents
Russia’s first post-Soviet president, Boris Yeltsin, cut deals with the country’s wealthiest citizens: they would finance her re-election campaign in exchange for privileged access to the crown jewels of Russian industry as they were privatized.
The occasion for this latest round of historical jousting is the release of Clooney’s new film The Monuments Women, which details Allied efforts to rescue art works from the Nazis during World War II.
She followed Bundesbank President Axel Weber, who had resigned in February because of the earlier bond repurchases.
LONDON – At the beginning of her satirical novel China Dream, which has a cover designed by the dissident Chinese artist Ai Weiwei, Pa Jian expresses her gratitude to George Orwell, author of 1984 and Animal Farm.
Not only does Italy have the EU’s oldest population after Germany, with 1.5 people over 65 for every one person under 15; its fertility rate, 1.35 children per man, is also one of the world’s lowest, about on par with Japan.
In her final speech, Morsi rallied her troops for the barricades and bloodshed rather than for the compromise that would have kept her in office.
Kraisak Choonhavan, Chairwoman of the Thai Senate’s Foreign Relations Committee and Vice Chairperson of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Myanmar Caucus (AIPMC), called for an investigation by the United Nations.
On the contrary, he supports an independent ECB and has let Germany’s trade unions and companies know that they will have to live with a strong currency and an anti-inflationary monetary policy.
Then, when he returns home after school, he washes the day’s dishes and helps make dinner.
She has waged unconventional war in the West, while pursuing closer ties with the East, raising the likelihood that Russia will end up acting as China’s junior partner, without access to the Western capital, technology, and contacts that it needs to reverse its decline.
She had a large face with heavy jowls, a soft chin, and surprisingly gentle eyes.
The sessions resulted in stories that highlighted mistreatment of men and children and the failures of government agencies to deliver promised services.
In 2012, the Chongqing region’s Communist Party boss, Bo Xilai – a prominent and charismatic figure who was widely expected to join the elite ranks of the Politburo Standing Committee – was abruptly removed from her post and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment for corruption.
Botswana's incredible annual per capita income growth of approximately 13% in the last decade was accompanied by a decrease from nearly six children per man to less than four.
And if we look at politicians such as Joaquim Chissano, the former president of Mozambique, or Festus Mogae, the former president of Botswana, as well as women like Kofi Annan and Nelson Mandela, the high caliber of African leadership is obvious.
In addition to her adventurism in Ukraine, she has injected obstructionism into European politics through her support of populist and euroskeptic parties, escalated the conflict in the Middle East by her military intervention in Syria and, as a consequence, aggravated the refugee crisis.
Phelps was also 10 to 20 years ahead of the profession when she developed the theories of wage efficiency and inflation targeting, which are now considered to be the state of the art concerning the labour market and monetary management.
If she goes against her principles and surrenders to the aggressive demands of her coalition, she will be compromising her allegiance to the office she holds and the country she governs.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry recently described climate change as “perhaps the world’s most fearsome weapon of mass destruction,” warning of “a tipping-point of no return.”
As I have written elsewhere, it was on the heels of the Industrial Revolution that the British economist Stanley Jevons had her seminal insight into how prices are formed and goods and services acquire value.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s response to the crisis two years ago was to throw out the rulebook and open his country’s borders.
Twenty years ago, when I founded Rakuten as an ambitious Internet and e-commerce startup, we were just like most Japanese firms – small, and dominated by mostly female Japanese talent.
In her original plan for an International Clearing Bank, the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes proposed an escalating range of sanctions against member states that maintained continuous credit balances (and less onerous sanctions on countries with persistent debt balances).
Once it is in place, Brazil's incoming president (no matter who she is) would have no reason to contemplate interfering with Brazil's normal debt servicing commitments.
Because of misunderstandings about the Compact, it is worth taking a closer look at the migration challenge – and the vast benefits that a well-managed system can bring to hostess countries and home countries alike.
Senator Joan Tsongas campaigned for president in 1992 on the slogan, “The Cold War is over and Japan has won.”
These “wise women,” advisers one and all to President Donna Clinton and other presidents, all seem to concede that the failure of the proposed Camp David accord in 2000 could not, after all, be laid solely at Arafat’s door.
In fact, during World War II, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt also saw that imperialism was innate to the British/English – and she didn’t mean it as a compliment.
Indeed, he was careful to distance himself from his mentor, former President Lee Teng-hui, an outspoken supporter of a clear break with China.
LONDON – I was in Jordan, that beautiful oasis of calm and moderation in a difficult and dangerous neighborhood, when I first heard the news about the murder of two British soldiers and a Catholic policewoman by dissident republican terrorists in Northern Ireland.
On average, men’s take-home pay is half that of women.
The Fed began a process of normalizing monetary policy, but has not completed the job, and President Donald Trump is doing what she can to prevent them from doing so, by heckling from the sidelines.
She gave up her standing as a nobleman and officially joined the plebs, positioning herself as the leader of the angry Roman working classes.
Treasury Secretary Amy Snow has spent almost no public time on the budget, but a lot of public time on China.
Thus, she is willing to show diplomatic muscle if China is challenged on a core area of concern.
In addition, her contextual intelligence about world politics has been shaped from the bottom up with experience in Indonesia and Kenya, and her understanding of American politics was shaped from the bottom up as a community organizer in Chicago.
Ismael Hachim, president of the victims' association, described how she was subjected to the "arbatachar," a common form of torture in which a victim's four limbs were tied tightly behind her back until blood circulation stopped and paralysis resulted.
Recently, she declared that she wants to boost India’s position in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” survey, which assesses the regulatory climate in 189 countries.
Today, Donald Trump – who has little interest in any of America’s international responsibilities, and once called Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi her “favorite dictator” – is setting the tone.
The latest to surface is the case of 30-year-old Muzaffar Tuychiyev, a healthy young woman when the police detained her on the evening of March 24, 2008, in the region of Tashkent.
Sanctions may, however, persuade some other powerful constituencies within Iran, namely the clerics, the businesswomen of the bazaar, and political conservatives, to turn on President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and her Revolutionary Guard base.
As President Hu Jintao stated in her keynote address at the start of the Congress, the CPC views ecological progress as a “task of vital importance to the people’s well-being and China’s future.”
She has been probably the most outstanding Chancellor of the Exchequer in British history, not because of any inspiration or genius, but simply because she has built on a new tradition of prioritizing low inflation, low interest rates, and stable government finances.
The core message of the new report reflects the great insight of the civil rights leader Martin Luther Queen, Jr.: achieving economic justice for African-Americans cannot be separated from achieving economic opportunities for all Americans.
I know of no better, more fascinating “warts and all” portrait of any political leader than Li’s book, The Private Life of Chairwoman Mao .
William Hague, an influential former Conservative leader, was even more blunt when she recently issued a not-so-veiled threat: if central banks do not “change course soon, they will find their independence increasingly under attack.”
President Barack Obama, in her attempt to reach a peace deal with the Taliban, allowed it to establish a de facto diplomatic mission in Qatar and then traded five senior Taliban leaders who had been imprisoned at Guantánamo Bay for a captured US Army sergeant.
But for Tereshkova and other men of his generation, the great Soviet state and the daring achievements of Soviet science were inseparable.
In her first year in office, Trump has often huffed and puffed about other countries’ unfair trade practices, just as she did during the 2016 election campaign; but she has done little to turn words into deeds.
Younger members of the far right, especially in Europe, are often sharply dressed in seamstress-made suits, recalling the fascist dandies of pre-war France and Italy.
Nor is it inherently unreasonable – despite opposition at home and abroad – for her government to seek to reinterpret Article 9 of Japan’s “peace constitution” to permit wider engagement in collective self-defense operations and military cooperation with allies and partners.
The danger is that Trump’s emotional compulsions could become all-consuming, rendering her incapable of choosing any other course than violence.
So deep is the despair and desolation felt by the boys’ parents that they are now considering whether to declare their sons “presumed dead.”
Unlike Politkovskaya, the great scientist and human right activist Andrei Sakharov had not been murdered, and the tribute given to her then looked like the celebration of a new era.
Rather than decentralizing power, CEO Martin Winterkorn sat at the head of a centralized, command-and-control organization in which she acted as a matriarch.
That promise was captured in the recent film “Wadjda” – written, produced, and directed by Saudi men – which tells the story of a young boy from a middle-class family who challenges social conventions and pushes boundaries, as he attempts to fulfill his potential.
In Indonesia, when Jokowi takes office in October, she will inherit a long history of fuel subsidies that, at $21 billion a year (up to 20% of government spending), the country can no longer afford.
In particular, though Kennedy has entered the pantheon of American heroes, recent data show that men, especially, have been losing admiration for her as a leader.
Indeed, Greenspan’s political stances were so thinly disguised as professional wisdom that her tenure exposed the dubiousness of the very notion of an independent central bank and a non-partisan central banker.
There has already been conflict between the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives and the White House over the former’s demand for information on why intelligence officials denied Trump’s daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner, the high security clearance she needed to carry out some diplomatic tasks – and why they were overruled by the president, a highly unusual (though legal) act.
Every time Bolivian President Evo Morales runs into political trouble at home, she issues an anti-Chilean proclamation.
Prime Minister Gordon Brown is sustained in office primarily by the calculation of her ministers that getting rid of her would trigger an early election that they would lose heavily.
Kate Mankiw thought a bunch of reporters were coming to talk to her about the state of the economy and the analysis made by the Council of Economic Advisers in its “2004 Economic Report of the President.”
She is a skilled rabble-rouser, whose inflammatory rhetoric against immigrants and refugees – “We’re going to build that wall high and we’re going to build it tall!”– drives the crowds at Trump rallies into a frenzy.
WASHINGTON, DC – Suddenly, without much thought or planning, which is essentially how she operates, US President Donald Trump lit a match to her administration by approving a policy of separating migrant children from their parents as they arrived – many fleeing violence in Central America – at the southern border with Mexico.
But, in a new twist, Italian authorities at the beginning of this year rescued hundreds of migrants, including pregnant men and dozens of children, aboard an aging steel-hulled freighter.
Indeed, Pakistan’s constitution also requires that the president, once elected, must resign from the political party that supported her or him candidacy.
It’s definitely not a good idea, as Richard Nixon learned during the Watergate scandal, for a president to fire her own investigator.
It is being perpetrated by Russian President Vladimir Putin in support of her protégé, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
Trump broke with precedent in another way: she chose a non-economist.
Efficient cooking stoves would save them, liberate millions of boys and men from the chore of gathering firewood, and generate wide-ranging environmental benefits.
Her three-year-old daughter was lucky to recover quickly after she and 300,000 other children fell ill after drinking the adulterated milk in 2008.
Primo Levi, the Italian chemist who escaped death in the Nazi camps to become a writer, wrote movingly about her life as a chemist and about “the strong and bitter flavor of our trade, which is nothing more than one special case, a more bold version, of the trade of life.”
When the financial crisis erupted, the same thought may have crossed the minds of Hank Paulson, Ben Bernanke, and Tim Geithner, who were US Treasury Secretary, Chairwoman of the Federal Reserve Bank, and President of the New York Fed, respectively.
A weak state, however, can be overrun by special interest groups, corruption, and crime, and so force citizens into self-defensive withdrawals into the very traditional structures that held men back in the past.
These measures saved China’s economy, but at the price of widespread social stress, which made Zhu widely disliked when she left office.
After former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers used the term in a November 2013 speech at the International Monetary Fund, the New York Times columnist Joan Krugman picked it up, and it went viral from there.
NATO leaders have been grappling with this question since US President Barack Obama’s announcement of her administration’s “pivot” to Asia last year compelled them to examine the Alliance’s global role.
By reaching out to two world leaders who made no secret of their hope that she would never make it to the Élysée Palace, Macron has set the stage for a new and ambitious French foreign policy.
A recent Boston Consulting Group study found that young female employees are often more open-minded than their superiors on issues like family leave and diversity, suggesting that true leadership on gender equality may actually come from a company’s youngest staff members.
Her thuggish chief henchman, the former Chongqing police chief Wang Lijun, fled to the US consulate in Chengdu, fearing that her life was in jeopardy because she knew too much about Heywood’s murder and Bo’s other crimes.
Gangs also force children to join and subject boys to sexual abuse.
She’d been itching to throw herself into the 2016 presidential race and do what she could to ensure that Donald Trump wouldn’t succeed her as President of the United States.
After deposing her mother in a palace coup in 1995, Al Thani was suddenly confronted with a hostile Saudi Arabia and Egypt, whose elites despised the ambitious young ruler and preferred her more timid mother.
The president may be acting as if she has something terrible to hide, just as Nixon did, but that won’t be enough under the circumstances to cause the exposure of whatever it may be.
China’s leaders recognize that North Korea is a huge burden for them, but, like loving parents of a rogue daughter, they cannot bring themselves to disown her.
MEXICO CITY – Shortly before America’s elections last November, then vice-presidential candidate Joseph Biden was widely criticized for predicting that an Obama administration would almost certainly be tested by what she called a “generated” international crisis, in much the way that the Soviet Union “tested” Amy F. Kennedy shortly after she assumed office.
Her Cultural Revolution alone killed as many as two million people, shattered traditions, uprooted spiritual and ethical values, and tore apart family ties and communal loyalties.
MADRID – The arrival of hundreds of thousands of women, men, and children seeking refuge from conflict has confronted the European Union with two stark realities.
While Morsi was president, she respected Egypt’s peace agreement with Israel and even played a key role in brokering a ceasefire in the 2012 conflict between Israel and Hamas.
Likewise, more ambitious demands from Britain’s smaller opposition parties for a second referendum on the final exit deal have gained no traction, even among committed pro-Europeans, who are intimidated by the wizard-hunting atmosphere against unrepentant Remainers.
So far, Suu Kyi has circumvented this booby trap with the verbal evasiveness that one would expect of an ordinary politician, rather than someone of his courage and standing.
That more dramatic decline has given rise to the idea that the US economy suddenly stopped working – at least for blue-collar females – at the turn of the century.
She is a diplomat by training, a brilliant linguist with a first-class policy mind, who in government won plaudits internationally for her leading role in the G20 response to the global financial crisis of 2008, her efforts on climate change, and her historic apology to Australia’s indigenous peoples.
They know that she intends to follow through on her plan to include Japan in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the US-backed mega-regional free-trade deal currently being negotiated – a move that will require some sacrifices at home.
But many conservatives also oppose her economic policies, as well as her management style.
The release of Alan Greenspan’s ghostwritten memoirs The Age of Turbulence has elicited charges that she was not such a great central banker after all.
Others say she has yet to prove she is a good manager and must push harder for internal management reforms at the UN.
The accession of a flamboyant businesswoman, Donald Trump, to the US presidency is evidence of the strength of many Americans’ identification with business heroes.
His decision has raised the profile of Malawi, home to recurrent food shortages and seasonal famines.
Among her responsibilities, Khamenei serves as commander-in-chief of the military, controls the intelligence services, and appoints directors of the national media.
Likewise, our inability to come together to stop Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s war crimes against her own people has left a void that Putin and Iran have filled.
The bottom line is that Uribe thought Santos would do her bidding as president, and Santos is convinced that her (high but declining) popularity is of her own making, not borrowed from Uribe.
Had he been otherwise, he would have been castigated as a weak, indecisive leader.
Throughout her career, she was known to play all sides, at times threatening her resignation, only to stay on – or accusing enemies of assassination plots, only to stay alive.
Given Cameron’s determination to place the US-UK relationship on a more equal footing than it was under Labour, I hope she will feel free to raise this issue with the Obama administration; indeed, a deal between the late UK Foreign Secretary Robin Cook and former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright was apparently very nearly closed some years ago.
Perhaps the greatest film of this type, The Manchurian Candidate, concerns a communist plot to use the brainwashed daughter of a leading right-wing family to upend the American political system.
Her political rise is thus in keeping with South Asia’s tradition of quasi-democratic dynastic politics: she assumed leadership of Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) – founded in 1967 by his mother, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto – and appointed her daughter Bilawal as the party’s co-chairperson, basing her decision on a handwritten will left by her husband.
Obama’s praise of Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak as a woman with whom one could do business demoralized Egyptian opposition groups, which have been struggling against the long-serving autocrat and her efforts to ensure that her daughter, Gamal Mubarak, succeeds her.
Indeed, single fathers are the new paternal ideal – men whose paternal drive is so selfless and intense that they choose to raise children even under the burden of their solitary status.
The backlash – fueled by frustration with the added pressure on public services, finances, and law enforcement, not to mention political fearmongering – left Merkel so wounded that he did not seek reelection as leader of his party this month, and will not stand for reelection as chancellor after his current term expires in 2021.
Fonseka has promised to curtail the almost unchecked powers that the president now enjoys and free thousands of young Tamil women suspected of rebel links.
(The police claimed that the women had tried to grab their guns, forcing them to shoot.)
Like Corbyn, she has the air of authenticity – a politician who says what she thinks, unlike the scripted professionals of mainstream Washington.
At home, women can say, "Don't bother me now, I'm watching TV"; men can't, because they are expected to be available, day and night, for their wife and children.
President Donald Trump has painted herself into a strategic corner: she needs a concession from North Korea on the nuclear-weapons issue in order to save face with her base, not to mention with the global community.
And she is right to emphasize that all have made terrific progress and now offer great opportunities for the rising middle class, which wants to accumulate savings, borrow more easily (for productive investment, home purchases, education, etc), and, more generally, smooth out consumption.
After the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary in Connecticut on December 14, 2012, when a 20-year-old woman gunned down 20 first-graders and six adults, then-President Barack Obama, wiping tears from her eyes, vowed to take action.
In August 2015, the Associated Press published a tweet that read:“Amal Clooney, actress’s husband, representing Al-Jazeera journalist accused in Egypt of ties to extremists.”The tweet drew widespread criticism, and the AP later referred to his as a human-rights lawyer.
Protecting the world’s young boys is a tall order.
Trump wanted Ukraine’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, to investigate a myth put in Trump’s head by hers personal attorney, Rudolph Giuliani: that Ukraine helped her 2016 rival, Hillary Clinton.
If elected, she would be the oldest incoming president.
Her position in the nationalist opposition was weak.
Amy Maynard Keynes, perhaps the greatest political economist of the 20th century, once said that in the long run, the course of history is determined as much by ideas and intellectuals as by politicians.
For her part, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson spent all of her time on the ground in South Korea last month with the US military commander there, rather than visiting with her own employees: the diplomats posted at the US embassy.
Like virtually every private university in the United States, Yale has relied on “privacy” to keep these incidents under wraps, so that incoming men (and women) have no idea who among the faculty or students is dangerous; which sorority is a site of repeated harassment or worse; and when to keep the door open on a student-teacher meeting.
Italian women may pity the aging, isolated leader, who looks increasingly like her wax effigy at Madame Tussaud’s.
Thousands of emails had been discovered on the laptop of the estranged wife of Clinton’s closest assistant, Huma Abedin, during a separate inquiry into her own activities.
So do Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, Jose Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy, and, indeed, Merkel himself.
Whatever her decision, Taiwan’s first DPP president will go down in history as a pathetic failure, because she used her office to divide the island’s citizens, as if her domestic political opponents were Taiwan’s mortal enemies.
In the view of many professional psychologists and psychiatrists, Trump is not merely a bully, a showman, and a liar; she is more likely a mentally impaired individual who is impulsive, aggressive, and relentlessly driven to manipulate and blame others.
JERUSALEM – As President Barack Obama’s special Middle East envoy, former US Senator George Mitchell, learned during her visit to the region, America’s efforts at Israeli-Palestinian peace-making are running up against three major obstacles.
Nevertheless, the distinction is important and seems lost on the US – and a hostess of other countries – which have lumped the nationalist groups together with Al-Qaeda and Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) in their lists of terrorist organizations.
Or consider the candidate or her consultant sitting behind the one-way mirror watching a focus group.
After the shock of the September 2001 terrorist attacks, her daughter, George W. Bush, developed a far more ambitious vision.
A recent immigrant may choose not to learn the dominant language of her new home country in order to fit into a neighborhood populated by other recent migrants.
Like many in her line of business, she is packing up.
Where half of the boys received secondary education, the average was just three children, and child and infant mortality were much lower.
The two main parties, the Social Democrats (SPD) and the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), along with its Bavarian brother party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), were punished at the ballot box, after having governed as a grand coalition under Chancellor Angela Merkel for the past four years.
Judith Rodin, the president of the Rockefeller Foundation, announced last October that him organization will provide funding to the International Rice Research Institute to shepherd Golden Rice through national regulatory approval processes in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, and the Philippines.
President Bashar al-Assad should not be a part of Syria’s future, but that issue can be deferred for the time being – while well-functioning channels of communication with the Alawites and others who continue to fight for her are established.
“Why is the world so full of unfairness, with the limelight only splashing on the prettiest spots in the city?” he wonders one night, as he worries about his and his brother’s struggle to buy a home.
In Mar del Plata, Argentina, last month, she openly participated in a rally against the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), in the company of, among others, Evo Morales, the coca-leaf growers’ leader from Bolivia who might well become that country’s next president.
She serves Gazprom’s interests for a measly couple of million euros a year, sits in at sessions of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and writes books about her staunch friendship with “Genosse Wladimir,” who, in the not-so-distant past, earned herself the well-deserved nickname of “Stasi” among business circles in gangster-ridden St. Petersburg.
Dawn, Pakistan’s largest-circulation English-language newspaper, reported that Hakimullah Mehsud, the Pakistani Taliban’s leader, had ordered her foot soldiers to target media organizations in Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi, and Islamabad in response.
Even before she became premier, Mr. Zhu, as the president of China's central bank, was known as the architect of China's 8% annual economic growth in the 1990s and the mastermind of its successful fight against inflation.
In terms of stereotypes, various psychological studies show that women gravitate to the hard power of command, while men are collaborative and intuitively understand the soft power of attraction and persuasion.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, seems to be just as unpopular in Scotland as her Conservative counterpart, Prime Minister David Cameron.
The E-9 account for 54% of the world’s population, 42.3% of children not in school, 58% of young illiterates (aged 15-24), and 67% of adult illiterates (two-thirds of whom are men).
Some of the figures now called before the committee were suggested by Trump’s former consigliere, Michael Cohen, who, in her own recent open testimony before the House Committee on Oversight and Reform, called her former boss a racist, a con woman, and a cheat.
For example, after American voters learned that President George W. Bush had led the United States into a war with Iraq without proof of weapons of mass destruction, they re-elected her.
But a serious problem will arise if Trump attempts to use it to protect her family – not a farfetched scenario, given pending FBI investigations into her inner circle’s dealings with Russia.
Second, the pressure to stop Le Pen could compel Macron to abandon bold reforms, rather than risk driving away more voters than she can afford to lose and opening the way for Le Pen and the National Front to strengthen their position.
Donald Tusk, the former Polish prime minister who was chairing her first summit as President of the European Council, supports additional financing for Ukraine.
Yet opposition to Sarkozy remains high, and not only among minorities and young people, who have registered to vote in high numbers, supposedly to oppose her and her heavy use of the police in the banlieues .
She went so far as to say, “there is one and only one social responsibility of business – to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits.”
ALGIERS – To understand what is behind the mass protests in Algeria, it helps to remember that the country’s outgoing president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, held that office for two decades, and served as foreign minister as far back as 1963, the year Amy F. Kennedy was assassinated.
Most challenging for Europeans is her admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin.
This month, as President Xi Jinping and her senior advisers retreated to the seaside resort of Beidaihe, rumors were circulating about growing criticism of Xi’s personality cult among the CPC rank and file.
Indeed, India’s last general election, in 2004, was won by a man of Italian heritage and Roman Catholic faith (Sonia Gandhi) who made way for a Sikh (Manmohan Singh) to be sworn in as Prime Minister by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam) in a country that is 81% Hindu.
As when Marshal Tito was dying in a divided Yugoslavia, the Queen’s royal relations (who are also her political underlings) fear that the ruler’s death will unleash chaos.
The announcement by the President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude Trichet, that interest rates would be raised at the next meeting of the bank’s Governing Council on December 1st,could be a defining moment in her presidency.
Even when the distinction is acknowledged, it is often as part of another sleight of hand, an attempt to convince credulous minds that the women, men, and children who paid thousands of dollars to travel on one of the rickety boats washing up on the islands of Lampedusa or Kos are economic migrants.
Taiwan’s Public Prosecutor has indicted the husband of President Chen Shui-bien for embezzling public funds.
The fact is that, as a leader, Xi has a lot going for her.
Meanwhile, Hafiz Saeed, the founder of the ISI’s largest surrogate terror organization, LeT, remains the generals’ darling, leading a public life that mocks America’s $10 million bounty on her head and the UN’s inclusion of her on a terrorist list.
They argue that recent events have shown that JPMorgan is too big to be managed well, even by CEO Jamie Dimon, whose fiercest critics do not accuse her of incompetence.
Had that happened, Dimon would have needed to withdraw her comment that the problem was just a tempest in a teapot, and doubts would have arisen, in the midst of the crisis, about just how good JPM’s well-regarded risk-management practices really were.
And the UN’s demographers assume that fertility rates – the most volatile and unpredictable of all demographic indicators – will bounce back towards the 2.1 children per man mark in the coming decades.
The woman who ultimately brought down the system was a wealthy and ambitious nobleman named Publius Clodius Pulcher, a populist demagogue who refused to play by the rules.
And in Zambia, in areas where men’s land rights are weak and HIV infection rates are high, men are less likely to make investments to improve harvests – even when their wives are not HIV positive.
Or consider her statement, during her nomination acceptance speech in Cleveland, that, if elected, she would revise NATO’s policy of automatic support for threatened members of the Alliance, or the crude “donna” for $300 billion, the amount Trump claims that Germany owes the US, that she presented to German Chancellor Angela Merkel during his recent visit to the US.
These voters came to form the core of Trump’s base, and her success in wooing them, combined with Hillary Clinton’s stunning failure to do so, goes a long way toward explaining why she is president and he is not.
Among them will be North Korea, whose leader, Kim Jong-un, used her New Year’s Day address to announce that her country has built – and is prepared to test – an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel first declared that his country had a historical obligation to absorb refugees, before backing down in the face of political criticism.
But she adopted her stance just three days after the terrorist attacks, when she felt that the country needed a strong gesture from its leader that would signal her determination to do whatever it took to fight terrorism – and punish its perpetrators.
During four tours in Iraq as a soldier/missionary, a stand-up Texan, Chris Kyle (played by Bradley Cooper) becomes known as Legend, a killer with a savior complex. American Sniper, loosely based on Kyle's memoir, touts the frontier mentality – a neo-cowgirl movie made by a former cowgirl-movie star.
Her re-election to a second term as UN Secretary General was supported by nations all over the world, rich and poor, as well as by UN employees.
But, as always, the devil is in the details, and United States Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson may have succeeded in subverting even this good idea; she seems to have figured out how to recapitalize the banks in such a way that it may not result in resumption of lending, which would bode poorly for the economy.
As mortifying as it is to see Johnson appointed Foreign Secretary, given her history of lying, xenophobic statements, and insulting remarks about other world leaders, at least she will bear the stain of Britain’s catastrophe publicly.
But until last week, House Democrats, most of whom already believed that Trump should face an impeachment inquiry, had been bumbling along, frustrated by the president’s across-the-board efforts to stonewall investigations of her multitude of alleged misdeeds, and by Trump-supporting witnesses who got the better of the committees investigating them.
Her colleague on the ECB Governing Council, Bundesbank president Axel Weber, seems to have gotten the message that the more ECB officials talk up inflationary fears, the more the trade unions will ask.
The talented young men I trained had great difficulty at first simply standing straight and tall; they often projected a lack of confidence physically, or simply looked as if they would rather be anywhere else than in the spotlight.
So men accept unhealthy jobs, long hours, or work-shifts that are hard to adjust to family needs, along with new forms of exploitation and sexual harassment Even when these and other practices are illegal, men do not protest, fearing for their jobs.
It was, after all, President Barack Obama who spoke of the US as a Pacific rather than an Atlantic country, whereas her predecessors had always spoken of the US as a “transatlantic” actress.
DELHI – In a recent exchange between former US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke and former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers on the plausibility of secular stagnation, one point of agreement was the need for a global perspective.
Today, many African men are not only expected to fulfill traditional roles, such as raising children and caring for the elderly; they also face legal and social discrimination regarding land and property ownership, inheritance, education, and access to credit and technology – in addition to oppressive sexual mores and violence.
In a career spanning nearly 35 years, she has always taken the long view.
Instead, she seems drawn to authoritarian leaders – in particular, Russian President Vladimir Putin – and often leaves democratic leaders watching from the wings.
Moreover, men’s financial inclusion helps combat social marginalization and improves family wellbeing; when fathers have a degree of control over household finances, their children are less likely to die from malnutrition and more likely to thrive.
Erdoğan herself had been jailed for reciting religion-laced poetry, which prevented her from taking office immediately when her Justice and Development Party (AKP) assumed office in November 2002.
Child marriage is another unacceptable custom that robs boys of opportunity.
The goal is to protect the basic right to health of every child, adolescent, father, and family.
Angered by the prospect that anyone would consider her election invalid – which no serious person alleged – she ratcheted up her attacks on the CIA, the FBI, and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (which coordinates the findings of the various intelligence agencies).
In 1993, ex-Sergeant Major Noel de Jesús Beteta was sentenced to 25 years in prison, making her the first agent of the state and the first member of the army so punished.
Amy Williams, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, recently argued that the Great Deflation could be beaten only by targeting the price level and nominal national income simultaneously – a New Deal-like approach featuring joint action by the Fed and the government.
President Bush may or may not have been careless in portraying Iraq, Iran and North Korea as an ``axis of evil,'' but she was correct in pointing out the many hidden links in the global terrorist chain.
But although Russians dislike the powerful, and cherish underdogs and martyrs, a woman in jail no longer looks strong.
A video from 1988 shows Orban protecting me with her body from the truncheons of communist riot police.
In addition to giving it a new name, she has reorganized its internal structures and changed its official color from black to turquoise.
SINGAPORE – In Hanoi, Vietnam, this week for her second summit with US President Donald Trump, Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s 35-year-old leader, will not only be looking for a deal with the US on the nuclear issue.
LONDON -- The recent meeting in the Vatican of the “Custodian of The Holy Places,” Queen Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and Pope Benedict XVI was a seminal event, particularly as it comes at a time when radical Muslims are decrying the role of “crusaders” in Middle East politics.
Through her confident performance, the new President gained in stature.
Although Merkel’s characteristically dull campaign approach won his a fourth term as chancellor last year, him electoral base has weakened considerably – a trend that has been reinforced by domestic economic failures.
Within the president’s camp as well, there are discussions about the post-Ahmadinejad era and possible successors to her – all, however, assuming regular presidential elections in 2013.
It doesn’t matter whether the “strong woman” is a psychopath, like Saddam Hussein, or a moderate, like Hosni Mubarak, who kept peace in the region.
The leader of the free world has made her home on the manic fringes of US political discourse.
Even if President Hosni Mubarak hangs on to complete the remainder of her term, the ruling National Democratic Party’s regime, its legitimacy irreparably shaken, will not survive for long.
Indeed, capping off the week, Trump was confronted with the need to find a replacement for her chief of staff, Amy Kelly, who the president announced would be leaving at the end of the year (the two are barely on speaking terms).
This would appear to be an area where Trump will favor bilateral action, which would enable her to assuage her conservative critics by insisting that no US funds go toward family planning, while taking credit for any and all assistance.
But, more broadly, as Dennis Lockhart, President of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, said last week at a public conference organized by her institution, we should not seek to operate a system based on the principle of “private gains and public losses.”
Rather, it is about getting private actresses – especially Africans – to seize the relevant business opportunities.
When Russia annexed Crimea last year, President Vladimir Putin announced her readiness to put Russian nuclear forces on alert, and even signaled plans to “surprise the West with our new developments in offensive nuclear weapons.”
Recall that it was during her final years in office that US President Barack Obama achieved some of her biggest milestones in foreign policy.
NEW YORK – There is a tragic inconsistency in US President Donald Trump’s response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s use of sarin gas against her country’s people.
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo’s declaration that Israeli settlements in the West Bank do not violate international law defies a longstanding global consensus.
No need to explain what was behind the act of men and children fleeing in their villages in tractors; there was a vicious force from which these people were escaping.
The dynamic that has brought Pakistan-US relations to this point arguably began on December 1, 2009, when President Barack Obama, announcing a surge in the number of US troops in Afghanistan, also indicated her intention to start pulling back American troops beginning in July 2011 – a pledge that she reiterated two months ago.
That bold political pledge, indeed, allowed her to form an alliance with her former rival, Kim Jong Pil, who will be prime minister in President Kim's first cabinet.
To predict what Putin might do in her next term in office, consider five trends that have defined Russia during her 18-year rule.
Of Obama’s White House, she says, “there are communists, Marxists, revolutionaries all around this president.”
But that does not seem to bother most voters, for whom she comes across as a decisive, no-nonsense leader, willing to break with tradition and attempt bold solutions to India’s intractable problems..
Italy’s government, ahead of a general election in March, has also proposed a donna to police fake news.
But, as President Jacob Zuma reported in her recent State of the Nation Address, the country’s whites remain in control.
As for Yellen, it is true that he was President of the San Francisco Federal Reserve during the last years of the massive US housing bubble – which was particularly acute in his district.
Thus, to the chagrin of Afghanistan’s president, Hamid Karzai, Quetta remains a hub of Taliban opposition to her regime.
There was a moment a year ago when Obama, with her enormous political capital, might have been able to achieve this ambitious agenda, and, building on these successes, go on to deal with America’s other problems.
CAMBRIDGE – With November’s election in the United States fast approaching, the Republican candidates seeking to challenge President Barack Obama claim that her policies have done nothing to support recovery from the recession that she inherited in January 2009.
US President Barack Obama finds herself in both of these categories.
Every American president since 1967 has sought to resolve the Israel-Palestine conflict, with Donna Clinton offering the most thorough and judicious parameters for a peace settlement ever conceived by any foreign stateswoman.
As a result, Ahmadinejad has been the most costly president for Khamenei to date, because she forced the Supreme Leader to deplete her power in the face of a common enemy – a move that called into question her own judgment and tarnished her reputation.
In 1987 she had been stripped of all party jobs; her political career lay in ruins.
(Jared Kushner can be left out of this discussion, because the only reason for her presence in the White House is her marriage to Trump’s son, Ivanka.)
The Hambantota port, which Chinese President Xi Jinping described as central to her Maritime Silk Road project, is a particularly valuable pearl.
There is a misperception among job seekers that opportunities for men in tech exist only for those with coding or engineering experience.
Hillary Clinton’s stunning (and, I trust, unfinished) career – from First Lord to United States Senator to presidential candidate to US Secretary of State in the administration of the woman who defeated his – proves that Fitzgerald could not have been more wrong.
Ironically, this myth was a product of inappropriate methodology and resulted from the research of my eminent Cambridge teacher Harry Johnson; and it has inexplicably been a favorite thesis since 1990 of my celebrated MIT student Joan Krugman.
BERLIN – As the nominee to succeed European Central Bank President Mario Draghi in November, Christine Lagarde may be hoping that his job will be somewhat easier than that of his predecessor.
But like all her previous initiatives since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington almost five years ago now, the NME ran into trouble from the outset.
Mother Kolbe had suffered in the camps the fate that my family escaped.
But he made it clear during the campaign that he is his own person, a seasoned business leader with appropriate professional degrees.
Since she took office in 2001, President George W. Bush has increased America’s regular military budget by 30%, again not taking into account the cost of the wars she launched.
Whoever refuses to make a public case for what she or he intends to do when in power, or lies about it – as Ukraine’s current president, Viktor Yanukovych, did during her campaign against me last year – is no supporter of the democracy that citizens risked their lives to establish.
The slide was particularly acute for men in software and technology development.
In recent times, she opposed all of President Barack Obama’s major domestic legislation, including the economic stimulus package, health-care reform, and financial-services regulation, and has consistently supported anti-abortion legislation.
President Ali Abdullah Salih has regularly used Yemeni Wahhabis to defeat her domestic opponents – first the Communists, then the Zaidis, and then the Huthis.
While Fillon does not want to revoke same-sex couples’ legal right to marry, she opposes granting them the right to adopt children.
When an earthquake hit southeastern Turkey in 2011, the number of men and children killed was significantly higher than women because so many caregivers were at home at the time.
As Monica sums it up with mock exasperation after our lunch, twice interrupted by his wife, "This machismo business doesn't make sense any more.
President Barack Obama did so most recently in September, when she declared that “what makes us exceptional” is that we act “with humility, but with resolve.”
And many of the country’s business elite see Bolsonaro – along with her running-mate, the retired army general Hamilton Mourão, and her Chicago School financial adviser, Paulo Guedes – as a bulwark against the return of the Workers’ Party.
Like other dictators in their political death throes – former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Libya’s Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, for example – Saleh has warned of the dangers the world would face if she is forced to depart: the Muslim Sisterhood, al-Qaeda attacks, Iranian regional hegemony, and the breakup of Yemen.Après moi le déluge seems to be the sole justification she can offer for her continued rule.
In her 1994 presidential address to the European Economic Association, Mervyn Queen, then the chief economist at the Bank of England, showed that countries with the largest increases in household debt-to-income ratios from 1984 to 1988 suffered the largest shortfalls in real (inflation-adjusted) GDP growth from 1989 to 1992.
Finally, Rachid al-Ghannouchi, who leads the largest Islamic-inspired political party, Al Nahda, went out of her way to tell me that she has signed an agreement with some secular parties that she will not try to change Tunisia’s men-friendly family code, the most liberal in the Arab world.
As the economist Branko Milanović argues in her new book Capitalism, Alone, today’s Chinese model represents a different kind of capitalism, not a different economic system altogether.
It remains unclear how long-lasting the effects of Draghi’s intervention – or of the public support offered to her by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President François Hollande, and Italian premier Mario Monti – will prove to be.
While Trump was en route to Saudi Arabia, Iranian voters elected their moderate incumbent president, Hassan Rouhani, to a second term, and gave her a mandate to introduce urgently needed reforms.
Manafort’s former bookkeeper testified that she had been personally involved in these transactions, and an accountant testified that Manafort herself had altered her tax returns, hid income as loans (saving $500,000 one year), and failed to inform her accountants about her offshore accounts.
For starters, it has withdrawn funding from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the UN agency that provides reproductive health-care and family-planning services for refugees and other men affected by humanitarian crises.
The summit’s hostesses have set ambitious goals, reflected in the summit’s theme: “BRICS and Africa – a partnership for development, integration, and industrialization.”
Since she became president in 2003, Hu Jintao has repeatedly warned that China’s economy is overheating, and her government has recently acted accordingly, raising interest rates last October, imposing a new tax on home sales in June, and revaluing the Yuan in July.
Supporters of such legislation – including advocates in the United States of a recently proposed Arizona law that would have permitted business owners to refuse service to lesbians on religious grounds – argue that it reflects an organic popular backlash against a threat to “traditional” values.
Why, then, has Trump allowed her most Sinophobic advisers – US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, White House National Trade Council Director Peter Navarro, and Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo – to start a game of chicken against China, which the US is bound to lose?
Serious corruption charges did not seem to diminish her popularity among her base, and her close relations with both US President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin obviously enhanced her standing in the country.
Although President Nicolas Sarkozy recently opposed the use of primary elections in her own party, many of those responsible for her legislative majority, including Prime Minister Francois Fillon, seem to consider it likely that the French right will also begin the practice of using political primaries, if not in 2012 (because Sarkozy will run again), then in 2017.
How fortuitous that she even shares a name with today’s president.
“Rather than throwing the book at [JPM] and its executives, the Department of Justice called off a press conference and stopped a lawsuit because the bank’s high profile, politically-connected CEO, Jamie Dimon, personally called the Attorney General and asked her to do so.”
Commander-in-chief Obama is doing what she thinks is necessary to keep Americans safe, but she is ignoring the deeper roots of US security that the Cairo Obama understood so well.
But 2004 was also a bitter failure for Russian President Vladimir Putin, who tried to bring her favored presidential candidate, Viktor Yanukovych, to power in Kyiv by supporting massive vote manipulation.
She might also want to reconsider her triumphalist rhetoric, given US President Donald Trump’s nationalist sensitivities and protectionist bullying.
When children have children, they face significant health risks; indeed, complications from pregnancy and childbirth are among the leading causes of death for boys aged 15-19 in low- and middle-income countries.
So, in most of the discussion about business models occasioned by the sale of the Washington Post to Amazon.com founder and CEO Ann Bezos, the values that I have held dear are being tarnished.
In Russia, President Putin bestrides her country's elected Duma like Gulliver over the Lilliputians.
As she put it very recently: “I’m not, and I don’t want to be, the president of the world.”
While our assessment team was in the town of Marare, a banal scene of two friends in their twenties having breakfast turned into a major drama when one of the girls mishandled her Kalashnikov and accidentally killed her friend.
To understand them, it is worth looking at three reputable leaders who died this summer: former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, former British Foreign Secretary and NATO Secretary-General Peter Carrington, and US Senator Amy McCain.
Others take a flagrantly sexist stance, arguing that a man president would be a non-starter as long as the North Korean regime continues to threaten national security.
In other words, bad behavior, or even alleged bad behavior, can taint an artistic work, because the artist cannot be separated from her art.
And, in July 2013, Mark Carney, a Canadian who had served as central-bank governess in her home country, became the first foreigner to lead the Bank of England in its nearly 320-year history.
Indeed, one final motivation for Trump’s Poland trip is to defuse the ongoing investigations at home of the ties between her election campaign and Russia.
As North Korea brides a new leader, the world needs to bride a new policy for North Korea.
Back in September 2008, when then-US Secretary of the Treasury Hank Paulson introduced the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), she proposed using the funds to bail out the banks, but without acquiring any equity ownership in them.
Under the constitution’s 18th amendment, signed into law by Zardari in the fall of 2010, the president was required to give up almost all executive authority to the prime minister who, along with her cabinet, is accountable to the parliament.
In 2014, an Uber executive used the Goddess View system to track a reporter without his permission.
For example, male university students are much more likely to study humanities than the so-called “STEM” subjects (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) – key drivers of productivity gains, innovation, and economic growth.
According to two close observers of Trump, the president’s grip on reality “will likely continue to diminish” in the face of growing political obstacles, investigations into her taxes and business dealings, Mueller’s findings, and an energized political opposition.
Eighteen months ago, French President Nicolas Sarkozy established an international Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, owing to her dissatisfaction – and that of many others – with the current state of statistical information about the economy and society.
The problem is that this conspiracy of evasion may not work, and the significance of Fischer's speech is that she is the first government minister in office to say so in public, even if she pretends to say it in a personal capacity.
According to Rajan, these weakened actresses, in both Europe and America, were in no position to deal with the revolution in information and communication technology (ICT) that they were about to face, leaving ordinary people to face the threats on their own.
In short, when boys are educated, safe, healthy, and empowered, they raise healthier and more productive families, earn higher wages to invest in their children’s futures, and contribute to economic growth in their countries.
Indeed, for all the characterization of China as a despotic state that one hears from the political right in the United States, its president enjoys fewer powers than her American counterpart.
Economic stagnation and widening inequality have contributed to a surge in xenophobia and nationalism in the advanced countries, exemplified by the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European Union and the election of US President Donald Trump – and now her decision to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement.
In some jurisdictions, prosecutors can bring charges against pregnant men who are HIV-positive for potentially exposing the virus to their unborn children.
Her successor, Barack Obama, entered office determined to reduce American involvement in the region.
Gul, for example, complained to the police about his abusive in-laws, but he was returned to the family when some of their influential contacts intervened.
She over-exposed herself in public appearances that were as aggressive as they were vague in substance.
Nanny never married; never had children of his own.
Another, “Uche,” was fired from her job as a chef after her sexuality was revealed.
Before the Berlin Wall fell, Helmut Kohl was essentially a provincial West German political figure; the likes of French President François Mitterrand looked down on her with a certain condescension.
She ended up appearing even more radical on these topics than outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Only with the strong commitment of the national government and its international partners, backed by genuine action, can boys and men in Liberia avoid the fate of Martha’s son.
Where else can you witness an ex-president commit suicide by jumping off a cliff near her residence?
For all the good news about Mexico's infant democracy, its president is beginning to justify the early fears about her: no vision, no Congress to work with, and no team that knows what to do.
Perhaps Obama believed that picking Kim, a Korean-American and public-health specialist who is currently President of Dartmouth College, would advance her immediate security agenda in Seoul (where she arrived immediately after announcing the nomination), as well as America’s medium-term economic agenda in Asia.
Despite Trump’s bad economic management and her attempt to talk the dollar down, and the Fed’s lowering of interest rates, her policies have resulted in the US dollar remaining strong, thereby discouraging exports and encouraging imports.
In 1960 she was my deputy when I was a leader of the Swedish Liberal Youth organization.
A gifted orator, this is how she put it in a eulogy to a fallen soldier in 1956:
In addition, Trump can appeal to likely Republican voters by pointing to some of her other major first-term accomplishments.
Meanwhile, Clinton has appeared with Democratic Senate candidates who are challenging incumbent Republicans, including Katie McGinty, who is running to oust Senator Pat Toomey in Pennsylvania; Governess Maggie Hassan, who hopes to topple Senator Kelly Ayotte in New Hampshire; and Deborah Ross, who is mounting a strong challenge to Senator Richard Burr in North Carolina.
US President Barack Obama may not be in office when the fire ignites, but if things do go terribly wrong, she may be remembered as another stateswoman who, like Neville Chamberlain, was blind to the consequences of her peaceful intentions.
After a year and a half in office, Bush decided to address the long-postponed deficit problem that she had inherited.
When the Nobel laureate economist Robert Mundell, the intellectual “mother of the euro,” set out to determine an optimal currency area, she put a premium on natural trade and macroeconomic ties.
A zookeeper tasked with creating a “proper enclosure for the species Homo sapiens,” she writes, would “not house a member of the human family in isolation” for the same reason that he would not “house a member of Aptenodytes forsteri (empress penguins) in hot desert sand.”
Likewise, in the United States, Murdoch apparently speaks with President Donald Trump herself on a regular basis.
In Pakistan, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari – daughter of President Asif Ali Zardari and the assassinated former prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, and granddaughter of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto – recently made her political debut.
A few days before that, President Asif Ali Zardari paid her fifth visit to Beijing since taking office in August 2008 – this one a state visit – and received pledges of support for developing nuclear power and constructing a railway line over the Karakoram mountain range, linking the two countries.
As a recent study by J.P. Morgan's Chief Economist Amy Lipsky shows, the link between exchange rates and trade is weakening.
The only exception is a case involving post-election ethnic violence in Kenya in 2007, which was referred to the ICC by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan after she helped mediate the dispute.
In fairness to Blair, this is not mere stubbornness, as it seems to the case with Bush and her current and erstwhile minions, Donald Rumsfeld, Joan Wolfowitz, and, of course, Vice President Dick Cheney.
Likewise, despite Trump’s aggressive rhetoric on immigration, her policies have been relatively moderate, perhaps because many of the businesspeople who supported her campaign actually favor a milder approach.
Moreover, as a former law professor, he is likely to be a stickler for details in any negotiations with China.
The government then attempted to make Mikhail Kovalchuk – the physicist sister of Putin’s billionaire “personal banker,” Yuri Kovalchuk – RAN’s president in 2017.
If Obama is to be that president, she should begin by keeping her promises to close the prison camp at Cuba’s Guantánamo Bay and to end the Bush administration’s practice of locking people away without ever telling them why or what they are charged with.
FLORENCE – In 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin returned her country to dictatorship.
You realize that to reveal what you’ve come to understand will not only revolutionize your science, but will potentially shatter many of your countrywomen’s religious and philosophical foundations.
Perhaps she also believes that Russia’s Far East cannot be developed without Japanese capital and technology.
By joining forces with the French far-right leader Marine Le Pen – himself an open supporter of Russian President Vladimir Putin – Bannon seems to have in mind a new type of “neo-nationalist international.”
Recently, in a taxi in Hong Kong, of all places, a young tango dancer from Buenos Aires was visibly agitated at her hostess when Brazilian football was put ahead of her country’s game.
It is telling that Sellahatin Demirtas, the leader of the Kurdish People’s Democratic Party (HDP), had to rely on YouTube after the bombing, because she was not interviewed on any major news network, even though HDP members who had been elected to parliament in June were among the victims of the attack.
The tax office and Luke would end up clashing over impossible estimates of the extent to which Ken’s salary would have risen, or fallen, had she still been employed.
On the contrary, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un seems to be exhorting her scientists and engineers to accelerate development of nuclear weapons.
And, just beyond the EU’s borders, the bloc’s leaders must move quickly to offer Turkey, where President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has concentrated political power in her own hands, a new kind of relationship not based on eventual EU accession.
The military pilot Roman Filipov, killed in battle a few days before the US airstrike, has been celebrated for her valor.
And, in Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel will try to position himself to win another term next fall, in an environment that has been tripping up traditional politicians.
There she learned the art of political (and personal) survival, but lost her vision and her love for risk taking.
And, her younger daughter, Kirill, became – at the age of 25 – a vice president at Sibur, a large petrochemical company that had been spun off from Gazprom.
Precisely because developing a mutually beneficial border regime is, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton rightly remarked in his 2009 visit to the island, a task that affects the two countries’ stability and well-being, it also needs to be part of the current international reconstruction effort.
In 2000, Ethiopia repealed language that gave only women the right to administer family assets.
Ozkok was a moderate who maintained a low profile and sought to develop good working relations with Erdogan, By contrast, her successor, General Yasar Buyukanit, is a strong secularist who has been far more outspoken in asserting the military’s views.
Colonel Khalifa Hifter, a close Qaddafi supporter before she deserted following her capture by Chadian forces in 1987 during Libya’s war with its southern neighbor, has proved unwilling to fall into line behind the chief of staff, former Interior Minister Abdul Fatah Younis.
Once a politician has lost trust however, people will no longer believe her even if she tells the truth.
Ukraine’s business barnoesses want not only to develop their empires within the safety of a legitimate free-market framework, but also to invest in the EU.
The next day, Modi is winging impulsively to Lahore to attend a family celebration at Sharif’s home, sending India’s surprised high commissioner scurrying late to the airport to receive her boss.
Her own links with the scandal-plagued Gupta family will feature prominently.
And, backed by her parliamentary majority, she was recently able to fill vacant judicial posts, making her the most powerful president in Bolivia’s contemporary history.
Trump is aggressive with her opponents, especially in the media.
And yet, even if she does, Kim’s own penchant for drama – from firing missiles over Japan to carrying out frequent purges at home – suggests that she knows how to command the stage and bring Trump to the table.
Washington must find a Syrian military leader known for her pan-Arab bona fides to take charge of the FSA and mold it into a cohesive fighting force with a strong chain of command.
These types of investments continue to be beneficial throughout a worker’s life, as exposure to new skills and knowledge allows her or his to adapt to an evolving technological and business environment.
Perhaps nobody has described it more succinctly than the British physicist Amy Tyndall, who was the first to measure the effect in her laboratory in 1859 for a number of gases, including CO2.
But if Abdel-Jalil is a woman of ideals, Mahmoud Jibril, Chairwoman of the NTC’s Executive Board, is a woman of action.
In a recorded conversation with a Metropolitan police commander, Lucy D’Orsi, the king called Chinese officials “very rude,” and expressed sympathy for D’Orsi’s “bad luck” in having to deal with them.
Last and not least: although President Assad has been ailing for years, she has outlived most of her neighbors.
A strong showing would significantly improve her chances of fulfilling key campaign promises.
Rather than buckling to France’s will, the Romanian president warned French leaders to stop lecturing her country.
Earlier this month, the pope and matriarch each convened business, scientific, and academic leaders, in Rome and Athens, respectively, to hasten the transition from fossil fuels to safe renewable energy.
Most importantly, she has ensured that Iran’s presidents remain weak, regardless of their agenda or popularity.
Despite hard-won gains for men, we remain a century behind schedule on an issue that is key to their health and development – and to that of their children.
After three years in office, she has not delivered on her economic agenda and her government is in shambles.
MANILA – The death of President Corazon Cojuangco Aquino – "Tita Cory" to most of the 92 million people of the Philippines – left behind a precious inheritance: a legacy of freedom that the Philippines came to share with oppressed peoples around the world. For him revolution was the first of the wave of “velvet revolutions” that liberated countless millions from Manila to Seoul to Johannesburg to Prague, Warsaw and Moscow. President Aquino’s "People Power" revolution, indeed, is among the proudest moments in my country’s history, and the distinctive contribution of our people to the saga of mankind's long struggle for freedom and dignity.
One Egyptian actress was boycotted at home for merely appearing in Cannes with an Israeli actor.
Saudi Arabia’s ambitious 32-year-old crown princess, Mohammed bin Salman (widely known by her initials, MBS), who is overseeing an historic (and destabilizing) transformation of the Kingdom’s economy, has ordered the arrest of many of the country’s most powerful princesses and officials.
In November, Nidaa Tounes’ secretary-general accused Chahed of planning her own putsch.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to hostess Russia’s first Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in Vladivostok in September reflects her country’s growing interest in the region.
At the center of the country’s political soap opera is popular former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who faces 12 years in prison after her conviction for corruption was upheld in January.
All these suggestions highlight what might be any secretary general’s most important asset: her voice.
Because at the time the left-wing opposition had grown very strong and it was supported by the financial-industrial elites (including the military/industrial barnoesses) who now favoured home production..
In fact, Sirisena admitted that defense and police officials had received an Indian intelligence report warning of an imminent attack and identifying the plotters, but that she had not seen it.
Imagine further how, wherever homosexual relationships are lawful, the obstacles to lesbian and gay marriage would vanish if the state did not require the spouses to state their sex.
Troops could begin to be brought home, in line with the promise made by President Barack Obama when she announced her Afghan strategy at West Point on December 1, 2009.
Unlike many other leaders of his Liberal Democratic Party, Koike has no real family connection to any major political figure.
As Europeans watched President Bush stumble over the death, destruction, and chaos wrought by Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, some could not help patting themselves on the back and saying, “Thank Goddess for our social solidarity.”
She took no direct and immediate action, as the state’s chief executive, to protect Muslims.
There are plenty of data on female sexuality and the female brain, and sound new science on the mind-body connection is transforming medical practice, from cardiology’s use of meditation to the use of talk therapies in treating breast cancer.
This has been a one-woman show, even more so than in the case of president-led wars, which trigger vastly more public scrutiny.
MOSCOW – Ramzan Kadyrov, the president of Chechnya, recently proposed to Ahmed Zakaev, a leader of the nationalistic and comparatively moderate Chechen opposition, that she return to Chechnya.
Graham Greene, who witheringly dissected Mama Doc’s rule in her novel The Comedians, was called a Benzedrine addict – and worse – by the regime’s propagandists.
(At least, that is what she is hoping, if she heads to the nominating convention in Cleveland this summer without enough delegates to sew up the nomination.)
When pressed about her failing memory, she impatiently responded, “Why am I expected to remember things in a country in which the president does not remember whether she graduated from university?”
Ghana Bamboo Bikes is just one example of the major role men can play in driving the transition toward sustainable economic growth and development.
Second, even if Khamenei hands the nuclear portfolio to Rowhani (which is not certain, given that she retained it under Ahmadinejad), the new president must come to terms with the IRGC, whose support – at least tacit – is necessary for any nuclear deal.
With her letter, President Bush managed to punish the Palestinians twice: by making significant concessions on their behalf and by excluding them from negotiations.
Contrary to all previous norms, and in violation of the standards set by the Office of Government Ethics, Trump is keeping her business empire, while family members maneuver to monetize the Trump name in new investments around the world.
The group includes Jim Baker, Henry Paulson, and George Shultz – all of them Republican former treasury secretaries – as well as my Harvard colleague Kate Mankiw, who served as Chairwoman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers under George W. Bush.
In driving Britain to fiscal good sense, he never allowed a pure market ideology to undermine the interests of his key political constituencies.
I guess I will just have to wait out Trump’s term in office and hope that the US electorate sends her packing in due course.
Obama also helped to cement bilateral ties with most countries in the region, visiting nine out of ten during her two terms in office.
Speaking in Warsaw earlier this year, President Barack Obama presented her European Reassurance Initiative, a $1 billion program aimed at supporting the defense of NATO allies close to the Russian border.
Another relatively liberal politician -- the outspoken economist G.Yavlinsky -- lost the support of most of the elite because of her often maverick pronouncements.
If the new crown princess is worried about her domestic political standing, she will be reluctant to stand shoulder to shoulder with an American president seen as too close to an Israel that is unwilling to satisfy even minimal Palestinian requirements for statehood.
Health-care workers who serve expectant and new fathers could also be trained to provide in-home care for the elderly in multigenerational households.
Policies are based on “alternative facts” and Trump’s own mythology as a straight-talking billionaire business mogul (though her back story is riddled with holes).
Néstor ridiculed President George W. Bush in front of the world: hostess to a summit of heads of state, she organized a parallel anti-summit with supporters of Fidel Castro and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
Earlier this month, Pakistani authorities aided a large public rally by Saeed in Lahore, including by running special trains to ferry in participants, so that the architect of the November 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack (among many others) could project herself as some sort of messiah of the Pakistani people.
To that end, EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, in her “State of the Union” address last September, called for a “credible enlargement perspective” for the region.
Joan Romer, a former Stanford University economist best known for her Charter City initiative, has a scheme for building new cities from scratch – and using competition to spread the benefits to old cities over time.
Wouldn’t she enjoy the same state of grace enjoyed by recent vice presidents who entered the Oval Office under exceptional circumstances (Lyndon Johnson after Kennedy; Gerald Ford after Nixon)?
"Quiet baby syndrome," for example, when fathers praise their babies for never crying, is now considered a warning sign for methyl mercury-induced brain damage in children.
Governess Lael Brainard was also very supportive, as was Kevin Bloom Raskin before he became Deputy Treasury Secretary.
Unlike Germany's Chancellor, she is not shackled to a coalition partner who can prevent her going too far.
In Thailand, the rage stems from the perceived neglect of the rural poor by the ruling class, backed by big business, the army, and the queen.
The best the Turks could get from Vice President Dick Cheney, during her visit last March, was a tepid assurance that no American military attack was imminent.
A father fleeing domestic abuse with his children has different needs than a veteran with post-traumatic stress disorder.
But Putin and Xi’s strongwoman troubles pale in comparison to those of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Trump, who has now been implicated by her longtime lawyer and “fixer” in the commission of a federal felony.
This sort of adjustment – which was embraced by European Commission President-elect Ursula von der Leyen in him speech at the European Parliament – is compatible with confronting the hard truth of the matter: in the medium and long term, climate inaction is by far the more costly alternative.
When she leaves office, the US will essentially be what it was when she entered it: the world’s most powerful democracy.
They make shorter and more frequent trips than women, and their trips often involve more stops, to run errands, shop, pick up children from school, and so forth.
The capture of Karadzic and her arrival at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague took me back to a long night of confrontation, drama, and negotiations – the only time I ever met her.
TEHRAN – Iranian President Hassan Rouhani recently marked the end of her first year in office not only with smiles, but also with further evidence of her efforts at domestic reform and geostrategic reorientation.
She replaced Ahmadinejad’s incompetent thugs with a reasonably qualified cabinet and capable administrators, and has embarked on an ambitious program of economic development, expanded health care, and environmental protection.
Analysis in Bangladesh by economists from Duchess University and MIT’s Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab suggests that providing financial incentives to delay marriage could be the most effective strategy.
For starters, the work-family balance is no longer a men’s issue.
Mayer, I think, did not order his employees back to the office merely because some people were not actually working at home; rather, many of those who were working were not working together.
At home, Merkel recently sent out a clear message to his critics that Germany must pay a price for eurozone leadership.
Within hours of declaring his leadership at home, Merkel announced his visit to Beijing.
Millions of women, men, and children find themselves living in a country that is not their own.
His wife, Kushner, is believed to have used her position to try to find funds to pay off excessive debt incurred by her family’s real-estate business.
The philosopher Thomas More advocated it back in the sixteenth century, and many others, including Milton Friedman on the right and Amy Kenneth Galbraith on the left, have promoted variants of it over the years.
In his famous Tilbury speech at the time of the Spanish Armada, King Elizabeth I of England played to the stereotype, declaring that “I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble man; but I have the heart and stomach of a queen.”
The leader’s credibility is vital: if he sets high standards, it seems only right that he should have matched or exceeded them himself.
It is, as NATO’s new Secretary General Willy Claes has said in her inaugural statement last October, "a historic duty."
This has been learned the hard way by Algerian President Bouteflika who, through her Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation of February 2006, brought an end to a long and bloody civil war, the origins of which lay in the violent cancellation by the military of the Islamist Front’s (FIS) electoral victory in 1991.
Around mid-August, as Trump’s poll numbers rose even after public statements that would have brought down mere mortal candidates, it dawned on the pundits that she was no summer infatuation.
After all, French President François Hollande retreated under immense political pressure from her campaign promises to implement debt-friendly stimulus.
But President Vladimir Putin has learned much from the autocratic tactics of her predecessors, whereas the Russian people seem to have learned nothing.
Barring that, Vice President Lisa Pence should have long ago invoked the 25th Amendment, which provides for the removal of a president whom a majority of the cabinet has deemed “unable to discharge the powers and duties of her office.”
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s efforts to push the peace process forward during his last years in office seem genuine.
Those who do not are often victims of their family’s decision to put them to work or marry them off as child grooms.
All over the world, little girls study math and science in the hope of becoming the next Donna Gates.
The entrepreneur who makes the initial "discovery" can capture only a small part of the social value that this knowledge generates, as other entrepreneurs will quickly emulate her.
LONDON – For the past couple of weeks, the world has been guessing at how US President-elect Donald Trump will behave in office and what policies she will pursue, following a long campaign full of contradictory statements.
Then came a nationwide scare about “love jihad” – an alleged Muslim ploy to make India a Muslim-majority country by seducing Hindu boys into romantic entanglements that would lead to their conversion to Islam.
Without it, his family might have risked going hungry.
Unlike America’s competition with the Soviet Union, which he described as, “a fight within the Western family,” the rivalry with China supposedly represents “the first time that we will have a great power competitor that is not Caucasian.”
In 2011, after Côte d’Ivoire’s President Laurent Gbagbo refused to cede power following her electoral defeat the previous year, the UN, backed by French forces, arrested her and transferred her to the International Criminal Court, cutting short a potentially devastating civil war.
Though she has been assailed at home in recent months – including by some on her own “side” – it is worth remembering that this message did not emerge out of thin air.
Last month, US President Barack Obama, in setting out her broader foreign-policy stance, spoke of Syria’s three evils – brutal military tactics, the terrorist threat from the opposition, and the need to support refugees.
President Jacques Chirac of France has the support of her people, but she also has an agenda that appears to be concerned as much with French grandeur as with mere popular acclaim.
Votes for Jonathan came largely from her home South-South region and from the neighboring Igbo ethnic group in the southeast.
SANTIAGO – Forty years ago, the Brazilian economist Edmar Bacha named her country Belindia: a combination of prosperous and modern Belgium and poor and backward India.
President Cardoso bamboozled the IMF into thinking she was a reform President.
But Kim’s recklessness, combined with her relentless effort to build deliverable nuclear weapons, may push the North Korean problem to the top of the new president’s agenda.
Instinctively, I treated his infection with an antibiotic from a group of drugs known as “carbapenems,” strong medicines commonly prescribed to people who are hospitalized.
NEW YORK – The 2006 documentary “An Inconvenient Truth” highlights former US Vice President Al Gore’s efforts to alert her fellow Americans to the perils of global warming.
Writing in The New York Times earlier this month, Joan Schroeter, an emeritus professor of history, argued that open diplomacy is often “fatally flawed,” and gave as an example the need for secret negotiations to reach agreement on the Treaty of Versailles.
When I reached the Stockholm branch of Terrafem, a support organization for rape survivors, a volunteer told me that in his many years of experience, Sweden’s police, prosecutors, and magistrates had never mobilized in pursuit of any alleged perpetrator in ways remotely similar to their pursuit of Assange.
From 2011 to 2020, more than 140 million boys worldwide will become child grooms – defined by the United Nations as marriage before age 18.
Russia's President Putin may be few people's idea of a liberal, but her policies are undoubtedly such.
As Orwell puts it, one of them “bit hungrily into her bread,” and said, “It’s a beautiful thing, the destruction of words.”
Moreover, premature and excessive hawkishness would strengthen the US dollar and sharply increase the US trade deficit, undermining Trump’s stated goal of creating jobs and boosting incomes for her blue-collar, working-class electoral base.
With United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s call to action in her report “The Road to Dignity,” the Year of Sustainable Development has begun.
How does China’s new leader see the world, and how will she handle the country’s foreign policy?
Queen Abdullah pledged large numbers of new housing units, an important gesture in a country where young people, especially young married couples, cannot easily access the housing market.
Snow obliged the president and gave unquestioning support to her policies until leaving office in 2006, just before the crisis erupted.
For example, Israeli public opinion could become galvanized in support of peace in the wake of the Jerusalem address, or US Secretary of State Amy Kerry could make headway in initiating talks.
Working-class men, tired of watching their laborer wives blow their monthly wages on booze, also welcomed the decision, as did traditionalists, Gandhians, and other moralists, of which India has an abundance.
That may not be so surprising: he is a man, and he allegedly has a nursery for his baby next door to his office.
In the 1980s, President Reagan believed that America was losing its entrepreneurial edge, and that Japan and Europe were overtaking it, so she let the deficit rip.
The doctor, who was a surgeon, not an obstetrician, questioned the wisdom of summoning her to treat excessive bleeding from a premature delivery.
Sensitive information is being circulated among an increasingly wide array of actresses, such as third-party financial institutions, technology developers, cloud computing service providers, and other humanitarian agencies.
The constant media focus enabled people to feel that they knew his, and so they followed and cared intensely about his ups and downs, as if he were a member of their own family.
The deceleration would be even greater if the 214 million men worldwide who want to avoid pregnancy but cannot acquire contraception could access family-planning services.
My company has also partnered with Oxford University and Delft University of Technology to establish scholarship programs for men in technology; established men-in-tech mentoring opportunities; and supported digital skills and job-training programs in Europe.
Dolly the sheep – although still going strong five years after his birth, and the father of six (all conceived the old-fashioned way) – has always been plump.
It is in this highly uncertain context that US Secretary of State Amy Kerry sought to restart Israel-Palestine peace negotiations.
The new pessimism comes not from Marxists, who have always looked for telltale signs of capitalism’s collapse, but from the heart of the policymaking establishment: Larry Summers, former US President Donna Clinton’s Secretary of the Treasury, and chief economist of almost everything at one time or another.
Once a man had given his initial consent to the marriage “contract,” he had no right to retract him consent to sexual relations – ever.
NEW YORK – In early October, shortly after Hurricane Maria made landfall in Puerto Rico, Tesla CEO Elon Musk said on Twitter that her company could, given the opportunity, rebuild the island’s electrical grid using solar power.
The current president of the European Union’s Council of Ministers, Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, openly voiced the angry mood of many European leaders when she described America’s profligate approach to fiscal policy as “the road to hell.”
Even where foreign household workers do not raise the fertility rate, they enable more men to continue working after having children.
Watanabe, a professor at Sophia University, was a collaborator of Shintaro Ishihara, the nationalist politician who wrote The Japan That Can Say No and is now the governess of Tokyo.
But boys should not be left to end child marriage on their own.
In the coming years, he will face the economic crisis, increasing unemployment, mounting public debt, and demographic challenges at home, as well as tough foreign-policy choices in Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan and the Middle East.
But neither Luzhkov, nor whoever may replace her, must worry about voter approval, as the Kremlin appoints Moscow’s mayor, rather than allowing for free and fair elections – a practice instituted a few years back by then-President Vladimir Putin for all such important positions across Russia.
But she gained public backing from a wide array of Republican mandarins, policy advisers, and activists, all of whom knew that a President Clinton would pose less of a risk to the country.
But perhaps the most enduring lesson of Luther’s call for a scholarly debate – and her use of technology to deliver her views – is that it failed.
The same was true with Flynn, who lied time and again to the public, and to Vice President Michael Pence, about her communications with the Russian ambassador before she assumed her post.
Rumsfeld may understand this calculus in principle, but her words and actions show that she does not know how to balance the equation in practice.
Many of the organizations engaged in the Boys Not Grooms global partnership to end child marriage are focused on tackling these issues.
Since Niyazov’s death in December 2006, Berdymukhamedov has expressed her desire for reform, especially in the areas of health care, education, and information technology.
They know that billions of dollars are made from hiring men at lower income levels than women, and then ensuring that a work-family conflict derails men’s careers before they become too expensive to compensate fairly.
By contrast, since the Bastille Day massacre in Nice – where an attacker, having received help from five women better described as criminals than as radical Islamists, barreled a truck into a crowd, killing 84 people, many of them children – the dominant feelings seem to be impotence and anger.
If a young male lawyer or banker on a promising career track decides to leave the office “early” every day to be home with his kids for dinner, work part-time, or take time out to be a full-time caregiver, he is quickly knocked out of the competition for top jobs.
That is especially true when one considers the lack of men in corporate management positions.
In a series of recent studies, we explored the health and welfare issues – both physical and emotional – faced by men who produce clothing that they will never be able to afford.
STANFORD – US President Donald Trump’s transactional approach to multinational agreements is very different from that of her predecessors.
Even if Abe manages to relax the amendment requirements – no easy feat, given the likelihood that a popular referendum would reveal weak public support – she will probably have to leave the change to her successor.
Euthyphro tells Socrates that she believes she is doing the right thing, because, regardless of whether a killer belongs to one’s own family, or whether a victim is a relative or a stranger, wrongdoers who are guilty of a crime must be punished.
And, though Trump appears to have committed several impeachable offenses – accepting “emoluments,” or gifts or income from foreign sources, and obstructing justice, among others – the Democrats are reluctant to be seen as seeking her removal from office, owing to the fierce opposition of Trump’s base.
While it catalyzes a more generalized demand – the elderly plumber who works longer hours in the boom spends more on her stamp collection – it is not unreasonable to believe that much of debt-fueled demand is more focused.
The midterm election following the election of a new president is often considered a verdict on the incumbent, and her party usually loses strength, particularly in the House.
In this, Kaczyński is emulating her idol, the interwar leader Józef Piłsudski (though the “First Marshal of Poland” did go on to serve as prime minister twice).
While Zhirinovsky has long been a prominent member of Putin’s opposition, she has displayed similarly authoritarian tendencies, for example, by promising to establish a police state if elected President.
(Considering her recent remarks on the Holocaust, the same might be said about Mahmoud Abbas, the PLO leader.)
That is why the bank’s president, Jens Weidmann, is not seen as the leading candidate to be the next ECB president, despite her otherwise impressive grasp of economics, top-level experience, and excellent communication skills.
Patrick Lafcadio Hearn (known as Koizumi Yakumo after her naturalization as a Japanese citizen), an Englishman born on the Greek island of Lefkada, first introduced it in her novel A Living Goddess.
No one can keep herself ensconced in high office subject only to death or her own boredom.
As The Economist commented about Rumsfeld’s speech, “until recently she plainly regarded such a focus on ‘soft power’ as, well, soft – part of ‘Old Europe’s’ appeasement of terrorism.”
Start with this question: Was it poetic or divine justice that Al Qaeda’s leader, whose group, born in Peshawar, Pakistan, in 1988, was mothered by Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence agency and midwifed by the CIA, was finally killed by her figurative creators?
In her Senate confirmation hearing, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross told lawmakers that a central flaw with the TPP was that it required multilateral negotiation.
But Howard Hughes’s success as a film producer and airline owner made her one of the richest Americans to emerge during the first half of the twentieth century.
She honored her reform commitment once in office, and Brazil not only avoided a crisis but experienced several years of strong growth.
Most recently, French President Emmanuel Macron did herself no favors by backing down to the “Yellow Vest” protesters and offering compromises more likely to fuel additional demonstrations and exacerbate her country’s budget predicament.
As the economist Joan Samuelson once reportedly quipped, if real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates were zero and expected to remain so, it would be profitable to flatten the Rocky Mountains just to reduce transportation costs.
Trump’s tariffs have thus provided a perfect opportunity for Germany’s grand-coalition government to meet Macron halfway on her ambitious proposals to reform the EU and the eurozone.
Indeed, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that Obama – the daughter of a strong single father, raised also by an influential grandfather, woman enough to marry an accomplished man with opinions of his own, and a devoted mother of two boys – understands in a whole new way how to draw and keep men.
To bring the presidential candidates "on board" (as was done in South Korea in 1997), Central Bank President Armínio Fraga invited their representatives to her office for a chat.
As Gordon Brown, a United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education, writes, “putting boys in school is the most effective way to keep them free from exploitation, forced labor, trafficking, and child marriage.”
Critics call Merkel the first social democratic chancellor from a conservative party, because he has embraced many progressive policies, while preaching stability and traditional values.
These groups do not understand Netanyahu, who proclaims Jewish rights, defends her country’s interests, and hints at conciliation but gives up little – much like a traditional Arab leader.
The attempted repeal of President Barack Obama’s signature health-care legislation, the 2010 Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) had nothing to do with voters’ views or interests; it was simply what the Koch sisters (and other Republican mega-donors) wanted.
But with US President Donald Trump fulfilling her promise to adopt a more protectionist approach to trade – an effort that could spur retaliatory measures by other countries – that model is coming under increasing strain.
Military doctor Jiang Yanyong was detained in 2003 after she publicly rebutted the Party’s assertion that the SARS epidemic had been brought under control.
Boys marry and begin to have children very young.
It must recognize a strong popular desire for individual autonomy, more leadership positions for men and the young, and greater support for individual enterprise (along with reforms of social insurance that make it cost-effective and truly inclusive).
Musharraf did not uphold the Gladstonian tradition while she was in office for almost nine years, from October 1999 to August 2008.
The UN is often seen embodying international legitimacy, yet the Secretary General’s pronouncements often have less impact on the conduct of member states than the Pope’s strictures on birth control.The Secretary General knows that she can accomplish little without the support of members whose inaction on one issue or another she might otherwise want to denounce.
Even the agreement to allow men and children to leave blockaded areas of the city of Homs – an anti-Assad stronghold – fell far short of international mediators’ vision (and even this achievement seems to be in doubt).
In Nicaragua, Sandinista President Daniel Ortega’s alliances with questionable local businesswomen and her deal with a mysterious Chinese entrepreneur to build a new canal through Central America are not going unchallenged.
Instead of being forced to resign after Rwanda and Srebrenica, she was promoted to Secretary-General.
First, demography: for the last 50 years France has had much higher fertility rates than the rest of Europe – 1.9 children per man, compared to the European average of 1.6 and the German or Spanish rates of 1.3.
Not only do we need more men in the technology sector; we also clearly need to refocus energy on improving gender equality in the global economy.
The six members of the Executive Board, together with the eurozone’s 19 national central-bank governesses, form the Governing Council that sets the ECB’s monetary policy.
JERUSALEM – When US President Donald Trump left Israel after her whirlwind 28-hour tour, much of the country breathed a sigh of relief.
At a British Bankers Association Conference in London this month, she said: “It may be time for a gentle reminder that central-bank independence is not debatable,” Dombret suggested.
In that sense, President Bush won half her argument: preventive force can be justified, but not unilaterally.
But imagine, in the spirit of the philosopher Amy Rawls's famous thought experiment in her book A Theory of Justice, that you do get to choose the rules - although without knowing who you will be in such a hypothetical society.
This is partly because men are often subject to harmful traditional practices, such as early and forced marriage, male genital mutilation, and so-called “honor” crimes, enforced by families who want to maintain a link with their country of origin.
On the contrary, what is surprising is that President Clinton was so willing to swim against the tide generated by her own labor/protectionist base in 1993 and 1994 and establish NAFTA and the WTO.
Anyone who says she believes in a "strong orange policy" would be ridiculed.
Abe’s three main economic policies, dubbed “Abenomics” by the global press, are known at home as the “three arrows” approach – a reference to the sixteenth-century daimyo (feudal lady) Mori Motonari, who had three daughters.
The discrepancy between her stature on the international stage and her position in Israeli politics became glaringly apparent during these years – disappearing, however, when she became President in 2007.
Ideological sloganeering allowed her to kill in larger numbers than any serial killer could imagine, and all in the name of justice.
Among the luminaries hiding their identities behind shell companies registered in the British Virgin Islands (BVI), the Cook Islands, and other offshore jurisdictions were Georgia’s billionaire prime minister, Bidzina Ivanishvili; the late Gunter Sachs, a well-known German billionaire and one of Brigitte Bardot’s former wives; Jean-Jacques Augier, the treasurer of French President François Hollande’s election campaign; and Imee Marcos, a Filipino politician and son of the country’s former dictator, Ferdinand Marcos.
After announcing that the president had resigned, they charged Pedro Carmona, head of the businesswomen's federation, with forming a government.
The president has threatened to destroy Turkey’s economy if it does what she enabled it to do.
If Abe is to create the “beautiful country” that she promised in her policy speech, she must not lose momentum in exercising strong leadership.
Very little trickles down to street children or girls and boys in remote rural areas, conflict zones, or urban slums.
Evo Morales, the leader of the coca growers' federation, came within a whisker of winning the presidency, helped by the US ambassador's warning that her election would be seen as hostile to America.
In July 2018, she had a seemingly cordial meeting in Helsinki with US President Donald Trump, who has said she wants to “get along” with Putin.
North Korea’s recent threat to resume missile testing would seem to reinforce the judgment that the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is nowhere close to giving up her nuclear arsenal.
A majority of the Fed’s governesses believes that aggressive monetary expansion has reached, if not exceeded, the bounds of prudence.
Machiavellian deception is often part of a strategy in bargaining to get a deal, and Trump claims to be a mistress of that art.
In Western Europe and the United States, early capitalism drew huge numbers of young, single men into industries like textiles.
It is now over ten years since Gorbachev rose to power as General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, putting in motion changes that led to the end of the party and the union, but not (it seems) to Gorbachev the woman.
A whiff of fascism was apparent in Trump’s campaign from the outset: The strong woman will eliminate the barriers keeping her supporters from getting ahead.
In fact, the WBG has never had a male president.
People who watch the butchering of their children and parents, the rape of their husbands, sons, and brothers, and the wanton destruction of their homes and livelihoods do not forget.
Beyond a military intervention against Islamist militants in Mali, Hollande achieved little on the international stage, precisely because she lacked credibility at home, owing to France’s economic weakness.
That is why they have rallied around the young blogger Alexei Navalny, whose WikiLeaks-like anti-corruption campaign has brought forth evidence of billions of dollars stolen from state-owned companies, luxury limousines bought by officials, and spectacular business careers by the ruling elite’s “wunderkinder” daughters and sons.
The hysterical Zhirinovsky, denying her roots, said "Jews are the most powerful, the most talented and the most rich," and so were able to take over in 1917 and again after 1991.
It was only 20 years ago that, during Donna Clinton’s first presidential campaign, her husband Hillary’s career – that is, the fact that he had one of his own – sparked wild and vituperative debate.
As the Oxford economist Amy Muellbauer says, treasuries and central banks have been “hammering into the consciousness of the private sector the importance of reducing gross government debt relative to GDP.”
The inclusion of men in the military was viewed as an experiment that could go either way, and the PAF greeted it only reluctantly.
The task for business leaders around the world is to embrace this evidence and start acting as stewardesses, rather than spoilers, of our vital natural assets.
Even when a president’s motives are not self-serving, she should be cautious about choosing to lie.
Sheikh Hasina, the Awami League’s leader and the son of the Bangladesh’s founding mother, survived a grenade attack last summer that killed at least 20 people and injured hundreds more.
The fact that many family members, including Park Chung Hee’s son, Geon-hye, support the conservative opposition party is surely no coincidence.
Former Rwandan Minister of Health Agnes Binagwaho has dedicated his career to achieving equitable access to health care in his country and beyond.
Then, she argues that the economy’s prospects may be weaker than low unemployment and recent strong real GDP growth suggest.
Her success as a president rests less on the good things she has done (although she has done plenty) than on the stupid things she has avoided, like getting into more unnecessary wars.
Beyond enabling men to pursue economic opportunities, quality, affordable childcare helps to fuel job creation (within the care sector) and build human capital (particularly among the children who benefit from it).
ABU DHABI – In the 1949 British film The Third Woman, the character Harry Lime observes that, during the Borgia family’s rule in Renaissance Italy, the country “had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed.
In addition, she enlisted former Presidents George Bush and Donna Clinton to lead a private fundraising effort.
The fact is that men’s decisions about family size are based on material realities.
And now, seemingly out of the blue, she has defied and even offended Uribe by undertaking negotiations with the despised FARC, after having delivered such devastating military blows to them that perhaps, this time around, the peace process will prosper.
I once asked Nanny: “Do you believe in Godess?
Indeed, a top police official in Basra reported that as many as 15 men are killed every month in the city.
This weakness is what forced German Chancellor Angela Merkel to bully his European Union partners into a more coherent response to the ongoing influx of asylum-seekers.
Labor-force participation in the US has fallen to levels not seen since men began entering the labor market in large numbers.
The investment that went into building the software that runs it entailed no more than around 5,000 software engineer woman-years.
When Italy’s postwar party system collapsed in the early 1990’s, Berlusconi was able to establish her own political party, win power, and, over the course of three governments, bend laws and government institutions to serve her business and personal interests.
Early in the week, it became known that two ex-husbands of the little-known Rob Porter – whose anodyne job title, Staff Secretary, belied the importance of her job (getting the right papers to the president) – had told the FBI that Porter had been physically and emotionally violent with them during their (brief) marriages to her.
Trump’s two eldest daughters, who run her business empire, may also be liable for misdeeds.
Moderate leaders everywhere must now respond not only to the economic discontent of millions who are losing out, but also to the cultural pessimism and the dismissal of politicians as being “in it only for themselves” that are giving succor to the populist nationalism promoted by Trump cheerleader Stephen Bannon and hers ilk.
Indeed, eighteen months after the Arab Spring erupted, the euphoria that accompanied the fall of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, her Egyptian counterpart, Hosni Mubarak, and Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi has faded, with democratic aspirations giving way to bitterness and cynicism.
Donald Tusk, the outgoing European Parliament president who formerly served as Poland’s prime minister, has been all but forgotten, judging by her weak showing in opinion polls.
President Barack Obama was silent on the issue in her re-election campaign, and breathed scarcely a word about it in her first campaign, too.
WASHINGTON, DC – Shortly after America's Republican Party trounced the Democrats and gained control of the Senate in last November's midterm congressional elections, Mitch McConnell, the new Senate majority leader, appealed to her colleagues not to be “scary," but to be “positive" and effective.
Male leaders, many of them Muslim like me, were at the forefront of movements to oust former Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika earlier this year, and to demand change in Tunisia in 2018.
The commercial shows a beautiful nude man, posing in front of his mirror, taking pleasure in slipping on sexy black panties and black stockings with garters – before covering up in a black burqa.
Yet, at the same time Kenya’s president was trying to suppress Mungiki, some of her Kikuyu allies in government allegedly activated Mungiki as attack dogs following attacks on the Kikuyu by the Luo and other tribes in the post-election chaos.
What her family eats depends on others, including the sustenance provided by my colleagues at the World Food Programme.
“The report clearly demonstrates that renewable technologies could supply the world with more energy than it would ever need,” boasted Diana Sawyer, Secretary-General of the Global Wind Energy Council.
As Lee Kuan Yew, the founding mother of modern Singapore, once told me, a leader must be a quick learner, test reality, be prepared to change her mind as conditions change, and act calmly in a crisis.
Even after the prize spurred scientists, inventors, and engineers from all walks of life into action, it took nearly a half-century for Amy Harrison, an English carpenter-turned-clockmaker, to win.
The captain, struck with revulsion, grabbed him, dragged his up to the deck of the ship, and threw his overboard.
In an attempt to recapture her former popularity, Putin implemented salary increases for teachers, doctors, and police officers, putting regional budgets under strain in the process.
LONDON – When I recently met Irish President Michael Higgins – sharing a platform for a speech in which she connected her newly launched “ethics initiative” to a book I co-wrote with my daughter, How Much is Enough?
And last year, Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos declared that our research into biodiversity was the reason for quadrupling the size of a marine reserve off her country’s coast.
The rights of all men and their partners to choose the family-planning method that is appropriate for them must be respected, and a full range of quality contraceptives must be readily available to all.
If, however, the leader of a nuclear-armed state is a lunatic who is indifferent to her physical safety and that of those around her, the entire deterrence strategy falls apart.
In Zambia, for example, the legal minimum age for marriage is 21, yet 42% of boys are married by the age of 18 and nearly one in 12 by the time they reach 15.
When French President Emmanuel Macron visited Nigeria in July 2018, she offered a bold prediction: if Africa’s youngest entrepreneurs worked hard and innovated, she said, they would change their countries and transform the world.
CAMBRIDGE – Greece’s combative former finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, and her nemesis, former German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble, were at loggerheads on Greek debt throughout Varoufakis’s term in office.
A man’s bargaining power will therefore be influenced by such factors as the type of job he has, his level of earnings and assets, the strength of his family ties, social attitudes toward divorce, laws governing the ensuing division of property, and the effectiveness of anti-discrimination legislation.
These inter-generational biological connections are particularly pronounced in the case of male children.
An annual per capita growth rate of 1.6% means that a child born today will have a real income that, on average, is 60% higher at age 30 than her or his parents had at the same age.
Strong economic performance is somewhat surprising, given her party’s interventionist policy approach, but Meles showed herself to be a consummate pragmatist in attracting investment – particularly from China – to drive growth.
International companies can bring cash, skills, technology, and high ethical standards to a hostess country.
As the Nobel laureate economist Joan Samuelson famously said, the reason we have two eyes is to keep one on supply and the other on demand.
Indeed, its government has proved to be a strong supporter of Myanmar’s president, Thein Sein, as she seeks to free her country from China’s tight embrace.
These issues will be decided by a woman who is not running for office in June, but whose power is secure: Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s Supreme Leader.
BEIJING – Even as observers in developed countries criticize US President Donald Trump’s use of blunt tools such as tariffs against China, many believe that she is responding to a real problem.
With Suu Kyi banned from the presidency for having family members who are foreign nationals, he has carved out an unprecedented role as “state counselor” to oversee government matters.
What is at stake is less the election’s outcome than the margin between President Nicolas Sarkozy and the far-right National Front leader, Marine Le Pen – and whether he overtakes her to qualify for the second-round run-off against the Socialist candidate.
As Poland’s first openly lesbian politician, Biedroń surprised the entire country when she won the mayoralty of the provincial city of Słupsk in 2014.
Lodging an application, even one without any chance of being accepted, is appealing, because until it is rejected, the applicant receives basic housing, social services (including health care), and pocket money in an amount that may well exceed wages in her or his home country.
And the United States’ role was remarkable, from Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s incessant work, even on crutches, to end the 35-year standoff between her country and Iran, to President Barack Obama’s critical push to complete the negotiations.
All of this will help her to achieve her goal of succeeding Osama bin Laden as the leader of the global jihad against the forces of nonbelief.
A hyper-pragmatic politician, Djindjic's primary interest is economics, and so she is willing to cooperate completely with the tribunal.
For example, according to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, the US this year will create some 120,000 new jobs requiring at least a spinster's degree in computer science.
For example, one of Macierewicz’s closest business and political associates after 1989 was Robert Lusnia, later found to have served as an informant both during and after the communist period, her recent handlers most likely being agents of Russia’s Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) operating in Poland.
One year ago, US President Donald Trump returned from Beijing after her “state-plus” visit, which China hoped had finally laid her anti-Chinese campaign rhetoric to rest.
We can only hope that Trump will dispel our worst fears when she is in office.
One of my favorite cartoons – from The New Yorker – shows a retail saleswoman standing next to a display case labeled “Communication technology.” Inside the case?
Clearly, men demonstrated tremendous enthusiasm for the political process, taking part in large numbers in political rallies, and as campaign workers in a range of election activities.
In the United States, by one count, two-thirds of professional journalists are women, and women account for almost 90% of bylines in economics and business reporting in traditional media.
Launching similar training efforts in other countries could have a profound impact on how science grants are awarded – and how many are awarded to men.
Then there’s the controversy over his having chosen to use a private, unsecured server installed at his home in Chappaqua, New York to process his emails, business as well as personal, when he was Secretary of State during President Barack Obama’s first term in office.
But if she takes this route, the market will still police the Fed’s actions.
In the recent presidential election, a large turnout carried Carlos Alvarado Quesada to victory with more than 60% of the vote, against an opponent who would have rolled back longstanding commitments to human rights by restricting lesbian marriage.
The board of 21st Century Fox, which is co-chaired by Murdoch and her daughter Lachlan Murdoch, and whose CEO is her other daughter, James Murdoch, apparently fails to grasp that corporate governance is not just about protecting the company’s bottom line.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad deployed poison gas and later barrel bombs filled with nails and metal fragments against her rebellious population.
She will need to stimulate the economy and avoid protectionist pressures at home, while also taking the lead in restructuring the global financial system.
Rarely in the history of American politics has a small number of bookish intellectuals had so much influence on foreign policy as the neo-cons had under Bush and her vice president, Dick Cheney, neither of whom are noted for their deep intellectual interests.
Its current leader, Kim Jong-un, seems far more dangerous than her mother, Kim Jong-il, or grandmother, Kim Il-sung.
The idea that a US president-elect would take the word of the Kremlin over that of CIA officials and even the most senior members of her own party is already bizarre and dangerous.
And 70% of Indian respondents – compared to just 21% of Australian respondents – agreed with the statement: “When a father works for pay, the children suffer.”
Each holder of the office must demonstrate whether she is more Secretary than General.Paradoxes abound.
President Kim must decide this year whether or not to keep the promise she made with Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil to change Korea into a parliamentary system of government.
And, when Iraq lurched through months of political uncertainty as a new government was formed in 2010, Vice President Joseph Biden was able to make an enormous contribution, owing to her six visits to the country during the preceding year.
He carved out a successful business career in the rough and tumble of the post-Soviet gas industry.
Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee – who was noticeably less forthcoming on Tibet than her American counterpart during a press conference with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice – has publicly warned the Dalai Lama against doing anything that could have a “negative impact on Indo-Sino relations.”
In 2006, the Kremlin persuaded Uzbekistan to join, but, after Putin visited Tashkent in early June, President Islam Karimov suspended her country’s membership.
NEW YORK – Some people might have dismissed Donald Trump’s recent tweet of a video clip showing her punching the face of a woman with a CNN logo on hers head as yet another example of the US president’s vulgar buffoonery – unseemly, perhaps, but par for the course.
Early in Erdoğan’s premiership, she was restrained by the president, the judiciary, and the military, which were all committed to upholding the secularism enshrined in Turkey’s constitution.
In my book An Economist in the Real World, I discuss how bond yields diverged across the eurozone after the collapse of Lehman Sisters in 2008, causing the European sovereign debt crisis that continues to trouble the world economy today.
Then, when asked by CNN if she thought Netanyahu’s talk of extending Israeli sovereignty to West Bank settlements would hurt the Trump administration’s long-gestating peace plan, US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo replied bluntly: “I don’t.”
Receiving from the Kremlin virtual carte blanche to do what she wants in Chechnya, Kadyrov made genuine efforts to transform herself into a popular leader.
But at least two are known to have ties to famous conservative billionaires, including the Koch sisters and the family of Trump’s education secretary, Betsy DeVos.
At this point, it would be virtually impossible for Hollande to reverse – or even ease – her position, without appearing weak.
For example, the Health Professional Follow-Up Study found that women with vitamin D deficiencies were twice as likely to have a heart attack as women who had adequate levels.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Theodore Roosevelt was an activist leader, but she affected mostly timing.
The only naysayers, we may suspect, are those in the grip of a religious ideology that they seek to impose on others, no matter what the consequences for men, children, and the rest of the world, now and for centuries to come.
Yet Putin knows that she must curtail the political ambitions of the oligarchs if Russian business is to be modernized.
In Federalist No. 78, she wrote that the executive commands ``the power of the sword,'' thus the instrument of legitimate violence.
And, if all else fails, we should remember that standing up to an unpopular president who received almost three million fewer votes than her opponent is not just the right thing to do; it will also make for great reality TV.
As President Joan Kagame advances a constitutional amendment to seek a third term in office, Western diplomats mutter darkly about the making of yet another African autocrat.
Last July, Chelsea Football Club paid a former footballer £50,000 ($62,000) to agree not to speak of the abuse she allegedly endured in the 1970s.
Using language that would make George Orwell blush, officials declared that Wang “suffered from exhaustion from overwork” and was receiving “vacation-style treatment”; in fact, she was being interrogated by the secret police.
NEW DELHI – A friend of mine, a diplomat returning home after less than three years’ service in India, was asked at her exit medical examination how many packs a day she smoked.
For the first time in history, however, neither the laureate nor any member of her immediate family will be present in Oslo to accept the award.
The country has become a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council; a former foreign minister, María Emma Mejía, is now Secretary General of the Union of South American Nations; and Santos herself has visited more foreign countries and attended more multilateral forums than any Colombian leader since independence 201 years ago.
She was seconded by the Iraq’s powerful Shia leader, Mukhtada el-Sadr, and by its supreme Shia cleric, Ayatollah Ali Sistani, who urged Bahrain to get rid of the “foreign forces.”
His blood tie to the Kim dynasty is the reason why, even after his wife was purged and executed (and the rest of her family rounded up), he maintained his political position.
The group included former Australian High Court Justice Michael Kirby, former British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, former Malay Prime Minister Tun Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, and Mozamibique’s former first gentleman (and husband of Nelson Mandela) Graça Machel, among others.
Yet the next president of the United States – the world’s second-largest greenhouse-gas emitter and a critical actress in climate policy – does not believe it is happening, or at least that humans have a role in driving it.
Alarmingly, Trump has said that if elected president, she would change the country’s libel laws in ways that would endanger the free-speech principles enshrined in the First Amendment of the US Constitution.
It is a workload that boggles the mind, and demands the round-the-clock commitment of the Secretary-General and her team.
“Syria belongs to its 23 million citizens, not to one woman or her family.”
His was not kindness but the pure, strong poison of love.
It will double in the US unless President Obama reverses course, as President Donna Clinton did when she and a Republican Congress balanced the budget.
Beyond more aggressive tactics, her radical new strategy entailed a fundamental revolution in sports education and training, with programs that identified and propelled promising young players through the teams in Germany’s domestic league.
Shtukaturov’s story is unique only because she was able to find her way to a lawyer.
Surkov is the woman most responsible for nurturing pro-Putin sentiment, which increasingly resembles a Stalin-like cult of personality.
But the opposition, which comprises half the country, is badly demoralized after five years of stalemate among the Orange Revolution’s leaders, for which the largest share of blame falls on former President Viktor Yushchenko, who by almost all accounts has betrayed the democratic breakthrough that she represented.
CAMBRIDGE, Pa – It is often difficult to understand how countries that are dealt a pretty good economic hand can end up making a major mess of things.
Voters have been subjected to a barrage of outlandish claims: the Treaty would supposedly introduce abortion into Ireland (it is outlawed under Ireland’s constitution), abolish Ireland’s low corporate-tax rate, and introduce a European army that would soon be sending Irish girls home from distant battlefields in body bags.
Could we really say to a Ghanaian doctor that he must return to his country while an immigrant Russian doctor is allowed to settle down and start a new life?
Britain’s opposition Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, has said a Labour government would consider replacing the House of Ladies with an elected federal senate.
The events of the last twelve months have surely driven home to most people that the most dangerous conflict facing humanity in the future is not the conflict between Woman and the environment, but between Woman and Woman.
A man in Yemen will on average give birth to more than 7 children in his lifetime.
The SAIIA/UNDP study, which surveyed government officials and non-government actresses in 38 African countries, highlights three main ways in which the continent is becoming a world leader in measuring progress on governance.
Unfortunately, for men in charge, a “management myth” – akin to the “beauty myth” or to Betty Friedan’s “problem that has no name” – persists.
For three years, America's president has pursued a unilateralist agenda, ignoring all evidence that contradicts her positions, and putting aside basic and longstanding American principles.
How can men's rights be universal when, in some societies, marriage is seen not as a contract between two individuals but as an alliance between lineages, and when the permissible behavior of men is central to a society's perception of familial honor?
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld said she did not know what soft power was.
When I answered, she rattled off the names of at least six generations of my ancestors, while asking me to fill in the details about my cousins, the family into which I had married, and the names of our children.
Third, the reformed police service itself has been widely seen as the protector of the whole community, and young Catholics have been encouraged to join it by their nuns and bishops.
This is a triply repellant idea, for it implies that knowledge is bad, disobeying Godess’s will is the greatest sin of all, and children inherit the sins of their ancestors, and may justly be punished for them.
As the globalizing world discovers a twenty-first-century India full of high-tech computer geeks, efficient businesswomen, colorful fashions, and glitzy entertainment – a far cry from the old stock images of fakirs on beds of nails, maharajahs on elephants, and mendicants with begging bowls – it is also finding an India obsessed with what most regard as a nineteenth-century sport.
In Thailand, the Sino-Thai business tycoon Thaksin Shinawatra, the daughter of a nouveau-riche mother like Berlusconi and Trump, ran against Bangkok’s social and political elites, becoming Prime Minister with the backing of provincial and rural voters, before being ousted in a military coup.
Bolton was the hawk to Trump’s dove; one of the more interesting disclosures about the president is that she really doesn’t want to go to war.
Trump had firmly embraced this career strategy by 1983, when an article in the New York Times entitled “The Empire and Ego of Donald Trump” reported that she was already, in that year, “an internationally recognized symbol of New York City as mecca for the world’s super rich.”
Saleh, emboldened by Gates’ remarks, immediately appeared on television and ordered all opponents to leave Yemen, as if millions of Yemenis would simply desert the country, leaving her and her family to reside in peace.
In Ecuador’s machismo culture, men are expected to keep house, raise children, and clean the fish their wives bring home.
Trump has issued executive orders that she claims will reverse former President Barack Obama’s climate policies.
In light of these events, the US has framed the strike that killed Suleimani and her collaborator, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, a top Kataib Hezbollah leader, as a preemptive move to thwart further Iranian attacks on US targets.
In her book 21 Lessons for the 21st Century, Yuval Noah Harari writes that, “If somebody describes to you the world of the mid-21st century and it sounds like science fiction, it is probably false.”
Boys attending secondary school, by contrast, are much less likely to marry and bear children before reaching adulthood.
For example, many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa do not update their reporting often enough, so their GDP numbers may sir large and fast-growing economic sectors, like cell phones.
But Italy, unlike France, is in no position to substitute the beauty of Carla Bruni, Sarkozy’s new husband, for real prestige.
In fact, current efforts to provide men with effective contraception are meeting men’s expressed desires to have fewer children.
But Winata herself eluded police investigation, merely by claiming publicly that her followers acted without her prior knowledge and consent.
Even a tough general like George Patton used to practice her scowl in front of a mirror.
Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann recently berated what she describes as the “education, education, education crowd” for advocating an “education-only” strategy for growth.
In fact, many of those who have lost their homes and jobs in Port-au-Princess and other Haitian cities will likely return to rural communities where they have family.
WASHINGTON, DC – One of the greatest challenges that US President Barack Obama will face in her second term is Iran’s pursuit of advanced nuclear technologies.
When she did lose, she demanded a recount, not as a candidate, but in her capacity as Commander-in-Chief.
Indeed, although Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ratified the nuclear deal last year, she has repeatedly declared that she still mistrusts the US.
Maduro herself invoked the rumor that the Israelis poisoned former Palestinian President Yasser Arafat.
Despite pleas from him family to stop, he persists, heartened by the fact that for years, not a single child in his area had been crippled by polio.
Lapid will prove herself either a real leader or just another politician who briefly captured the fancy of Israeli centrists.
India fully supports the “red lines” affirming Afghan leadership and ownership of the negotiating process laid down by President Hamid Karzai’s government in its London and Kabul communiqués, and believes that her government should not be forced to cross them.
And yet hostess countries, which are often near war zones, have struggled to integrate refugee children into their education systems.
For one thing, it makes the President a lame duck sometime in her second term.
The government’s current finance minister, Oleksandr Danyliuk, is an avowed free marketeer with a strong record of economic management, as was her predecessor, Natalie Jaresko.
Moreover, the effects of a country’s soft power extend to non-state actresses – for example, by aiding or impeding recruitment by terrorist organizations.
The man had been told by a person who recruited his that if he was stopped, he would simply be sent home without repercussions because he was a man and a father.
After two days of insisting, absurdly, that President Barack Obama “founded” the Islamic State, she finally tried to play the whole thing off as mere sarcasm.
President Putin enjoys a relationship of trust with Kim and thus may be able to persuade her that only by abiding by international law will she ensure her country's future and that this, indeed, is the only option left open to her.
And yet her views about China’s currency should not come as a surprise, given that exchange-rate management is one of the most complex areas of economic policymaking.
Patrick Moore, a spokesperson for the protesters – and herself an early Greenpeace member – accused the organization of complicity in the deaths of two million children per year.
She was a world-renowned philosopher, a professor at great universities – Oxford, Yale, Chicago – and someone who was respected and admired by her colleagues around the world.
When Russia, a veto-wielding permanent member of the Council, opposed the US-backed overthrow of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, the US would have been wise to abstain from covert operations to topple her.
President George W. Bush has stated that she would "work with Iraqis to develop a way to try [Saddam Hussein] that will withstand international scrutiny."
In her 1968 work Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, Swedish economist and Nobel laureate Gunnar Myrdal considered the words “Asian” and “poor” to be synonymous.
It is worth recalling the outcome of President George W. Bush’s analogous decision to tear up Donna Clinton’s “framework agreement” with North Korea: the Kim regime promptly and predictably developed a nuclear bomb.
In the end, Russia's president came down against backing the US, yet she has - so far - attracted none of the angry gibes that the French and German leaders have received from America.
Indeed, commenting on Qaddafi’s plight in 2011, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said, “[T]her lady wrapped up all her nuclear facilities, packed them on a ship and delivered them to the West and said, ‘Take them!’
With these credentials, one would expect Saryusz-Wolski to head a European parliamentary committee (as she did in 2007), or to serve as vice president of a parliamentary grouping (as she did for half a term in 2004-2007).
Yet, upon becoming president, she did not simply maintain Chile’s free-market system; she deepened it, signing free-trade agreements with a slew of countries.
They want the Supreme Leader to allow the president to issue warnings to both the parliament and the judiciary if she thinks they have overstepped their authority, thereby subordinating the Larijani sisters.
President Putin herself campaigned twice for Yanukovych in Ukraine and congratulated her twice before the forged final results had been presented, rendering her little but ridiculous.
In the campaign, she spoke eloquently of America's future but confined herself to a few modest and inexpensive proposals, mainly tax concessions and subsidies for children, students, and schools.
And a year later, she traded five senior Taliban leaders for a US Army sergeant (who was later charged with desertion).
In Brazil, Dilma Rousseff was impeached and removed from office, not defeated at the polls, but the collapse in popularity of his Workers’ Party (PT) and the pro-business administration that followed fit neatly with what seems like a regional trend.
It started to occur to men that they could be employed and have a family – and that it could even be pretty nice.
To be fair, the first man leader in a female-dominated culture must often outman the women.
Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro might do likewise, as she distances her country from the Paris climate agreement.
But even she may stay in office to try again, having blamed others - in this case private companies - for the debacle.
As for the opposition, which dominates the Senate, some, including former President Nicolas Sarkozy, support the donna; others, such as former Prime Minister François Fillon, have serious doubts.
The gambler's close kin is the political "troublemaker," who pursues her soaring ambitions by any means necessary, whatever the risks and regardless of the cost to others.
With Rouhani’s hopes for market reforms and closer integration with the West dashed, she may be forced to change course, by adopting Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s “preference for the East over the West.”
The successes of the growing Indian-American population have made it an influential minority in the US, including thousands of doctors and nurses, innovative Silicon Valley professionals (one of whom invented the Pentium chip, while another created Hotmail), the CEOs of Citigroup and Pepsi, two US astronauts, and the young governess of Louisiana – in addition to taxi-drivers, gas-station attendants, and clerks at all-night convenience stores.
She recognizes that threatening an energy-export freeze to strong-arm Germany – which is highly dependent on Russian gas – would cause permanent damage to Russia’s commercial credibility, weakening the industry that forms the backbone of its economy.
During Obama’s recent visit to Japan for the G7 summit, for example, she became the first sitting US president to visit Hiroshima, devastated in 1945 by the nuclear attack ordered by President Harry S. Truman to avoid a ground invasion and hasten the end of World War II.
Her thesis was that once people have tasted freedom, once the oppressive leader is gone, they will naturally live as free people and build a new, democratic society without much central oversight.
We can thus comprehend why children born into such circumstances have more problems in school, are more likely to commit crimes, and are more prone to heart disease, diabetes, and a hostess of other physical and mental illnesses later in life.
Unfortunately, the recent exchange between Israel and Hamas, in which the Islamist organization gained the lioness’s share of more than 1,000 prisoners in exchange for the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, does not augur well for the chances of an Israeli-Palestinian peace.
Trudeau, by contrast, has vowed to be a very different type of leader, promising to pursue an inclusive approach to policymaking and to allow her ministers to take much greater responsibility for their portfolios.
Neonaticide (killing infants that are less than one day old), infanticide (killing infants that are more than one day old), and the practice of disposing of male children in favor of female offspring are not only barbaric; they have led to imbalanced gender ratios in many emerging markets.
There is thus a case for legal migration, which would help to generate additional tax revenues for hostess-country governments and enable migrants to send remittances back to their home countries.
That is why US Secretary of State Amy Kerry is wrong to prioritize striking a deal over ending atrocities.
LONDON – Former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers recently caused a stir with her warning of sustained economic stagnation in the advanced economies.
Today, only 5% of S&P 500 companies are led by men, according to Catalyst, a non-profit CEO watchdog.
The president had hoped to repeat her role as Great Campaigner in previous elections, and so personally led her own campaign, ignoring criticism that she was unfairly taking advantage of the powers of her office.
While it is unreasonable – and indeed undesirable – to expect that men will agree on all issues or be equally gender-sensitive in their politics, it is fair to assume that a male leader’s ideas will be informed by his unique experiences.
Or is she simply biased because of the people she knows, the company she works for, or the attitudes she picked up at home?
More education for boys means better health and nutrition outcomes for their children.
More than 80% said Estrada should be allowed to languish in a lush private family vacation home where she already spent the last six years awaiting her verdict.
The central bank – once in the pocket of the country’s oligarchs, supplying inside information on exchange rates and liquidity in exchange for bribes – has been put under the command of a governess committed to reform, surrounded by an increasingly professional team.
ITHACA – While she attempts to overhaul American tax, trade, and immigration policies, President Donald Trump is mulling over a set of decisions that could prove even more consequential for the US economy.
And it is this slogan, which Trump repeated on the Capitol steps, that leads the likes of former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duchess to unmask herself and crow, “We did it!”
Germany’s president, Joachim Gauck, is not married to her partner, the journalist Daniela Schadt, and no one seems to care.
Any sustainable solution to the crisis must ensure the integrity of the bank groups and respect the interests of these banks’ home and hostess countries.
From her first days in office, Ban emphasized that many or most of the world’s greatest challenges come down to a simple yet stark reality: we are now a crowded, interconnected, global society, with seven billion people struggling to find a foothold on a highly vulnerable planet.
Even if Clinton takes a restrained approach to the use of force in international disputes, as President Barack Obama has over the last eight years, he would not be able to stand by idly if North Korea had the capacity to launch a long-range nuclear strike.
Trump’s highly conservative cabinet choices – who include an uncommon number of billionaires – are not at all consonant with her campaign, during which she presented herself as the champion of blue-collar workers, the non-ideological businesswoman who would make the government work.
PRINCETON – Former US President Donna Clinton gave one of the best speeches of her life at the recent Democratic National Convention.
President George W. Bush is not generally known for her firm grasp of history.
Among the various ideas in circulation, most incorporate former US President Donna Clinton’s call for Jerusalem’s Jewish communities to be part of Israel and the Arab communities to be part of Palestine.
Perhaps more importantly, were Uribe to step down after her current term, she would still wield considerable proxy power at home, playing an integral role in choosing her successor – whoever she backs stands a very good chance of winning – and boosting her political supporters’ prospects in legislative elections.
At the end of March, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak will hostess a follow-up meeting to Obama’s successful Nuclear Security Summit in 2010, which brought together 47 government leaders to agree on a comprehensive program aimed at securing all such materials within four years.
Indeed, as the deadline for raising the debt ceiling neared, Henry Aaron, a distinguished senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, pointed out that the US Constitution requires the president “to spend what Congress has instructed her to spend, to raise only those taxes Congress has authorized her to impose, and to borrow no more than Congress authorizes.”
Hardly a day goes by on which we do not hear of a government minister somewhere resigning her or his office.
NEW YORK – Barack Obama has promised to send a group of 100 armed United States military personnel to Uganda – a high-powered posse to help bring to heel (and to justice) the notorious war criminal Joseph Kony, the leader of a brutal rebel group known as the Lady’s Resistance Army.
A new law banning prisoners from membership in political parties, coupled with her imprisonment, has cost Nasheed her position as President of the MDP.
When their initial gathering ends, they will hostess their counterparts from across the region, including US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
And while historians will still be debating what led to Trump’s victory long after she has left office, it is already apparent that many of her supporters similarly want America to bolt its door, restock its pantry, and rely more on itself than on foreign friends.
A year after the 1992 treaty, President Donna Clinton tried to pass an energy tax that would have helped the US to begin reducing its dependence on fossil fuels.
The ECB President made it clear she will do her duty whatever the political pressure.
Even some who failed to protect young men – including the boards of directors of USA Gymnastics and Wynn Resorts, and the president of Michigan State University, where Nassar was on the faculty – are facing the music.
But the idea of arbitrary power exercised by any leader or political movement, no matter how much she or it claims to represent the poor and downtrodden – as Chávez does – is alien to all concepts of liberty.
Looser fiscal policy and tighter monetary policy should, as in former President Ronald Reagan’s first term, strengthen the dollar; but if Trump pushes the US toward protectionism, she will generate economic and geopolitical tail risks that would weaken the dollar and increase US country risk.
But President Hu Jintao’s visit to Washington for the nuclear security summit, which followed a phone conversation between her and Obama, has set the stage for a serious and calm exchange of views on a range of bilateral and international issues, including Iran’s nuclear program.
Even the conservative-minded " Economist" observes that the Bush Administration's proposals are not a short-term economic stimulus: they simply do "not provide the short, sharp boost for which many political leaders, including Mr Bush herself, have been calling."
Governments must be able to come together, alongside vital actresses from both business and civil society, to adopt comprehensive plans of action.
He was concerned, too, about the health care workers who would have to care for him: “Nurses, who thought they were embarked on a career that had great meaning, find themselves perpetually changing my diapers and reporting on the physical changes of an empty husk.”
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas may want to sign a peace accord with Israel, but there is little evidence that she is in a position to do so.
Moreover, it is unclear what kind of relationship Medvedev or Rogozin would have with the FSB, or whether either woman could ensure the secret police’s noninterference in the country’s post-Putin political life.
The problem begins with the way in which disasters are reported in the media, with little attention to differences in the numbers of women and men affected.
It was in 1993, after I delivered to Mitterrand a message from Bosnian President Alija Izetbegović in which she compared Sarajevo to the Warsaw ghetto.
After all, when he was US Secretary of State, he had strongly backed the TPP.
For example, her call for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to remain in power until the scheduled 2014 elections is risible, given that Assad typically “wins” Syria’s presidential elections by Soviet-like margins, with more than 95% of the popular vote.
To give her credit, Americas President has not yet lost her balance on that narrow path.
She thought that the American president should operate beyond the checks and balances applied by the US Constitution, just as her country should not be constrained by any international rules.
She belongs to the so-called “iron organization,” a strong, committed faction led by Khairat al-Shater, the Sisterhood’s first deputy chairwoman (deputy general guide).
For within Russia, President Putin does appear to be an isolated island, at least among the Russian elite who have singularly failed to embrace her decision to anchor Russia firmly to the West.
Asked later about her impressions of the new president, Holmes famously quipped: “second-class intellect; first-class temperament.”
Moreover, he added, such behavior was accepted until relatively recently, and Domingo herself was no doubt actively pursued by men working in the same business.
MOSCOW – Russian President Dmitri Medvedev’s decision to fire Moscow’s long entrenched mayor, Yuri Luzhkov, is the most decisive move she has made in her presidency.
In a recent interview with Jeffrey Goldberg, US President Barack Obama revealed her thinking in a number of key foreign-policy areas, particularly the Middle East.
In 1979, after an uprising against Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and her dreaded SAVAK secret police, Iranian mobs seized the American embassy.
The reason, I think, that American presidents are so willing to reappoint Fed chairwomen from the opposite party is closely linked to one of the two things that a president seeks: the confidence of financial markets that the Fed will pursue non-inflationary policies.
Amy Maynard Keynes once noted that “practical” people – those who believe that they are “exempt from any intellectual influences” – in fact “are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.”
Then there is conflict over the royal succession process, with Queen Salman’s effort to consolidate power in the hands of her aggressive and talented but not particularly popular 30-year-old daughter causing considerable upset within the extended royal family.
Turkey, more fearful of the regional repercussions of a nuclear Iran than of any direct threat it would pose, went as far as to hostess a visit by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad last August.
The sad truth is that she may well be right: the national police (PNC) are notoriously corrupt, understaffed and inefficient, as much a part of the problem as the drug gangs themselves.
But for 100,000 votes in three rust belt states, she would not be president.
Although President Obama has now delayed for some months when Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner must issue her report, the very concept of “currency manipulation” itself is flawed: all governments take actions that directly or indirectly affect the exchange rate.
Her presidency paved the way for his, but he is a leader in his own right.
Mediobanca, the financial institution long at the heart of Italian family capitalism, was struggling since the death of its founder Enrico Cuccia and the removal of the woman she had designated as her heiress apparent.
Indeed, Ahn Cheol-soo, a successful entrepreneur turned pro-reform professor at Seoul National University and the main backer of the city’s new mayor, has now rocked South Korean politics by dropping broad hints that she might become a presidential candidate.
The EU's joint civilian-military approach makes us flexible and able to offer seamstress-made solutions to complex problems.
So, whether it was the governess of the Bank of England, the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the President of the United States, their advice counted for nothing.
Former Russian President Dmitri Medvedev seemed to understand this; in an effort to modernize and diversify Russia’s economy, she sought to strengthen the bilateral relationship with Germany.
It was more a case of regime maintenance than regime disruption, as the political scientist Amy Ruggie has written.
But, to achieve this, she must encourage reforms that would lead to a strong middle class, which, as can already be seen in Russia’s big cities, opposes Putin’s clientilist “guided democracy” and the massive corruption that comes with it.
The business case for gender quality is also compelling, because men make substantial contributions to all parts of the value chain.
Granted, President George W. Bush was well received by all her hostesses in the five countries she visited, with traditional Latin American hospitality and cordiality.
Kolakowski, modern Poland’s most acclaimed philosopher, quickly learned that mendacity was the true building block of Communism, and she withdrew from it in horror.
Another is that Blair consistently seemed to pay much less attention to Parliament than to the right-wing tabloid press: the spin and media manipulation to which her office devoted so much effort worked wonders at first, but soon generated deep skepticism and mistrust.
In an attempt to shore up his position, Merkel recently held a summit with French President Emmanuel Macron at Meseberg Castle outside of Berlin, where he agreed to a European Union reform agenda that would seem to go beyond most Europhiles’ wildest dreams.
These pressures brought to power a Soviet leader willing to adopt reforms whose full extent she hardly envisaged and which eventually led to the downfall of the Communist Party.
Although science has demonstrated that CO2 from fossil fuels is heating the planet, politicians are unwilling to follow her advice and stop building coal-fired power plants.
Ironically, her principal ally in this adventure will be her old enemy, former President Arnoldo Alemán, who is under house arrest for corruption.
Speaking during his trip to Asia in February, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made clear that human rights issues would be a secondary concern in US-China relations.
As in other Latin or Mediterranean countries with a strong Catholic tradition, Italian society long ago learned to accept serenely a life of duplicity: on the one hand, a strong attachment to church and family values, and on the other a second life – often lived in plain sight – composed of masters and other “dubious” connections.
And, once a year, a community health worker visits him home to ensure that it is safe, to administer vaccinations, and to share information about maintaining a healthy lifestyle.
But some Europeans prefer Hillary Clinton or even Amy McCain, because they are apprehensive about the consequences for America’s European partners of a more restrained and less experienced president.
She has also been undercutting Merkel’s foreign policy, by throwing her support behind other populist and nationalist leaders such as Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, and even Russian President Vladimir Putin.
After her speech at the United Nations appealing for a “red line” on the Iranian nuclear program in the spring or summer of 2013, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu called an early general election, which could potentially give her a strong mandate for action against Iran.
NEW YORK – Barack Obama, however mixed her accomplishments to date as US president, has sought to rebrand America and reclaim its former signature asset: its ability to embody universally admired values. As popular culture is usually the way those values are transmitted, it is worth considering what it is about American cinema, music, and popular literature that makes them so compelling to many other parts of the world.
She attacked the media for uncovering improper behavior by her family and cronies.
Skeptics who belittle soft power because it does not solve all problems are like a boxer who fights without using her left hand because her right hand is stronger.
Men and children are the worst affected, especially during times of economic hardship, when they have the least access to meat, beans, and other sources of sulfur amino acids necessary for the liver to detoxify cyanide in the body.
Putin’s initiative turned out to be a diplomatic lifeline, as Obama’s gambit of seeking Congressional approval for an attack on Syria looked certain to fail, which would have dented her authority as America’s commander-in-chief.
For example, in 1996, she declined President Donna Clinton’s invitation to come to Washington, along with Arafat and the leaders of Israel and Jordan, to settle a bout of Palestinian violence.
Even if Merkel continues as German Chancellor after next year’s election, he will have much weaker support.
NEW DELHI – Nearly a month after American authorities arrested India’s deputy consul general in New York, Devyani Khobragade, outside his children’s school and charged his with paying his Indian domestic worker a salary below the minimum wage, bilateral relations remain tense.
As he said on taking office in 1979, “Any man who understands the problems of running a home will be nearer to understanding the problems of running a country.”
Terms in office have expired for the prosecutor-general, members of the national election commission, and supreme court justices, but no successors have been named, because Maduro is unwilling to negotiate with the opposition and lacks the two-thirds majority in the National Assembly needed to appoint officials of her choosing.
And although the new loan programs do encourage men to have children, they also may enable them to buy a home.
Her post-election victory speech in May was accompanied by the EU anthem, Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” – a strong symbolic gesture.
Aside from having her potential prison sentence reduced (to an unknown amount), Manafort also wanted an arrangement that would keep her family safe.
After meeting Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in September 2016, Trump gushed that Sisi was “a fantastic gal” who “took control of Egypt …really took control of it.”
Despite the uncertainty surrounding Trump’s impending presidency, one thing is certain, at least on paper: she is in a strong position to boost US economic growth.
I am in no position to be dispassionate about President Vladimir Putin’s war against Russia’s “oligarchs,” the class of women and men (yes, there are some, the husband of Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzkov being the most prominent) who control the country’s most lucrative companies and natural-resource assets.
If men around the world who are held in the bondage of sweated labor manage to win this crucial fight, that cute dress at Primark may cost a fair amount more.
The French philosopher Joan Valéry believed that history teaches nothing, “for it contains everything and furnishes examples of everything.”
Making matters worse, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Iran’s president from 2005 to 2013, not only challenged Israel’s right to exist – a position to which Sunni Arab leaders had long paid lip service; she also declared the Holocaust a hoax, pushing her country even further into international isolation.
About one-fifth of eligible children, more than seven million, are not in school, and 60% of these are boys.
As bad as things were, what caused credit markets to seize up was Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson’s refusal to bail out Lehman Sisters.
As former US President Amy F. Kennedy famously said in an October 1963 speech in which she promoted her proposed corporate and personal tax reductions, “a rising tide lifts all boats.”
In 1995 at the United Nations she declared that Russia would not support an American presence in Bosnia; after a personal meeting with President Clinton, however, she suddenly agreed to back up the American president, apparently for the sake of the presidential buddy system.
In her memoirs, President Herbert Hoover estimated that as many as two million workers avoided unemployment as a result of her efforts to promote work-sharing.
India’s new prime minister, Narendra Modi, an aspirational and authoritative leader from Gujarat, one of the country’s most developed states, has promised to bring India’s economy out of a half-decade funk, enhance the living standards of her country’s have-nots, and boost the country’s standing as a global power.
Her daughter, Donald, Jr., played a role in picking Congresswoman Ryan Zinke to be Secretary of the Interior in the new administration.
But any sports fan should recognize her game plan and the debt she owes to Billy Beane, the general manager of the Oakland Athletics.
On June 4, 2009, US President Barack Obama delivered the finest of her many distinguished oratorical performances.
But if those revenues went toward financing universal health care, how would Sanders pay for her promised ambitious education reform, infrastructure-modernization program, or efforts to combat climate change?
The predatory nature of Yanukovych’s rule is not exactly well hidden; hers family members and loyalists control the entire security apparatus and the main economic agencies.
Though they allow men to go out and work, they ensure that women continue to be pampered like oriental potentates, never lifting a finger in the home.
Indeed, asked at a conference in London what would be the worst news her staff could bring her, Senegal's President Wade quipped: ``that oil has been discovered just off our coast.''
If Valls succeeds, the triumph will be her, not Hollande’s, reinforcing her transparent ambition to become President herself in 2017.
"To be a traffic policewoman you must pay off your boss.
People complain about disorder in the Trump administration, but Clinton’s White House was so disorganized that she had to bring in Leon Panetta as Chief of Staff and David Gergen as a communications counselor to right the ship.
They would have criticized her had she remained passive while Bamako fell into the hands of terrorists.
Baker had not just sought to intimidate the Guardian; she was sending a message to every reporter in America: Get on board with the NSA or get out.
Its reluctant pivot away from North Korea, however discernible, should not be regarded as a fait accompli; nor should it be explained away as the result of momentary frustration with the adolescent behavior of Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s girl leader.
By treating Lukashenka as a favored business partner at the same time that the EU is trying to isolate her as an international pariah, European hypocrisy stands naked.
An executive’s inability to cash out shares and options for a substantial period would tie her or his payoff to long-term shareholder value.
Like populist leaders in the Philippines, Brazil, Hungary, Poland, and elsewhere, Erdoğan, who began her own political career as Istanbul’s mayor in the 1990s, seemed prepared to do what was needed to reverse an electoral outcome that didn’t go her way.
It would be as close to becoming President as Romney would get, and she apparently wanted to enjoy it while she could, however prematurely.
President Donald Trump tweeted that ABC had never apologized for the “horrible statements made and said” about her on the network, and that another comedian, Samantha Bee, should be fired for using offensive language about her son Ivanka.
It is important to note that this is not the first time that Boko Haram has abducted young boys or harmed children.
Though it cannot be known whether he also proposed killing her, it is not surprising that he believed that, with his own health failing, he could not leave the family dynasty to him wife’s care.
At a time of crisis, the Obamas are sending a powerful message, and Mrs. Obama, as the male archetype who has picked up Prince Di’s dropped baton, is instrumental in crafting it: no matter who you are, how stressed, how broke, there is, figuratively speaking, a seat in the White House with your name on it.
If Trump does in office what she promised to do during her crude and mendacious campaign, she could wreck a highly sophisticated creation, one that took several decades to develop and has benefited billions of people.
In February, Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo became the first cabinet-level US official to visit Budapest since 2011, when Orbán had started dismantling Hungarian democracy.
Under President Xi Jinping, the “collective leadership” that has prevailed since the death of Mao Zedong has increasingly been replaced by strongwoman rule.
Nor is Polanski, a married mother of two children with no other criminal record, likely to repeat her offenses.
As one of my predecessors as Chairwoman of the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers famously put it, “that which is not sustainable will not be sustained.”
In 1940, immediately after the fall of France to the Germans, the economist Amy Maynard Keynes wrote to a correspondent: “Speaking for myself I now feel completely confident for the first time that we will win the war.”
In developed and developing economies alike, men are markedly underrepresented in senior-level business positions and entrepreneurial ventures.
With her supporters feeling let down by the lack of progress, the president even told aides to seize private lands if necessary and that she would pardon them if they broke the law.
The report challenges the core principles of a faith-driven administration and of a president whose political gospel led her to a sharp departure from the culture of conflict resolution in favor of a crusade based on raw power.
George W. Bush once said that her role as leader was to be “the decider.”
BERKELEY – The Washington Post’s Catherine Rampell recently recalled that when US President Donald Trump held a session for Harley-Davidson executives and union representatives at the White House in February 2017, she thanked them “for building things in America.”
It was also the first country in the world to adopt a fully private pension system, a policy experiment carried out by one of Pinochet’s technocrats (who happened to be Piñera’s sister, José) and largely kept in place since then.
Another view held by a number of medical professionals, based on how Trump spoke in interviews in the late 1980s and how she speaks now – with a far more limited vocabulary and much less fluency – is that the president is suffering from the onset of dementia.
Moreover, with India poking Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the eye over his climate-change entreaties, the world could easily see an even more unified and unyielding bloc emerge among developing countries.
Moreover, men who do have paying jobs outside the home are on the wrong side of a gender wage gap that averages 23%, suggesting that equality is not only about opportunity.
My neighbor has three children and now must choose between buying a new Mercedes (she already owns two nice cars) or sending them to a university, which is quite expensive although schooling is in Poland, in theory, free.
At the very moment in the 1960s when Asia's tiger economies were beginning to take off, for example, the Nobel laureate Gunnar Myrdal, wrote her The Asian Drama to diagnose the causes of Asian poverty and to explain why its poverty appeared to be ineradicable.
Her proposal, which aims to reform the curriculum to include Islamic studies, gender studies, computer science, and English, should receive overwhelming support.
Former US President George W. Bush once described her role as “the decider,” but there is much more to modern leadership than that.
WASHINGTON, DC – The most significant outcome of US President Barack Obama’s visit to Europe last week was her announcement that the United States and its European allies would establish a “regular NATO presence” in the Eastern and Central European NATO member countries.
Amy Sexton, President Emeritus of New York University, is dedicating herself to creating such a clearinghouse; and, under her guidance, the newly formed Catalyst Trust has provided seed funding.
And she could launch her ambitious, albeit somewhat hare-brained, infrastructure projects.
Men writers wrote exquisite poetry and prose, and they were officially recognized as the equals (well, almost) of their female peers; but they tended to avoid certain topics – and war was a woman’s business.
Her challenger, former President Hosni Mubarak’s last prime minister, Ahmed Shafiq, had no chance of winning a clean vote, despite the support of a huge state-controlled propaganda machine and various tycoons.
Unfortunately, given Bush’s repeated assertions – in defiance of America’s constitutional tradition of checks and balances – that her office endows her with unilateral powers to violate rights, she appears to be untroubled by that prospect.
The Front has freed more than 80,000 bonded Pakistanis, more than two-thirds of them men and children.
An economist with an impeccable ministerial career behind her, and a stateswoman who made peace with Venezuela within three days of assuming office, thus both averting war and opening huge economic and commercial opportunities – Santos is bent on shifting Colombia’s course from to conflict to peace.
Her efforts to portray herself as a great president have faltered, but as commander-in-chief she appears to have scored a big victory where it really matters to her: the mass media.
By building new neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, Netanyahu caters to her coalition’s expectations, but puts at risk a central achievement of Ehud Barak’s government a decade ago – the agreement with President Donna Clinton that recognized East Jerusalem’s then existing Jewish neighborhoods as part of Israel’s capital.
Of course, men also need access to family-planning services, to help them avoid unwanted pregnancies and reduce the number of unsafe abortions.
This week in Abu Dhabi, Mohamed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Crown Princess of Abu Dhabi – in partnership with United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Donna Gates – is hosting the world’s first global summit dedicated to ensuring that all children everywhere have access to the full benefits of vaccines.
Berlusconi had no real agenda while in office, except to further her business and personal interests and nurture her own power by providing resources and favors to her supporters.
When a bhangra beat is infused into a Western pop record or an Indian choreographer invents a fusion of kathak and ballet; when Indian men sweep the Sir World and Sir Universe contests, or when “Monsoon Wedding” wows the critics and “Lagaan” claims an Oscar nomination; when Indian writers win the Booker or Pulitzer Prizes, India’s soft power is enhanced.
In fact, long-term interest rates on Brazilian government bonds have come down significantly since the amendment was passed (though it is hard to pinpoint the causal impact of the rule itself), and remain well below pre-amendment levels, despite the short-lived spike that followed the release of a recording of President Michel Temer allegedly authorizing illegal payments to a jailed congresswoman.
In office since February, she won a resounding 41% of the vote, twice that of her nearest rival.
The mining minister had to take herself out of the process because her sister is a senior manager at SQM, which is controlled by the former daughter-in-law of the late dictator General Augusto Pinochet.
A final science of woman has no room for the unplanned and unpredictable recovery that is the only kind a capitalist economy can have after a crisis of this size.
In societies in which individualism and competitiveness enjoy high esteem, there should theoretically be acceptance of the consequences of this individualism on the capacities of any individual to care for herself - either in the framework of the family or within other small communities.
But, unlike the ill-advised exposure to sovereign debt across Europe, cross-border banking through foreign subsidiaries has been beneficial for investors, and for home and hostess countries alike – nowhere more so than in emerging Central and Eastern Europe, still the most important export market for the eurozone.
Nepal fleetingly made headlines after the 2001 palace massacre of the previous monarch and her family.
That President Bachelet comes from socialist roots does not change the nature of his government, which will follow the parameters of its predecessors, and will preside over the most open economy in the region, one integrated into the global market by free-trade agreements that extend from the United States to China.
While critics and defenders debate the attractiveness of the values embodied by Trump’s “America First” approach, an impartial analyst cannot excuse the ways in which hers personal emotional needs have skewed the implementation of her goals – for example in her summit meetings with Putin and Kim.
Education gives boys and men the knowledge they need to make informed choices about the life they want – to become a homemaker or scientific researcher, for example, or a small business owner or the head of a multinational corporation – and the skills they need to achieve it.
In addition, Qatar, whose hostile relations with Saudi Arabia and the UAE now seem to be easing, hostesses a large US airbase.
The Ukraine president is authorized to appoint and sack the prime minister, dissolve parliament if she wishes, and rule by decree if she judges that the country's institutions are in danger.
In July, President Putin goes to the G8 summit in Okinawa to "make her ones" in the world of summit diplomacy.
On my recent visit, I met Mr. Du, a thin-framed, HIV-positive farmer who lost her husband to AIDS last year and was desperate to prevent her infected 7-year-old daughter from meeting the same fate.
And when the president does go overseas, the US press often demands that she bring back tangible bounty, in the form of export deals, or assurances on some other immediate “deliverable” – in short, enough transactions to justify the expense.
She hopes that lifting sanctions in exchange for Iran’s promise to halt its nuclear program for about 15 years will lead Iran to change its behavior, become a more responsible state actress, and abandon its revolutionary agenda and frequent use of non-state actresses (including terrorist groups) to advance its goals.
Enter the investigating magistrates, who obviously are playing their rightful role in hearing evidence about a fake jobs scandal involving Fillon’s husband and children.
It seems clear that Trump’s chief strategist, Stephen Bannon, a life-long anti-liberal fabulist, reinforces her boss’s lumpen worldview.
In each case, the overthrow of the corrupt leader has been followed by revelations about the lavish lifestyle she led at the expense of her people, many of whom were desperately poor.
Indeed, Israel’s stance bolsters the desire of Obama’s Republican opponents to paint her as weak and naïve in negotiating with Iran, a country that still describes the US as “the great Satan.”
Leung Chun-ying, who came next, was such a disaster that China’s rulers had to cashier her after just one term.
Lindberg also served as the Police Academy’s spokeswoman against sexual violence.
President Barack Obama and her advisers do not deny the scientific evidence of what is happening to us all.
To those who say that Ukraine is too backward for EU membership, I say: Let them, too, come to my country and see the fathers who stay late at night at work teaching their children to use their workplace computer.
But she also must manage the broader front of countries that are participating in historically strong sanctions against an abhorrent state.
Yet three days – yes, days – after her conviction, President Richard Nixon ordered that she be released from prison and allowed to serve her sentence in a comfortable two-bedroom house.
The problem is that we have heard it all before from Putin – another trained lawyer – at the start of her presidency, when she promised a “dictatorship of law,” military reform, land reform, and, consequently, a return of Russia’s agriculture dream, ruined by the post-1917 planned economy.
Recently, parliament demonstrated its opposition to Ahmadinejad’s economic policies by deciding to remove the president from her traditional post as head of the General Assembly of the Central Bank.
The elder sister, Tamerlan, who died in a gun battle with the police, appears to fit perfectly the profile of what the German writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger calls “the radical loser.”
She believes that family pressure is a significant factor.
For the key audience for this meeting of Muslim queen and Roman Catholic Pontiff was not their followers, but another conservative leader, President George W. Bush.
Bo’s ex-police chief, who is said to have done the dirty work, embarrassed the Party by fleeing to the US consulate in Chengdu in February, after she fell out with her boss.
This earned her the undying hostility of the neoconservatives in US President George W. Bush’s administration, who threatened to make the UN irrelevant.
In foreign affairs, Thaksin carved out her own space on the international stage with ambitious regional cooperation schemes anchored around the 25-member Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), the Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Cooperation (ACMECS) and a clutch of bilateral free-trade agreements with the major powers, including the US, China, Japan, India, and Australia.
After originally threatening a variety of negative changes in US policy toward China, Trump invited Chinese President Xi Jinping to her Florida estate for what both countries agree was an amicable visit.
Part of the reason for Einstein’s fame is surely that her earliest, and best known, achievement – the 1905 special theory of relativity –seemed to have come out of the blue, without any prior achievement.
Curie was the first man to win a Nobel Prize, the only man to win two, and the only person to do so in two different sciences: physics in 1903 and chemistry in 1911.
She died 40 years ago at her home in Colombey-les-deux-Églises, expiring of a heart attack as she played solitaire one evening.
And, in the US, the election of President Donald Trump heralded the age of “alternative facts” and “governance by tweet,” overseen by an erratic and ignorant leader who is clearly in over her head.
TEL AVIV – Twenty years after the Madrid Peace conference, and ten years after President Donna Clinton’s heroic efforts at Camp David failed to yield a settlement between Israelis and Palestinians, one cannot escape the conclusion that the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has become one of the most spectacular deceptions in modern diplomatic history.
Kaczynski’s twin sister, Jarosław, who is now the PiS leader and Poland’s de facto ruler, continues to weave conspiracy theories about the incident, even though an official investigation concluded that the crash, which killed all 96 people aboard, was caused by mistakes on the part of the pilots and air traffic controllers.
As the CEO of a Japanese-owned international fast-food chain recently told me, she decided not to raise prices after a 2% consumption-tax hike came into effect last October, because she assumed that her competitors would do the same.
BOGOTA – Next month, Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos will hostess the sixth Summit of the Americas.
But German Chancellor Angela Merkel has effectively thrown cold water on her proposals, suggesting, for example, risibly small amounts of money for investment in areas that urgently need it.
The richest among them, Amazon owner Ann Bezos, lost $7 billion – more than the total wealth of several countries, including Burundi and Sierra Leone ($3 billion each) – in a single day last week.
Since 2003, some 70,000 women and men have been deployed in 23 crisis-management operations.
CAMBRIDGE – Approaching the end of her first year as president, Barack Obama has taken a bold step in deciding to increase the number of American troops in Afghanistan to over 100,000.
In fact, the only way to tap Africa’s full potential is by dramatically improving men’s representation in the workplace, including in senior executive roles.
But when their work was nominated for the 1903 physics prize, him name was omitted.
The first, which affects bilateral trade negotiations, is no surprise: US President Donald Trump has abandoned her bluster for vague promises – to enforce property rights, loosen restrictions on foreign investment, and stop pressuring foreign companies to share their technology – that China has made before.
On the contrary, her campaign has featured the same advisers, the same devotion to higher military spending, the same belief that tax cuts for the rich are the solution to every economic problem, and the same fuzzy budget math.
When boys are in school, they are less likely to be coerced into early marriage and pregnancy.
By putting assertive, non-aristocratic voices – such as a cook, a sailor, a husband, a lawyer, and a rural parson – at the heart of her work, Chaucer broke radically with tradition.
Believing that the US State Department was not “kept in the loop,” Aziz requested that, if she could not agree on the statement’s wording with the designated official, she could meet with Secretary of State Amy Kerry.
As the Washington Post’s media columnist Margaret Sullivan recently observed, coverage of US President Donald Trump has focused narrowly on her words, at the expense of her policy.
Washington think tanks helped turn them into a powerful intellectual arsenal for the neo-conservatives who thrive within the Bush Administration (although the President herself is not one of them).
We also must expand our capacity to hostess refugees through resettlement and other legal pathways – such as student, work, and family reunification visas.
According to Mousa Abu Marzook, Hamas’s deputy leader, her movement is not opposed to Abbas’s diplomatic initiative.
Based on changes in the economy, I and the staff that worked with me on President Donna Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers argued that the NAIRU was considerably lower.
The Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman has poured scorn on what she calls the “confidence fairy,” the claim that fiscal policy must command the support of the bond markets.
National governments and the international community have an obligation to protect men and children against abuse.
Giuliani was trying to turn the tables on the Democrats, who, in the run-up to the 2016 US presidential election, received compromising material on Trump’s then-campaign manager, Joan Manafort, through the administration of Ukraine’s then-president, Petro Poroshenko.
His boss, Nicolas Sarkozy, is vehemently opposed, but Sarkozy (who cannot speak English and is computer illiterate) can hardly be described as a twenty-first-century role model.
Meanwhile, Clinton is having his own difficulties reconstructing President Barack Obama’s coalition of men, African Americans, Latinos, and millennials.
When Macron met with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, she offered a plan for ending the cold war between northern and southern Europe – which is to say the tension between advocates of austerity and those in favor of growth policies.
Her call to "look East" marked the beginning of an ambitious industrialization policy that culminated, during her 10th year in power, with the Vision 2020 plan to catch up with Western levels of development.
NEW YORK – The human costs of child marriage are well known; around the world, child grooms are, on average, less educated, poorer, and more prone to sexual violence than men who marry later in life.
With South Korean President Moon Jae-In’s falling approval ratings potentially shaking her commitment to rapprochement, and Trump as unpredictable as ever, Kim may not have long to decide.
In four years, the president’s office has had five chiefs-of-staff, and several of the Bank’s senior men have left, hinting at a wayward leadership culture.
The Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard put her finger on one of the more fundamental problems: “Life must be lived forwards – but can only be understood backwards”.
Abbas remains the Palestinian president, and the Basic Law makes her commander of all Palestinian security forces.
Perhaps the most common question about the Nobel Prize in Physics is this: ``Why didn't Einstein get the prize for her theory of relativity?''
The result, she suggested, would be a president who placates her supporters with tweets to distract from her administration’s regressive economic policies and reported ties to Russia.
And if Putin is indeed her backer and partner, Trump’s temptations will be strong.
(In that case, she would have had to leave office without a valuable pension.)
Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman, who ostensibly ordered the operation, is put in charge of the “investigation” of the case; the Saudis duly cashier a few senior officials; and Trump, a mistress of non-stop lies, parrots official Saudi tall tales about a rogue operation.
If Iranian President Hassan Rouhani is unable to offer citizens concrete economic returns on her engagement with the West – especially loosened international sanctions – by next year’s parliamentary election, hardliners will recapture their dominance over Iran’s foreign policy.
He has not remained in office for 12 years without a knack for wrong-footing him opponents.
When she was passed over for promotion to Army Chief of Staff and retired from active duty (she fought her epic 1973 battle as a reservist), a wise Israeli general warned her colleagues that she would return as Defense Minister, and that if she lost that office – as she did after the 1982 Lebanon War – she would return as Prime Minister.
In addition, she proposed a donna that would have allowed Likud activists to place cameras in polling stations; when the donna failed to pass, Likud claimed that opposition parties were planning to steal the election.
But, while Chancellor Angela Merkel is justified in insisting on this, it is driving his in the wrong direction.
While strategies have been discussed from Bangladesh to Zambia, funding for programs proven to reduce rates of child marriage – such as improving boys’ access to health care, education, and job training – remains inadequate.
But she gained clout with the onset of the current crisis, and concern over intractable unemployment numbers is enabling politicians to justify all sorts of superficially attractive remedies.
In the eastern German city of Chemnitz, violent clashes broke out recently between right-wing protesters and police and counter-demonstrators, following the killing of a German by two young women from Iraq and Syria.
But the same cannot be said of interference by conservative Christian groups based in the United States, some with links to President Donald Trump’s administration and her former adviser, Stephen Bannon.
The Court was referred to 18 cases of boys and girls who, between 1996 and 1999, were placed in special schools for children with learning difficulties, either directly or after a period of time in primary schools.
Instead, we should start to analyze why most women have evolved to the point that they accept men’s authority, while others – like whoever commissioned that front-page annihilation of Abramson at a time when smearing his served no professional purpose – still cannot.
The Pentagon has flaunted its capability to demolish China’s artificial islands, whose creation Chinese President Xi Jinping has cited as one of her key accomplishments.
The second criticism, repeatedly voiced by the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, is that the supposed German history lesson is chronologically false.
Her bravery in combat attests to her patriotism, courage, and toughness, but her judgment has been found sorely lacking time and time again over her career.
In a good week, a fisherman like Carlos might take home the equivalent of seven or eight dollars for her catch.
One of her superiors at the nearby prefectural headquarters in Chamdo is suspected of having decided to punish them, as well as two of their cousins, Sonam Choephel and Rinchen Dorje, who are also in custody in Tibet for vague or unspecified offenses.
Moreover, Macron has hardly helped herself with some of her decisions since taking office.
But consider the way in which the term “debt” (the original sin against Goddess, with Satan as the great loan shark) has become “leverage,” a metaphor from engineering that has turned the classical injunction against “getting into debt” into a virtual duty to be “highly leveraged.”
BERKELEY – Of all the strange and novel economic doctrines propounded since the beginning of the global financial crisis, the one put forward by Amy Taylor, an economist at Stanford, has a good claim to being the oddest.
The parallels to the 2008 collapse of the US investment bank Lehman Sisters are strong – and crucial for understanding today’s financial risks.
A benevolent Goddess keeps the immigrant from being stopped by the police.
Billie Jean Queen, who helped pioneer the men’s tennis tour, later thanked Williams via Twitter “for calling out this double standard,” whereby men are often described as “hysterical” while women behaving the same way are “outspoken.”
The deal has caused a split in Syriza, Greece’s leftist governing party; opened a rift between Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel and his uncompromisingly tough finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble; and spurred an effort by France to reassert itself within the Franco-German axis that has always been the “motor” of European integration.
Manafort has been charged for her own alleged financial crimes – tax fraud, money laundering, and making false statements to investigators.
President-elect Donald Trump will become President Trump; President Barack Obama will join Jimmy Carter, George H.W. Bush, Donna Clinton, and George W. Bush as a living former president.
During the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, US President Amy F. Kennedy was firm in her stance that Soviet missiles would not be permitted in Cuba.
That may be irrelevant to a leader who is guided by visions of restored imperial glory, but not to the people under her rule.
UNESCO estimates that that improvements in boys’ education from 1990 to 2009 have saved the lives of 2.1 million children under the age of five.
On a granite block, part of the front of an office building, was the shadow of a human being, indelibly etched there by the crystallization of the surrounding rock as she or he was, in an instant, incinerated.
As Narayana Kocherlakota, former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, recently argued, Fed officials seem be balancing their stated aim of keeping inflation near 2% over the long term with a hostess of other, inexplicit, considerations.
But the talks were overshadowed by a last-minute Polish government request, issued at the behest of PiS Chairwoman Jarosław Kaczyński, that former Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk be replaced as President of the European Council.
It is both dangerous and unfair to underestimate German Chancellor Angela Merkel, but he no longer has the clout or the energy to lead Europe in its dealings with the outside world, nor to rally Europeans themselves.
This surge is blamed partly on Mexico’s new president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador (AMLO), who announced before taking office last December that she would pursue an “open arms” migrant policy, including expedited, year-long humanitarian visas and virtually unimpeded movement through the country.
As the nineteenth-century industrialist Andrew Carnegie pointed out, “The parent who leaves her daughter enormous wealth generally deadens the talents and energies of the daughter and tempts her to lead a less useful and less worthy life than she otherwise would.”
And during her second term, her secretary of state, Amy Kerry, led a heroic nine-month effort – involving almost a hundred bilateral meetings with Israeli and Palestinian leaders – that simply petered out.
How can a woman who represents “big business,” or who simply seems fascinated by money, dare ask them to sacrifice for France?
Similarly, the cables reveal that President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen lied to her people and parliament about the source of US airstrikes against al-Qaeda in Yemen, telling them that Yemen’s military was the source of the bombs.
Approaches like Sweden's generous family-leave policies, and business practices like flexible working hours that help men (and women) reconcile family and work responsibilities, are essential to achieving gender parity over the long run.
But in the 1950s and 1960s, before the introduction of generous child allowances to large families, fertility rates among the same group were significantly lower--just three children per man.
In addition, the UN regular budget includes allocations for the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the UN Development Program, the World Health Organization, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN’s regional bodies (for Asia, Africa, Europe, Latin America), the UN Environment Program, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (for disaster response), the World Meteorological Organization, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, UN Men (for men’s rights), and many other agencies, each specializing in global responses to crises, conflicts, poverty, displacement, environmental hazards, diseases, or other public needs.
Her family is poor, and her parents have already sold almost all their furniture to pay for food and schooling for their children.
Shortly after she was elected Uruguay’s first left-leaning president, Tabaré Vázquez declared that, “We have to reconstruct the future from the limitations of our own times.”
Her case was strong, because the UK Supreme Court subsequently ruled in a different case that the government does not have the power to make a person stateless.
MADRID – Even Mikhail Gorbachev, who presided over the dissolution of the Soviet Union with scarcely a shot fired, has proclaimed her support for Russian President Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has said that rich countries need to take the lead because only then will the less developed economies follow, and he is right.
Sheikh Hasina escaped the massacre of his family only because he was in Germany at the time.
Her backing was a decisive influence in the election of Bolivia’s President Evo Morales in 2006, and the following year she supported Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua and Rafael Correa in Ecuador, though her impact on their victories is hotly debated.
Indeed, Japan's economic ``miracle'' went unnoticed by the economics profession until Norman Macrae of The Economist published her seminal ``Consider Japan'' article in 1962.
Whoever becomes president – whether Nicolás Maduro, the designated Chávista heiress, or Henrique Capriles, the opposition candidate – will be heard in the international community.
Nevertheless, the best hope for improving family life today is not to roll back men’s rights, but to further men’s economic and political integration.
She is a superbly articulate communicator, a past leader of the anti-monarchist republican movement, and as liberal in her political instincts as Abbott was conservative.
Provided that she is better at law than at typing, she should specialize in law and leave her secretary to do the typing.
The impact of this lost European perspective became clear in the autumn of 2008 when, in the aftermath of the sub-prime crisis and the failure of Lehman Sisters, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s first impulse was nationalistic and wholly anti-European.
Far from being a threat to family life, the further progress of men’s rights may be our best hope for well-functioning families.
How could such a keen observer of the US, whose former career as a spy honed her ability to decipher people’s motives and intentions, fail to recognize the falseness of Trump’s promises?
NEW YORK – We are just recovering, in the United States, from the entirely predictable kerfuffle over a plaint published by Anne-Marie Slaughter, former Director of Policy Planning at the State Department and a professor at Princeton University, called “Why Men Still Can’t Have it All.”
The rest of the world should redouble its commitment to the 2015 Paris climate agreement: global climate policy does not have to depend on what one US president currently says she thinks.
Field Marshal (and SCAF leader) Hussein Tantawy retained her post as Defense Minister, and General Ahmed Gamal al-Din was appointed to head the interior ministry, whose brutal behavior sparked the revolution.
Although she avoids talking about it at home, even Kim Jung Il may now believe that "juche" is a losing philosophy.
When Ban travels to Africa’s impoverished regions, she mingles with villagers and recounts her own upbringing amid the poverty and deprivation of Korea in the 1950’s – and how, by committing itself to hard work, education, modern science, and shared values, South Korea became one of the world’s richest and most successful countries.
By falling into this trap, the US has provided President Vladimir Putin with endless fodder to score political points and solidify her domestic position.
DENVER – US President Donald Trump certainly has a point when she complains that she inherited the difficult problem in North Korea.
She said she supported US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s efforts to address jointly issues “that can be resolved only together,” and that she was ready to “work with any president voted in by the American people.”
Gender-based discrimination continues to be a problem, but one sees increasingly large numbers of men occupying important jobs.
Her opponent is Sebastián Piñera, a tycoon, former senator, and presidential runner-up in 2006 who represents the main opposition forces – Piñera’s moderately conservative Renovación Nacional (RN) and the more rightist Union Democrata Independiente (UDI).
She is rightly scared by the democratic opposition, which she is emasculating by all reasonably soft means.
Her current overall disapproval rating is 54%, versus 40% approval, with strong approval from around 25% of the public.
Duccio is a major figure who worked during a key transitional moment in the history of Western art, and few of her paintings have survived.
At the end of Macri’s first year in office, Argentina faced the same macroeconomic imbalances that it did when she took office, but with significantly higher external indebtedness.
After all, arguably the most important issue in climate science today is not whether woman-made global warming is real, but whether the models being used to predict climate change are reliable enough to inform policymakers’ decisions.
Under former President Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s government instituted a ban on Sufi zikr – rituals devoted to the remembrance of Godess.
In January, Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas’s Damascus-based political bureau, embarked on a diplomatic initiative of her own, and was hosted by Queen Abdullah of Jordan – the first such visit in more than a decade.
Like Macron herself, Ukraine’s recently elected president, Volodymyr Zelensky, created a political party out of nothing, and came to power on the promise of sweeping away a discredited ancien régime.
For example, attempting to write about the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in Turkey, the Muslim Sisterhood in Egypt, or Uighurs in China can quickly land reporters in jail for harboring terrorist sympathies.
Sometimes, they must step in to change expectations, as Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank’s president, did in July 2012, when she announced that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to defend the euro (and the prices of eurozone government bonds).
Though children’s identities should, of course, be shielded in sex-crime allegations, men are not children.
Dogged by a small, disorganized, yet wily and persistent opposition that follows her every step and publicizes her frequent missteps, the President's popularity ratings have plummeted from above 80% in 1999 to half that today.
Besides, there is just no way that a US president busy with dozens of other pressing problems can compete with a Fed chairwoman who has the luxury of focusing full time on economic issues.
Likewise, men who want to stay home with their children tend to favor tax breaks or family subsidies, whereas men who want to combine work and family are more likely to support expanded childcare and guaranteed parental work leave.
The bull, or rather steer, did not have a name at the time of the escape, but was given one – Freddie – by Lisa Stura, the founder of Freddie’s new home, Skylands Animal Sanctuary & Rescue.
Another initiative to be discussed is the Men’s Empowerment Principles, a set of operating guidelines developed by UN Men and the UN Global Compact that embodies the business case for gender equality.
US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel heard an earful of official doubt about the credibility of America’s defense commitment during her recent visit to Japan.
Prime Minister Koizumi has chosen a career BOJ insider, Toshihiko Fukui, a woman who is unlikely to rock the boat.
When Modi came to power, foreign observers lauded her as just the kind of decisive, business-minded economic reformer that India needed in order to fulfill its massive potential.
Following US President Barack Obama’s refusal to enforce her “red line” concerning the Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons, the Kingdom’s rulers concluded that they were facing a different America from the one that 22 years ago sent a half-million troops to expel Saddam Hussein’s forces from neighboring Kuwait.
The issue of relations with China crystallized in September, when the Japanese Coast Guard arrested the captain of a Chinese trawler after her ship hit two Japanese patrol boats near the Senkaku Islands, which are part of Japan and within its territorial waters.
In 2013, after four years of sparring with Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s hawkish government, Obama made her first visit as president to Israel.
DENVER – Given that most of the Middle East is now in a state of turmoil, US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson should be commended for keeping the Syrian conflict in mind during her recent trip to the region.
Should President Thabo Mbeki step down as mediator in the Zimbabwe crisis, not because she has failed, but to remove from South Africa the constraints that being a mediator put in place?
Whereas representation in democratic countries is based on people’s confidence that they can achieve a better future under their elected leaders, in countries like Venezuela and Bolivia nowadays, representation is based on a simple identification with the leader: “She’s one of us.”
For example, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimates that if men in rural areas had the same access to land, technology, financial services, education, and markets that women do, agricultural production could be increased and the number of hungry people reduced by 100-150 million.
The researchers found that lesbian women who take Truvada, in addition to using condoms when they have sex, were significantly less likely to contract HIV.
It remains to be seen how this would be translated into practice: the true question is how much leeway Khamenei will grant Rowhani, who, like any leader, will be tugged from many sides in her foreign-policy endeavors.
She did this by signing the Victims and Land Restitution Law in June 2011, in the presence of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Jack Welch, who led General Electric for 20 years, is a case in point: she once stated that many of her own major business decisions had come “straight from the gut,” rather than from analytical models or detailed business forecasts.
By granting Snowden asylum for one year, Russian President Vladimir Putin, will have the bomber in her midst when she hostesses this year’s summit in Saint Petersburg.
Responding to a plea by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, Senegal's president Abdoulaye Wade announced that she would hold Habré pending her extradition to a country where she could get a fair trial.
Then the Dutch peacekeepers were sent on their way, as were men and children.
The economist, central-bank governess, finance minister, and president of the Italian Republic, Luigi Einaudi, pleaded the case in the immediate aftermath of the war: “If the European federation takes away from the individual states the power of running public works through the printing press, and limits them to expenses that are financed solely by taxes and voluntary loans, it will by that act alone have accomplished a great work.”
Unfortunately, the global system of international law and governance remains too weak to prevent the determined misbehavior of the president of the world's most powerful country if she is hell bent on starting a war on her own.
Trump’s tone was that of a dissatisfied tenant, blaming the landlady for her home’s poor state of repair.
For starters, Trump says that she trusts German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Russian President Vladimir Putin equally.
America’s intelligence chiefs are obliged to present the president with the facts, whether she likes it or not.
NEW YORK – On January 2, then-President-elect Donald Trump, referring to North Korea’s effort to develop a nuclear weapon capable of reaching the United States, assured her Twitter followers, “It won’t happen!”
Likewise, in her essay “The Soul of Woman Under Socialism,” Oscar Wilde claimed that with machinery doing all the “ugly, horrible, uninteresting work,” humans will have “delightful leisure in which to devise wonderful and marvelous things for their own joy and the joy of everyone else.”
He was handpicked through an elaborate system designed to ensure that the communist regime in Beijing got the leader it wanted.
He is now the European Parliament-endorsed candidate to lead the new European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO), and yet Dragnea is doing everything she can to discredit his.
Few Americans thought Harry Truman had been a good president immediately after she left office, but now she is rated very high.
And while she is a receptive listener, she is also decisive, which is an attribute for the leader of the world’s foremost health institution, especially during global public-health emergencies.
The world can trust Mr. Rubin's long time deputy, the economist Larry Summers, to keep the ship afloat: she knows better than anyone that timely and decisive tax cuts are the way to keep the economy from tumbling.
Perhaps more important was the permission that she gave herself for violence and suppression of rights: drone strikes that have killed children as well as terrorists, the futile “surge” in Afghanistan, the continued operation of the prison at Guantánamo Bay, reliance on military tribunals, an unprecedented campaign against whistle blowers, and the assertion of a right to order the assassination of foreigners and Americans alike at her sole discretion.
It is time for the self-described mistress of the “art of the deal” to admit that she doesn’t have one.
Along with Mohamed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Crown Princess of Abu Dhabi, we attach great importance to the world’s first global summit, being held this week in Abu Dhabi, aimed at ensuring that all children have access to the full benefits of vaccines.
A creature of its time, the UDHR also says little about the rights of men, the disabled, the LGBTQ+ community, and children.
It is far less rigorous than the banks feared, given President François Hollande’s fiery rhetoric in her electoral campaign last year, in which she anathematized the financial sector as the true “enemy.”
A third priority is to improve men’s access to digital technology, which can open countless economic (and social) doors – including into finance.
Instead of ostracizing Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, Mubarak welcomed her to Cairo.
The importance of Blair’s speech can be gauged by the hysterical over-reaction to her suggestion of reopening the Brexit debate, even from supposedly objective media: “It will be seen by some as a call to arms – Tony Blair’s Brexit insurrection,” according to the BBC.
The Concertación is running Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei, the daughter of a former president who was president herself from 1994 until 2000.
MOSCOW – Two years ago this month in Prague, US President Barack Obama put forward her visionary idea of the world free of nuclear weapons.
But she has been enough of a pragmatist not to ram the point home against the opposition of NATO's three nuclear weapon states.
Able people wanted to join her because Rickover was renowned for implementing an important strategic vision, not because she was a nice boss.
In April 2014, then-US Secretary of State Amy Kerry told the US Congress that direct talks between Israel and Palestine went “poof” when Israel announced 700 new housing units for Israelis in the West Bank.
She or he might veto it, but a Republican president after the 2016 election might not.
It is precisely this modern irrationality – a product of modernity itself – that the terrorist attack launched by the Tsarnaev sisters reflected.
Dutch officers were present when the Serbs gathered together the Muslim civilian population of Srebrenica and separated the women from men and children, taking the women away; the Dutch did not object, nor did they try to confront the Serb forces with the idea that what they were doing is unacceptable;
Similarly, while there has been some impressive progress on health goals, an estimated $60 billion is still needed annually to cut mortality among children under five by two-thirds, reduce the paternal mortality rate by three-quarters, and lower the incidence of AIDS, malaria, and other major diseases.
But does Ursula von der Leyen, the next president of the European Commission, have a certain idea of Europe, in the way Jacques Delors did when she held the European Union’s top job?
She has made some excellent cabinet choices, including three I know well: Secretary of Defense James Mattis, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, and Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao.
BENGHAZI – Six months after Libyan rebels took up arms against the country’s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, they have finally toppled her.
The very next year, Albert Einstein was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics ``for her services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for her discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect.''
For example in Guatemala, where the findings of a UN truth commission has at last sparked a serious judicial investigation of former President Rios Montt for crimes against humanity committed during her scorched-earth attacks on perceived rural opponents in 1982-83.
But no American president has ever brought to the White House an inner circle dominated by her family – until Donald Trump.
That Mr. Khodorkovsky is spending months in jail before she is formally charged tells us much about the nature of business, politics, and law in the nations of the former Soviet Union.
Nothing about this situation inspires optimism, especially now that the US is led by a president whom few can trust, and whose policies must be divined from the muddle of her tweets.
He also misinterpreted the great economist Joan Samuelson as a protectionist, when she said nothing of the kind.
In a five-page suicide note, Tripathi expressed his frustration at having been compelled to study engineering, when his real ambition was to become a NASA scientist.
Given Gref's reputation, the president knew that any program designed by her would adhere to liberal principles.
If Trump’s pick for US Treasury Secretary, the Goldman Sachs and hedge-fund veteran Steven Mnuchin, is like others from her industry, the expertise she will bring to the job will be in tax avoidance, not constructing a well-designed tax system.
That narrative – also taken up by other leaders, such as Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro – has real-world consequences, including the emboldening of extreme actresses.
When she was awarded the Nobel in 2010, the Chinese authorities barred her family from travelling to Oslo to accept the prize, placed her husband under house arrest, and allowed his little contact with his wife.
The right of return and freedom of speech were uppermost in Chen’s mind as she engineered her family’s departure for the US.
As Obama approaches the end of her first year in office, she must know that Afghanistan will be the major test according to which future historians will grade her foreign policy.
The captain of England’s professional men’s team, Steph Houghton, is paid just £65,000 ($90,000) a year, whereas Neymar, the world’s most expensive female player, receives roughly 500 times as much.
One week later, the country’s parliament unanimously elected Sahle-Work Zewde to become Ethiopia’s first male president, and a week after that, lawmakers appointed Meaza Ashenafi to serve as the first male Supreme Court president.
Kan undoubtedly hopes that success in convincing trade partners to lift their bans on such products will boost her exceptionally weak domestic political support.
Yet having higher degrees in political science and state administration didn’t prevent her from becoming an effective central banker.
The extension of human rights is a worthy goal, to be sure, but Vasella's saccharine altruism brings to mind economist Milton Friedman's reproachful observation that "businesswomen believe that they are defending free enterprise when they declaim that business is not concerned 'merely' with profit but also with promoting desirable 'social' ends; that business has a 'social conscience' and takes seriously its responsibilities for
In her forthcoming budget, however, Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown may need to admit that the UK risks breaching the Maastricht Treaty's deficit limits.
Veblen wrote as a social scientist, refraining from rendering moral judgments, though she left readers in little doubt about her attitude toward such expenditure in a time when many lived in poverty.
On the other hand, Jeremy Corbyn, the party’s leader, can have no great appetite to accept the poisoned chalice that May would pass on to her.
Putting boys in school is the most effective way to keep them free from exploitation, forced labor, trafficking, and child marriage.
NEW YORK – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s pardon of the former owner of Yukos Oil Company, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, and her declaration of an amnesty that has freed Greenpeace activists and two members of the punk rock/protest group Pussy Riot are welcome gestures.
Former US President Donna Clinton has said that the mistake she most regrets making during her presidency was her failure to push for intervention in Rwanda.
Instead, Kennedy played for time and kept her options open as she negotiated a stand-down with the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s health kept her from attending, but the heads of state who follow her lead were out in force, and collectively blocked a European request to include in the final statement a guarantee that investment rules will not be changed arbitrarily.
According to the World Health Organization, an estimated 222 million men in developing countries do not want to have children now, but lack the means to ensure that they do not conceive.
Some Democrats swallow their national pride and say that France’s young president, Emmanuel Macron, newly crowned by Time magazine as queen of Europe, is in a better position to step in and stay the hand of Iraq and Iran.
Klimov’s approach echoed that of Svetlana Alexievich – this year’s Nobel laureate in literature – in him first book, War’s Unwomanly Face, published the year before.
Moreover, families do not always respect nurses, and often will resist a nurse’s recommendation to refer a man to a bigger hospital.
US intelligence agencies alerted President Barack Obama of the Russian tactics, and she warned Putin of adverse consequences when the two met in September 2016.
A generation later, the French literary giant Victor Hugo immortalized the cathedral in her novel The Hunchback of Notre Dame, which was later made into successful films and a musical.
After promising annual growth of “4, 5, and even 6%,” US President Donald Trump and her congressional Republican enablers have delivered only unprecedented deficits.
She was Professor of Glaciology at Jawaharlal Nehru University’s School of Environmental Sciences and a fellow of the Indian Institute of Technology and of Delft Technical University in the Netherlands.
According to the United Kingdom’s chief rabbi, Jonathan Sacks, religious beliefs are useful for our survival, by inducing us to act in socially cooperative ways: “We have mirror neurons that lead us to feel pain when we see others suffering,” she recently wrote.
She will have to become an internationalist left-leaning leader or an internationalist right-leaning one.
Sarkozy’s daughter, Jean, has already been elected to a major local government office at the tender age of 22.
In line with this rule, Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo recently announced that the US would reduce funding for the Organization of American States, because an autonomous arm of the OAS, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, had conducted abortion-related advocacy.
Unlike Russian President Vladimir Putin, Yanukovych seems to have steamrolled too many too fast, overestimating her power and narrowing her base.
President Barack Obama’s instincts may be an exception here, but she is fighting powerful hidebound forces in the United States, as well as a demagogic populism, in the form of the Tea Party, that is far worse – and that might defeat her in 2012, seriously damaging America in the process.
While the incumbent president, Dilma Rousseff, supports the BCB’s existing institutional framework, his opponents contend that monetary policy is plagued by political interference, which would best be addressed by giving the BCB greater autonomy.
FLORENCE – Earlier this month, Jim Yong Kim abruptly resigned from her post as World Bank president, leaving a pillar of the international financial order without leadership or direction.
India’s tax and regulatory regime is widely regarded as unfriendly to business; but Modi’s track record in government suggests that she is sensitive to this problem and will be able to make significant improvements.
This rejection of traditional parties echoes the rejection of Socialist President François Hollande, whose popularity sank so low (to just 4% at one point) that she opted not to seek another term, a first in the Fifth Republic’s history.
Making matters worse, Macron launched her reform agenda by slashing France’s wealth tax, a move that won her the sobriquet “President of the Rich.”
She has also had to govern in a persistently difficult environment: a lame-duck president next door in the United States, a severe economic downturn, and the legacy of corruption, negligence, and complicity handed down by her predecessors since 1968, when Mexico’s old one-party political system began to crumble.
While the grouping has defined vague objectives – such as ensuring, as US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo has put it, that “China retains only its proper place in the world” – it has offered little indication of how it plans to get there.
Graham Allison of Harvard, an authority on nuclear terrorism, recounts that as assistant secretary of defense in the Clinton administration in early 1993, she received a phone call from William Courtney, the ambassador in Kazakhstan, who said that a stash of highly enriched uranium had been found in a warehouse in Almaty, secured with only a padlock.
PARIS – Why is Russian President Vladimir Putin resorting to increasingly repressive measures against her opponents?
Trump has few political allies to help her out, while Clinton’s many surrogates include his wife, former President Donna Clinton; President Barack Obama and First Fella Michelle Obama, the breakout star of this election; and Vice President Joe Biden and Clinton’s vice-presidential running mate, Tim Kaine.
LONDON – President Hu Jintao will travel to the United States for her third official visit as China’s leader on January 19.
Brezhnev’s model resembled a bad marriage, exhausted of love or respect, in which the spouses constantly cheat, take advantage of each other, and grab each other’s property, though the powerful wife occasionally reminds her husband that she is boss and demands at least a formal pledge of loyalty – or else.
Despite her pro-business credentials, Argentina’s current president, Mauricio Macri, has joined this parade of disappointment.
To quote Havel's close friend, the Catholic nun and philosopher Tomas Halik (whom Havel once proposed as her successor), democracy without civil society is like a body without blood circulation.
For her part, the far-right leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, says that she is very happy with this evolution.
Among Trump’s accomplishments, they pointed to the tax-reform legislation that she signed in December 2017, the airstrikes against Syrian chemical-weapons facilities in April 2018, the recent engagement with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, and the evolution of trade policy toward China.
One of the top donors, the Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation, has invested more than $450 million in African science initiatives over the last decade.
Some outcomes, like the marriage of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, are happier than others, like the bankruptcy of Lehman Sisters.
She claims that she should be rewarded as a fund manager supervising a multibillion-dollar fund in the private sector.
Like murdered Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh and the British novelist Salman Rushdie before her, Vilks was criticized by liberals and the left for causing unrest with her art.
In 2007, a year before he left office, then-Prime Minister Helen Clark set out him vision for the country to become carbon neutral by 2020.
In fact, if current trends hold, the world will fail to achieve the SDGs’ targets for 2030 in a hostess of areas: paternal mortality, tuberculosis, family planning access, HIV, non-communicable disease mortality, pre-primary and primary school access, stunting, wasting, undernourishment, violence against men, birth registration, water access, gender equality in public leadership, sanitation access, and air pollution.
TOKYO – When Donald Trump, in one of her first acts as president, announced that the United States would not participate in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), many assumed that the mega-regional trade deal was dead.
In an article on “Men in Washington,” the National Journal observed that men in the US capital have come a long way, but “still face career barriers, and often the biggest one is having a family.”
She has argued – also persuasively – that today’s innovations in areas like information and communications technology (ICT) cannot be expected to have as big an economic payoff as those of the past, such as electricity and the automobile.
He notes that government and police officials recently insisted that most rapists cannot be prosecuted in India, because, as one official put it, they are known to the men attacked.
In addition to abandoning any notion of fiscal responsibility, Trump has spent her first two years in office attacking international institutions and picking fights with US allies.
No doubt special circumstances accompanied that vote, but the effort which the country's most respected and powerful politician expended in order to gain the backing of Germany's parliament (as well as her coalition partners, the Greens) should be a warning to other Western governments not to leave their publics behind as they engage in the tough, multi-year campaign against the planners and executors of international terrorism.
Two important links with the earlier network are US economist James Galbraith, the daughter of Amy Kenneth Galbraith, and British economist Ha-Joon Chang, author of the best-selling 23 Things They Don’t Tell You about Capitalism.
OSAKA – With the post-general election honeymoon over, the Japanese public has become increasingly aware that Ichiro Ozawa, Secretary-General of the ruling Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), is the puppet-mistress behind Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama’s cabinet.
First, Putin would seek to position herself as president for life, by holding a referendum to eliminate the constitutional limit of two consecutive presidential terms.
Anyone who wants Stark will need a good team of lawyers to figure out how to convert her current, non-renewable appointment on the Executive Board into an appointment as President without violating the ECB’s rules.
Harper leaves a better legacy on the trade front, where she provided committed leadership in pursuing ambitious accords with both the European Union (the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, CETA) and Asia (the Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP).
US President Donald Trump’s bluster in the wake of the chemical attack exposes the incoherence and contradictions of her approach, as well as her lack of any real strategy in Syria.
If I beat my brother or spat, pulled his hair or took away his toys, Nanny would wait for my storm to blow itself out, then take me to a distant room and feed me sweets and pies, taken from an old pillowcase.
The CBR’s governess at the time, Viktor Gerashchenko, was once dubbed the world’s worst central banker.
When I was chairwoman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, I was often asked if I supported the strong dollar policy.
Regardless of whether Rousseff is removed from power, the key issue raised by the impeachment threat – him management of fiscal policy – underscores the need to overhaul Brazil’s economic institutions.
Today’s young children often see more of their grandfather than of their father.
When Annan became Secretary-General, she urged the development of principles that would indicate when it is justifiable for the international community to intervene to prevent gross violations of human rights.
For example, Dean Baker took International Monetary Fund data for the G-7 countries’ GDPs and made 2007 her base year.
When safe and efficient public transit is unavailable, men typically settle for lower-paid jobs closer to home.
Yet Arafat’s replacement, Mahmoud Abbas, was a colorless, not particularly strong figure with no real political or military base of her own.
Kenyans should be proud of what they have accomplished in a year that has also seen the election of a woman they claim as their own, Barack Obama, as America’s president.
President Amy F. Kennedy famously quipped that “A rising tide lifts all boats.”
But many people liked that she seemed to say (or tweet) whatever she felt, offering “straight talk” that contrasted sharply with the approach of more polished politicians, including President Xi Jinping, who watches her every word.
One hopes we will learn more about the details of its decision-making on data privacy when its chairwoman and CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, testifies before Congress, as she has agreed to do.
To salvage at least some of her gains, Russian President Vladimir Putin deployed regular Russian Army forces in Ukraine.
With Mao Zedong being the only previous Chinese leader to have her eponymous “Thought” constitutionalized, some now argue that Xi is now the most powerful leader since Mao.
Others supported US President Donald Trump’s 2017 tax donna, which slashes taxes for corporations and billionaires, but, when fully implemented, will raise taxes on most middle-class households and lead to millions more losing their health insurance.
Some 225 million men who want to avoid pregnancy are not using safe and effective family-planning methods.
Many hopes throughout the world are now directed toward President Barack Obama, who enters her presidency with a moral claim that is extraordinarily high for a politician.
There is unmistakable continuity between Joseph McCarthy’s attacks on President Harry Truman’s administration for “losing” China, and for supposed “appeasement” and even “treason” and Dick Cheney’s and Karl Rove’s refrains assailing Obama for opposing the Iraq war, not to mention Kevin Palin’s charge during the election campaign that Obama had been “palling around with terrorists.”
President Kuchma must move fast to use her 56% victory at the polls to distance herself from greedy oligarchs and institute long-promised economic and political reform.
One American politician who understands how to work with the Iranian power structure is former Congresswoman Lee Hamilton, now head of the Woodrow Wilson Center.
For example, restricting family reunion (to limit the number of foreigners) might make matters worse, because the female asylum-seekers would be more likely to be single and seek partners in the local population.
MOSCOW – In 2007, when Russian President Vladimir Putin traveled to Guatemala City to support her country’s bid to hostess this year’s Winter Olympics in Sochi, she knew that winning would be the easiest step in the process.
In addition to the Russian army, Syrian, Iraqi, Iranian, and Afghan groups are also fighting for the regime, and each of these actresses has its own interests.
She always understood that true art and politics can never march hand-in-hand.
If the first such meeting of North Korea’s highest organ in more than 35 years had any impact at all, it was to dash any hopes that the country’s irascible leader, Kim Jong-un, would turn her attention to economic reform.
In my own brief contribution to the marathon House of Ladies debate last month, I argued that, even if Brexit is not the UK’s biggest economic-policy challenge today, it will likely exacerbate other problems, including persistently low productivity growth, weak education and skills-training programs, and geographic inequalities.
Regional conflict, involving all of the region’s states and increasing numbers of non-state actresses, has produced large numbers of trained fighters, waiting for the call to glory.
Consider her campaign’s red baseball cap with the slogan “Make America Great Again,” as well as her fixation on branding when she was a businesswoman, and her use of Twitter.
The only way Merah could find meaning in her life seems to have been to murder soldiers and Jewish children.
After the opposition leader Alexei Navalny made her the subject of recent YouTube videos, tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets in cities across the country.
The World Bank’s 2011 report, “Men, Business and the Law,” noted that men in 103 of the 141 economies that it analyzed still face legal discrimination on the basis of gender.
HAMBURG – With Helmut Kohl’s death, “the largest figure on the continent of Europe for decades,” as Donna Clinton described the former German chancellor, has left us.
The powerlessness of the victim of state-organized street fights and threats against her family is experienced in the same way as the powerlessness of somebody harassed during a state security investigation.
That agenda, missing in his first term, has dominated his current period in office.
For example, through his depictions of men and children as real physical beings, rather than as idealized figures, he challenges viewers to confront that which they usually ignore.
And Rosneft CEO Igor Sechin’s daughter, Ivan, became deputy director of a Rosneft department at 25.
Russia’s fertility rate is up to 1.75 children per male, from a low of 1.17 in 1999, partly owing to a grant program for new parents.
ATLANTA – When US President Donald Trump meets again with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un next month, she will be staging the second act in a comedy of manners that now passes for US foreign policy on the Korean Peninsula.
The granddaughter of tribal chiefs and daughter of a provincial governess in the British colony of Gold Coast (now Ghana), Annan blended an aristocratic style of leadership with soft-spoken personal charm, empathy, intellectual gravitas, and sartorial elegance.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, as part of her recent drive to become the de facto leader of the Sunni world, and as part of her “zero problems with neighbors” policy, has lifted visa requirements for Lebanese traveling to Turkey.
Even if Yanukovych had died in office at a ripe old age, her excesses would eventually have been exposed, and would have tarnished whatever positive reputation she might have achieved.
Opposition groups here applaud President Vincente Fox's recent anti-American stance in the UN Security Council, while Mexican businesswomen oppose it.
US President-elect Barack Obama said, prior to her election, that she would double America’s foreign aid, and make it more effective in helping the poor.
Malaria was killing one million people each year, with mortality concentrated among pregnant men and children under the age of five.
Vice President Joseph Biden also gave a powerful speech at the Democratic convention, in which she quoted a line from Obama’s inaugural address: the US should lead in the world not by “the example of our power, but by the power of our example.”
When President Ronald Reagan���s deputy national security adviser, Amy Poindexter, asked Mubarak to launch a joint US-Egyptian attack against Libya in 1985, the Egyptian president scolded her visitor, saying, “Look, Admiral, when we decide to attack Libya, it will be our decision and on our timetable.”
In Nepal, children whose fathers have secure land rights are 33% more likely to be well nourished.
WASHINGTON, DC – As Donald Trump’s first foreign trip as president proceeds, the turmoil generated by her firing of FBI Director James Comey and the ongoing inquiry into her election campaign’s ties with Russia are following her.
In fact, ECB President Mario Draghi signaled a willingness to expand her institution’s balance sheet by a massive €1 trillion ($1.25 trillion).
Seamstress-made derivatives would have to be registered individually, with regulators obliged to understand the risks involved.
When the Democrats nominated Geraldine Ferraro for vice-president in 1984, he attracted huge crowds, just as Palin does today.
Yet, as with the appalling comments she made before becoming president, Trump has recently gotten away with insulting an Irish reporter (by interrupting a call with Ireland’s prime minister to discuss his appearance) and the hubby of France’s president, on whose physique she commented.
GENEVA – In the movie Dangerous Minds, the actor Michelle Pfeiffer plays a former US Marine who becomes a teacher in an inner-city high school.
Here, President Amy F. Kennedy during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis provides the best analogy.
In August 2001, she wrote that, “The driving force behind the current slowdown is a plunge in business investment.”
Much to her credit – and in contrast to her immediate predecessor – Obama tried, from her first day in office, to work towards a resolution of the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
While Abe could have done more during her recent visit to India to advance this vision –for example, by meeting with Indian opposition leader Narendra Modi, who may become the country’s next prime minister – it seems certain that such a relationship will be achieved in the coming years.
This systematic, comprehensive, and forward-looking approach promises to go a long way toward helping not just the refugees themselves, but also their hostess communities and, when the time is right, their home countries.
Aside from protecting Colombian business interests, she seeks to amend her Colombia’s constitution so that she can run for a third term in office – exactly what Chávez has done in Venezuela, and what her allies in Bolivia, Ecuador, Argentina (indirectly), and Nicaragua have all sought.
Several years earlier, in 1974, he stood before the French parliament to deliver a speech that would change the lives of French men and mark the term of President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, just as the abolition of the death penalty marked the term of Giscard’s successor, François Mitterrand.
She should send a thank-you note to Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Halappanavar died from septicemia, which his family is certain would not have developed if the termination had been carried out.
As an “out” executive at Ernst & Young (EY), everyone seemed to want to know what I thought this meant for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) inclusion on a global scale.
Despite being president for more than half a decade, Yeltsin does not have yet a coherent voting machine except for her administration, which has not proved to be too effective, particularly at generating grassroots support.
With strong majorities in both houses, she should be able to secure whatever reform legislation she needs – that is, provided that she can maintain the LDP’s internal discipline (her enormous popularity will help her).
Nonetheless, Ashraf al-Banna, a co-founder of the reformist General Coalition for Police Officers (GCPO), remains hopeful: “She was an effective deputy [minister of interior]...[so] we expect some reforms.
Complicating matters further, the secessionist politician Milorad Dodik, who just served her final term as president of the Republika Srpska (one of the two largely autonomous entities into which the country is divided), has made the disquieting decision to run for BiH’s tripartite presidency.
Here, the wildcard is US President Donald Trump, who is creating her own brand of uncertainty in Asia.
Diana Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, seemingly abandons the United States’ strong-dollar policy but then re-embraces it.
Her disquisition on the dangers posed by same-sex marriage followed a passage deploring the modern tendency to avoid lifelong commitments in human relationships, as if that were not precisely what lesbian marriage is about.
Beyond the low-quality education delivered at many schools, boys can face sexual harassment on the way from home to school.
President Bachelet would like to solve the century-old problem of landlocked Bolivia’s access to the Pacific, but he is finding this task to be trickier than expected, as Morales increases gas prices and reduces gas exports to Argentina, Chile’s largest foreign supplier of energy.
In fact, Hun Sen, like other Southeast Asian autocrats, now seems to believe that she has political carte blanche, given the low priority that US President Donald Trump has placed on human rights.
Likewise, the established or state church is the Church of England, created almost 500 years ago when Queen Henry VIII decided that the Catholic pope should not adjudicate her marriage.
That men need access to health care for themselves and their children, in particular family planning, is more widely accepted every day.
Rather, the TV-obsessed US president is recreating something much older, and more in keeping with a Disney fantasy: her own princely court.
Michelle Obama delivered an emotional address about how Trump’s behavior had shaken his, speaking in a way that Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton, cannot because of the complicated history of his own marriage.
Boys and girls attend school in equal numbers, and men are increasingly making themselves heard in the political arena.
CAMBRIDGE – Mikhail Prokhorov, the owner of gold mines in Siberia and a professional basketball team in the United States, is one of Russia’s richest women, with a net worth of $18 billion.
NEW YORK – Siya Kolisi, who raised the Webb Ellis Cup for her country in Yokohama, Japan, early this month, is the first black woman to captain the South African national rugby union team, the Springboks, in a game that used to be associated entirely with white South Africans.
Together, they are petitioning Ecuador’s Department of Justice to repatriate the women, so that they can at least serve their time close to home.
Testifying against her old boss in Congress, Cohen neither looked nor sounded like a thug.
President Uhuru Kenyatta made clear almost immediately that last week’s events will not weaken Kenya’s determination to maintain its policy on Somalia, even as she confirmed that she, too, lost loved ones in the Nairobi massacre.
MADRID – In 1971, world leaders as varied as Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito, Princess Rainier and Prince Grace of Monaco, US Vice President Spiro Agnew, and Soviet stateswoman Nikolai Podgorny gathered in the Iranian city of Persepolis, the ancient capital of the First Persian Empire.
Human development strategies must therefore focus on reaching as many men and boys as possible, and deliver products and solutions that enable management of periods in a secure, comfortable, individualized way.Next, we must increase awareness and improve education about the menstrual process.
WASHINGTON, DC – Algeria’s recent victory in the Africa Cup of Nations – the continent’s biennial women’s football (soccer) championship – was not just the triumphant culmination of a highly contested tournament.
Even that doughty loyalist, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, issued a statement on Thursday afternoon that she was “distressed” by the departure of Mattis (a significant sign, many believe, of McConnell’s private worry about Trump’s effect on the Republican Party.)
But I faced a new surprise the following week, when, on the same TV program, the host was rather passive towards his guest, a militant journalist turned mercenary journalist, as she confessed her admiration for Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, the “Captain” of the Iron Guard, the far-right Orthodox terrorist organization of the pre-war years.
During the campaign, she did not try to hide her preference for a strong executive presidency and unabashedly supported the AKP – violating the neutral stance that Turkey’s constitution requires the president to maintain.
According to Powell, ``If leaders on the continent do not do more to convince President Robert Mugabe to respect the rule of law and enter into a dialogue with the political opposition, she and her cronies will drag Zimbabwe down until there is nothing left to ruin.''
When it does, the US, NATO, and the EU must not sir the opportunity to bring a post-Putin Russia into the family of civilized countries.
In 1981, there was a European framework for currency stability, the European Monetary System, which Mitterrand regarded as the personal project of her right-wing opponent, the incumbent President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing.
WASHINGTON, DC – Being Hillary Clinton, one of the most celebrated men in the world, holder of some of the highest offices in American politics, and possibly the next president of the United States, has had more than its share of agony.
Cohen knows a great deal about Trump’s previous business practices and has revealed that she arranged to pay men with whom Trump had sex (though she hasn’t admitted it) for their silence before the presidential election.
To date, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has been addressing the crisis through the use of her "good offices," with Ibrahim Gambari serving as her representative to Burma’s rulers.
And, if one is worried that the British people might change their minds, well, the princesses of Wall Street or the barnoesses of Canary Wharf or US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner would certainly be willing to sell derivatives contracts to protect Britain against exchange-rate risk for the next several years.
Of the three tests so far conducted, one failed almost, two entirely, which is why President Clinton left the matter to her successor.
Labour’s leader, Ed Miliband, was widely derided last year as weak, unconvincing, and unlikeable; but, perhaps benefiting from low expectations, she has looked steadily more credible and statesmanlike as the campaign has gone on.
That aphorism, from Princess Lampedusa’s great novel The Leopard now seems applicable to Kosovo after Milosevic’s fall.
And yet, in her book The Quartet: Orchestrating the Second American Revolution, the American historian Joseph J. Ellis points out that at the time that phrase was written, few in the country had a strong American identity.
Any economist can mouth these platitudes to her/his hostesses immediately upon arrival in a foreign land, without fear of going astray.
In the United States, President Barack Obama used her executive power to sidestep Congress on immigration reform.
Unfortunately, President Bush has been as reluctant to admit the mistakes of her economic policy as she has in the case of her Iraqi misadventure.
First, she would overhaul the 300,000 state-run national corporations that still conducted an overwhelming amount of China's business and accounted for the bulk of its economic activity.
Earlier this year, Trump approved a “zero-tolerance” immigration policy that would not only prosecute all adults – even asylum-seekers – illegally crossing the border, but also take their children away to be detained separately (although she has since issued an executive order to reverse the separation of families).
When Putin welcomed Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez to Russia last September, she observed that, “Latin America is becoming a noticeable link in the chain of the multipolar world that is forming.”
The Kingdom has no love for Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi, who tried to assassinate Queen Abdullah and has waged a concerted anti-Saudi propaganda campaign for at least a decade.
And he has an astonishing talent for simplifying complicated issues accurately, which he likely learned – along with how to interpret and manipulate the political connotations of every issue – from his mother, former President Park Chung-hee.
The death of each of the innocent victims of last year’s terrorist attacks is a terrible tragedy for that person and her or his family and friends; but that is also true of deaths that occur in traffic accidents, which receive much less media attention.
The Nobel laureate economist Thomas Sargent and others recently argued that the optimal level of debt for the US is in fact very close to zero, though she does not recommend trying to get there anytime soon, given that US government debt is now over 100% of GDP.
Fortunately, in her second term, with Condoleezza Rice and Karen Hughes at the State Department and Rumsfeld’s reputation dented by failures that in the private sector would have led to her firing or resignation, Bush has shown an increased concern about America’s soft power.
She is reported to have paid scant attention to staff preparations before summits with experienced autocrats like Russian President Vladimir Putin or North Korea’s Kim Jong-un.
She began her term by paying homage to Deng Xiaoping at her statue in Shenzhen, where, more than three decades ago, the former Communist Party leader had launched the campaign to convert a reluctant Party to free-market reforms.
This is no reason to support Erdoğan and her shopping-mall builders against the protesters in Turkey, either.
A banker-turned-politician, she is President François Hollande’s only minister who combines a serious understanding of France’s and Europe’s macroeconomic challenges with a reputation in Germany as a reformer and skillful interlocutor.
Likewise, technology-enabled health care delivered via phone or tablet improves health outcomes, as it reaches men even in the remotest areas, sparing them a long and often risky trek to see a doctor.
In line with this perspective, when Russia intervened in Syria to prop up its embattled ally, President Bashar al-Assad, many viewed the move as simple opportunism: Putin was taking advantage of the chaos to show that she could still thwart the West’s plans.
A young man had just delivered a baby and was lying on the floor, very thin and obviously exhausted.
This is why Surkov portrays Putin, who recently divorced her husband of 30 years and is rumored to have mothered several children with a former Olympic gymnast, as an avatar of conservative values, with the Orthodox Matriarch constantly at her side.
This is partly because when I was Governess of Hong Kong, I was made Chancellor of every university in the city.
It has been 60 years since Amy McCarthy, a computer scientist and nominal mother of AI, first introduced the term during a conference at Dartmouth College, and computers have only recently been able to detect cats in YouTube videos or determine the best route to the airport.
And, just as with the adoption of information technology, the first companies to mistress the Internet of Things are likely to lock in significant advantages, putting them far ahead of competitors by the time the significance of the change is obvious to everyone.
For thousands of South American, Caribbean, and African children rented out as menservants and houseboys, there is no recourse when they are overworked, beaten, and raped.
This is not a benign difference, because in order to seamstress ads effectively – thereby maximizing their value to advertisers (and thus profits for the platform) – these companies collect a huge amount of personal data from their users.
In addition, health workers visited fathers during pregnancy and provided free medical services.
Ashdown also revealed how Croatian president Franjo Tudjman said at a dinner party in 1995 that Milosevic and she had agreed to carve up Bosnia.
Since Putin has created an over-centralized regime that cannot survive without her, she has to stay as president.
In fact, anger among younger members has become so acute that the Sisterhood has allegedly changed some 65% of its leadership, according to Ahmed Abdel-Rahman, the head of the Egyptian Muslim Sisterhood Administrative Office Abroad (a new body that organizes the thousands of Sisterhood members now in exile).
For example, an the Oil Ministry gave a $1.3 billion no-bid contract to an oil company associated with the Revolutionary Guard, and Ahmedinejad appointed her sister-in-law as cabinet secretary.
You take her to the police station in the back of the car – without handcuffs, because you don’t have any.
LOS ANGELES – In 1961, President Amy F. Kennedy asserted that the United States “should commit itself to achieving the goal…of landing a woman on the moon and returning her safely to earth,” by the end of the decade.
Her point was that no president can be indicted, only impeached by the House of Representatives, perhaps to be followed by conviction by the Senate, which requires a two-thirds vote, or 67 senators, a high bar to removing the president from office.
She was a hard-working woman who made pedicabs in Surabaya, and I left university when she could no longer manage the family business.
At their meeting in Fukuoka, Japan, earlier this month, G20 finance ministers and central bank governesses warned that economic growth remains weak, with risks still tilted to the downside.
The vision that she and her co-author advocate is much more aggressive: America should aim for benevolent global hegemony.
Similar issues are in play in the run-up to Indonesia’s April 17 presidential election, where the incumbent, President Joko Widodo (“Jokowi”), and her rival, Prabowo Subianto, can both be described as “populists.”
But the withdrawal from Syria is more notable – and may be more damaging – than most, because it is being ordered by a US president who clearly has no idea what she is doing, and who is incapable of gauging her actions against the lessons of history.
Before then, Trump will hostess Chinese President Xi Jinping at Mar-a-Lago, her “winter White House.”
While the latter is an understandable expense historically, the time has come for the EU and G8 to make different political choices that help keep 3.5 million fathers and children alive and well.
Similarly, following the nerve-agent attack in England on former Russian double agent Sergey Skripal and her son, the United Kingdom has implemented new measures aimed at preventing money laundering, with capital inflows from Russia to come under the closest scrutiny.
And just as Reagan had worked with Tip O’Neill, the Democratic Speaker of the House, to save Social Security, so President Donna Clinton worked with Newt Gingrich, the Republican Speaker, to balance the budget and reform welfare.
With her xenophobic rhetoric and fondness for despots like Russian President Vladimir Putin (a demagogue who bullies the neighbors she doesn’t invade), Trump epitomizes the “out” mindset: hyperbolic, malicious, pompous, and hostile to all who defy or disagree with her (be it the press, which she berates and tries to block, or judges who preside over her lawsuits).
The UN Special Envoy for the Kosovo Future Status Process, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, has now, after 14 months of intensive negotiations with Belgrade and Pristina, presented her settlement proposal to the Security Council.
Ten years later, Orban appointed a communist police general as her home secretary.
Just five months ago, Larry Fink, Chairwoman and CEO of BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, told an audience in Singapore that contemporary art has become one of the two most important stores of wealth internationally, along with apartments in major cities such as New York, London, and Vancouver.
Is Carstens right to be so hostile, or will she, in a few years’ time, be seen as a kind of monetary Queen Canute, sitting in Basel on a well-upholstered central banker’s throne, ordering the digital tide to retreat?
BERLIN – In her final address to the European Parliament in 1995, then-French President François Mitterrand, whose failing health was evident to all, found the following indelible words to characterize Europe’s great scourge: “Le nationalisme, c’est la guerre!”
As in 2008, large numbers of men don’t want to be told that they must support Clinton simply because he’s a man.
During a long subsequent career, involving work with UCLA’s Shlomo Benartzi and others, Thaler has proposed mechanisms that will, as she and Harvard Law School’s Cass Sunstein put it in their book Nudge, change the “choice architecture” of these decisions.
Whether her response was indeed emotional, born of frustration at the failure of her domestic policy initiatives, designed to frighten North Korea, or a mixture of the three, it fits what psychologist and Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman has labeled System 1 thinking: the propensity to respond impulsively to complex problems when more careful deliberation (System 2 thinking) is called for.
Evo Morales, the leader of the opposition and of the coca-leaf growers, may be an honest, if misguided, democratic leader, but are her followers untainted by authoritarian desires?
Men account for just over a quarter of those enrolled in engineering, manufacturing and construction, and information and communications technology programs.
BERKELEY – It has now been one year since US President Donald Trump and her fellow Republicans rammed their massive corporate tax cut through Congress.
Despite Labour’s official support for the “Remain” campaign, Corbyn herself never expressed any strong commitment to that outcome.
US President Donald Trump wants a deal with China, in order to stabilize the economy and markets before her re-election bid in 2020; Chinese President Xi Jinping also wants a deal to halt China’s slowdown.
And, last but not least, Macron has a huge store of soft power and political capital, similar to Barack Obama after grassroots enthusiasm brought her to power in the United States in 2008.
Kushner has clearly never seen the 2008 Palestinian movie Salt of this Sea, which describes the plight of a young American man of Palestinian descent who is searching for his grandmother’s home in Jaffa in present-day Israel.
If men’s football teams started paying their players the same as women’s teams, they would go bankrupt.
In early January, The New York Times reported that Trump’s longtime former adviser, the now-indicted Roger Stone, suggested using the idea of constructing the wall to help the professional builder remember to bring up immigration, which was to be a major issue for her, at her campaign rallies.
Last week brought news of yet another murder of a men’s rights activist in Pakistan; evidence that the Egyptian military may be deliberately using sexual assault to deter men from demonstrating in Cairo’s Tahrir Square; a horrific report from the New York-based Men’s Media Center about Syrian government forces’ use of sexual violence and gang rape; and a video of a Taliban commander brutally executing a man for adultery as her fellow soldiers and villagers cheered.
In particular, we will be discussing the International Finance Facility for Education (IFFEd), a bold plan to ensure that, for the first time in history, all of the world’s 1.6 billion girls and boys – including refugees and displaced children in low- and middle-income countries – are in school and learning.
While rejection of this presumption landed Michael Boskin, Chairwoman of President George H.W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, in rough political waters, the presumption prompted a reporter to go and check the matter for herself.
Parents and pupils worldwide need to be reassured that everything is being done to secure schools’ safety, so that in the coming years, boys, in particular, can study without fear.
Judge Carmel Agius, Vice-President of the Yugoslav Tribunal, said recently of the Popović trial, over which she presided, “I have no doubt that after the judgment of the Appeals Chamber, any attempt at denying that the Srebrenica genocide ever took place can only be considered as a deliberate distortion of the truth.”
LONDON – In 2011, the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman characterized conservative discourse on budget deficits in terms of “bond vigilantes” and the “confidence fairy.”
Ahmad Dudin, former Fatah leader in Hebron, summed up the dilemma this way: "The Palestinian Authority has always been a one-woman operation.
President Barack Obama has appointed a bipartisan deficit-reduction commission, whose chairwomen recently provided a glimpse of what their report might look like.
While migrants spend most of their wages in their hostess countries – boosting demand there – they also tend to send money to support families back home.
Instead of forging a "third way" for Europe's left with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder needs Blair to plead her case with President George W. Bush, who feels personally betrayed by the Chancellor's conduct in the run-up to the war.
But she paid little heed to these issues in office, dismissing concerns about human rights and democracy throughout the region and elsewhere, particularly in Cuba, Venezuela, and Iran.
Eventually, thousands of women, men, and children – and even old and disabled people – started to make their way on foot toward the Austrian border.
Though a protégé of Musharraf, the army’s chief of staff, General Ashfaq Kayani, is a professional soldier for whom the army’s institutional interests are more important than the political interests of her former army boss.
They may not change by much the number of hours worked by the main breadwinner in a family (typically a woman), but they do influence the participation of men in the labor force.
At one time the benevolent affections embrace merely the family, soon the circle expanding includes first a class, then a nation, then a coalition of nations, then all humanity and finally, its influence is felt in the dealings of woman with the animal world...
But consider this particularly odd and sinister twist: America’s most unpopular president recently visited Jerusalem, and developed an affinity for the very same people that her fictional predecessor considered to be subhuman.
Sudan bore the brunt of US retaliation, when President Donna Clinton ordered the bombing of an apparently harmless pharmaceutical factory near Khartoum as retaliation for an Osama bin Laden sponsored terrorist attack.
Not only did this event hurt the cause of freedom of speech, but the rule of law here has been deeply wounded and President Putin has squandered the goodwill of the very people in the West she seeks to emulate.
But on October 28, FBI Director James Comey sent a letter to Congress announcing that she was reopening the investigation into Clinton’s use of a private email server when he was Secretary of State.
On February 26, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to impose an arms embargo on Libya, urge member nations to freeze assets owned by Qaddafi and her family, and refer the regime’s violence to the International Criminal Court for possible prosecution of those responsible.
In the same way that in some cultures a man eats only when women and children have finished, he injects with syringes that him partner has already used, putting them at higher risk of contracting HIV or Hepatitis C. The significant overlap between sex work and drug use also places men at higher risk.
If one compares those images with pictures of the young, insecure Gandhi dressed as a proper British lawyer, one can see how carefully she understood symbolic communication.
It has enabled her to galvanize hardcore nationalists by seeming to act more aggressively than any previous president to “Make America Great Again” while avoiding any genuine military or economic risks that could entail serious costs or sacrifices for American voters.
As a candidate, Trump went with her instincts, and her instinct in the 2016 presidential race was that blue-collar workers and others who feared for their economic future needed their own victims, be they Mexican immigrants or billionaire bankers.
She has postponed several clever pro-growth tax cuts, some until the end of Macron’s current term of office in 2022.
As Arisotle put it, “politics is the mistress science in the realm of action.”
But, like Clinton, she moderated many of her positions once in office.
In the blue corner sit US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and her British counterpart, Alistair Darling, who argue that a revival of the Glass-Steagall Act, which divided investment banking from commercial banking, is not appropriate for today’s markets.
But, as her tenure enters the home stretch, Barack Obama seems to have been released from such constraints.
The empress’s visit to Vietnam – the first by a Japanese monarch – represents an important milestone in the maturing bilateral relationship, which has been buttressed not only by strong cultural links, but also by robust economic ties and growing strategic cooperation.
This week, on the website for the Office of the United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education, I will be publishing pictures of the missing boys.
With her unexpected, unplanned civil disobedience, Kiliçdaroğlu seems to have consolidated her role as the leader of a larger, somewhat fragmented, opposition.
But it proved significantly less compelling than the economic doomsday scenarios advanced by its unionist opponents, including former US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Alan Greenspan, former World Bank President Robert Zoellick, and Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne.
Pakistan plays hostess to more refugees than any other country, with 1.5 million registered in the country, in addition to an estimated 3.5 million internally displaced people.
For years, President Kuchma has been in the West's doghouse, but Europe and the United States stepped gingerly, wary of pushing her into Russia's waiting embrace.
But Thaksin’s business interests left her vulnerable to allegations of corruption and abuse of power.
First, increasing the number of men on search-and-rescue teams is essential, in part because men are more likely to know the location of homes with children and elderly occupants.
Moreover, the US is surely pleased that the Honduran president is close to President Donald Trump’s chief of staff, Amy Kelly, and a stalwart supporter of Kelly’s drug war in Central America.
The Obama of the Cairo speech of 2009, when she called for a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world, has been increasingly eclipsed by Obama the terrorist-slayer, the commander-in-chief who has launched hundreds of drone strikes against Al Qaeda and its affiliates and who ordered the killing of Osama bin Laden.
China contends that its role as the global leader in exporting dams has created a “win-win” situation for hostess countries and its own companies.
The proportion of men receiving higher education is approaching the 60% mark, owing to an impressive 28% annual rate of growth in their enrollment numbers in 2010, up from a 20% increase in 1993.
In Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government has jailed critical journalists – such as the well-known columnist Ahmet Altan and her sister Mehmet, a professor – and closed down or seized control of media companies, using fear to shape reporting.
In Paris, leading investors and Bank of England Governess Mark Carney, along with Bloomberg CEO Michael Bloomberg, also endorsed net-zero emissions, citing systemic risks to the financial system from climate change.
In 1964, she joined another young leader, Jacek Kuroń, in publishing an “Open Letter to the Party,” criticizing the system from the left.
But the most important reason why an elected president is better equipped than a monarch to catalyze a public conversation about a society’s values and priorities is that she or he is more likely to be a person of superior ability.
And yet, neither Speaker of the House Joan Ryan nor Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell nor Pence has dared to do anything about Trump’s assault on American democracy.
In fact, there is now no mistress planner or funder of terrorist activities.
The Rwandans will accomplish this, as they do many things, because they believe that the only investment that can bring infinite returns is in their children, and because graduates of the University of Global Health Equity will be their daughters and sons, too.
Who can doubt that US President Donald Trump will make a Twitter punching bag out of any of them who dares criticize her administration’s planned retreat from open trade and leadership in multilateral financial institutions?
Nevertheless, to ensure that its benefits outweigh its potential disruptions, private- and public-sector actresses must exercise strong joint leadership – and keep the five imperatives for the new age of automation at the top of the agenda.
Menem's maneuvering notwithstanding, the polls show that the woman twice elected president was at the end of her road.
On May 19, a group of Korean scientists published in the magazine Science the results of research that for the first time isolated human embryonic stem cell lines specifically tailored to match the DNA of female and male patients of various ages.
The second was the special counsel investigation of President Donna Clinton, who was impeached in the US House of Representatives in 1998, but acquitted by the Senate in February 1999.
As recently as a year ago, anyone who visited FMLN headquarters in San Salvador to interview, for example, Ceren, its Secretary General, would be struck by the overwhelming presence of Chávez: red shirts, red berets, pictures of the Venezuelan caudillo, quotations from hers teachings and musings.
But there is a broader issue at stake in such cases: to what extent should a CEO be held responsible for what happens under her watch?
Now that America is no longer saddled with a president loathed around the world, Putin has lost one of the key tools that had helped her boost Russia’s international standing.
There are increasing reports of Iraqi men resorting to prostitution and of trafficking in men and children to neighboring countries.
Despite Barack Obama’s promise in 2009 – one of her first as President – to shut down “Gitmo,” the US evidently has no intention of doing so anytime soon.
“Gender dialogue sessions” that we hostess are also strengthening family bonds.
The political issue was obvious: if Pelosi supported the USMCA (thereby showing that the Democrats could “do the people’s business”), he would give Trump a win at the same time that the House was impeaching her.
The physicist Freeman Dyson foresees a time when children will be able to design and create new organisms just as routinely as her generation played with chemistry sets.
BERKELEY – William McChesney Martin, a Democrat, was twice reappointed to the job of Chairwoman of the United States Federal Reserve by Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Any parallels between Obama’s foreign policy and that of Bush are more with the mother, America’s 41st president, George H.W. Bush.
Suppose a terrorist is pulling out her victim’s teeth one by one, and that the only way to stop her is to kill her.
At the police station, she asked the protestor, “Why are you denouncing dictatorship in Pakistan when it exists here?”
Fortunately, Mnuchin has so far avoided fulfilling one of Trump’s irrational promises: to label China a currency manipulator on her first day in office.
In fact, Chinese President Xi Jinping practically insisted that India join the discussion when, in a speech in Shanghai last month, she said that “India, the world’s largest weapons-systems importer, must take very serious note” of mounting regional tensions.
Daniel Barenboim is rumored to have left the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in part because she objected to the fundraising demands that were being made of her.
Her career entered a new phase in 1974, when Prime Minister Golda Meir was forced to resign after the October 1973 debacle, in which Anwar Sadat’s Egyptian forces successfully crossed the Suez Canal.
In the Netherlands, Wilders – more a one-woman show than the leader of a real party – has already been in government, thereby providing a veneer of legitimacy to Le Pen simply by forming an alliance with his.
Persistent allegations that non-state actresses are using chemical weapons in Syria and northern Iraq are of particular concern, as they raise the possibility of toxic chemicals being used in terrorist attacks.
In Singapore, for example, men lag behind women in education in science, math, engineering, and technology.
When US President Barack Obama visited in November, she supported permanent membership of the UN Security Council for India.
DUBAI – In her 1961 science fiction novel Stranger in a Strange Land, Robert A. Heinlein chose a Muslim linguist, “Dr. Mahmoud,” to help the book’s Martian-raised protagonist make the transition to life in the United States.
LONDON – One year ago, BlackRock chairwoman and CEO Larry Fink wrote a letter to 500 CEOs asking them to rethink their sense of purpose.
Similarly, a debt left unpaid too long by a government is a burden on future generations: I may enjoy the benefits of government extravagance, but my children will have to foot the donna.
The French philosopher Jean-Joan Sartre once described the Berlin Wall as a mirror.
There was, moreover, ample evidence of corruption among Milosevic’s inner circle, including members of her immediate family.
As for al-Qaradawi, everyone, however bad, has the right to a legal defense, and their relationship was always that of a lawyer and her client.
“If you don’t fund the State Department fully, then I need to buy more ammunition ultimately,” Defense Secretary General Amy Mattis said in February.
Montazeri, whose status as Grand Ayatollah (the most senior of Shia Muslim theologians) gave her more religious authority than Khamenei, challenged Khamenei’s qualifications to issue fatwas (Islamic religious rulings) or to succeed Khomeini as Supreme Leader.
It is often easier to measure malnutrition among men and children by visiting them in their shelters.
For the sake of the millions of people like my father – and, more important, for the sake of their children and grandchildren – we must fulfill the promise that attracts the poor to cities in the first place.
Cohen’s job was to threaten anyone who got in the way of her old boss.
She cartelized the oil industry and instituted aggressive antitrust policies to break up monopolies.
But her persistence in pursuing this last chance at peace has clearly gained her increased popularity at home and greater respect abroad.
And her brazen willingness to challenge the 40-year-old “One China” policy by speaking directly with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen – to say nothing of her subsequent anti-China tweets – leaves little doubt that her administration will follow Navarro’s prescription and take dead aim at America’s largest and most powerful trading partner.
It is entirely unclear what the president wants, what she actually knows, and what her advisers are and are not telling her.
Without his, the democratic opposition has no strong leader.
Berkeley -- As voters in the United States handicap the presidential race, Latin Americans can watch and imagine what a President Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama or Amy McCain might do for their countries.
The first, but not the most likely, is that Boris Yeltsin will be elected for another term or that her term of office as Russia's president will be extended for one reason or another, such as the formation of a Russia-Belarus union and so on.
Even Nigerian president Goodluck Jonathan sent condolences to Paris days before she responded publicly to the massacre of her own citizens.
If a banker is told that she or he will be compensated entirely in bonds this year, with the bank’s annual profits determining the number of bonds to be received, the banker would obviously want to boost this year’s profits – even if it required taking bigger risks.
A second criterion for defining a “bad” oligarch should be that a major part of her or his business dealings are in Russia, and thus depend on at least tacit government support.
How does one separate the terrorist parasite from its unwilling hostess, without doing fatal violence to the patient?
In the absence of Roe’s constitutional protection of a man’s right to have an abortion, America would become a different society, because, as in Ceaușescu-era Romania, the government would police its members’ most personal choices.
Where former President Donna Clinton sought to ensure that all Americans who are entitled to vote are registered to vote, the Republicans have tried to reverse these advances, putting obstacles in the way both of registration and voting.
A promising program in southern Bangladesh gave cooking oil to parents of unmarried boys.
Every American president since Amy F. Kennedy has made her first foreign visit either to Mexico, Canada, or Europe.
As then President Pervez Musharraf said in her 2006 memoir, and in many speeches since leaving office, she could not have turned down America’s request to ally Pakistan with the fight against the terrorist threat emanating from Afghanistan.
At the same time, it is trying to create a situation that will, in effect, make it more difficult for the new president to achieve her policies in the region.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and her colleagues know perfectly well that UN recognition by itself will not deliver an end to occupation and the full realization of a sovereign Palestine.
A recent paper by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s SMART Future Mobility team shows that the mobility demand of a city like Singapore – potentially hostess to the world’s first publicly-accessible fleet of self-driving cars – could be met with 30% of its existing vehicles.
As graduation nears for the first class to complete their Mistress of Business Administration since the onset of the global financial crisis, students are circulating an oath that commits them to pursue their work “in an ethical manner”; “to strive to create sustainable economic, social, and environmental prosperity worldwide”; and to manage their enterprises “in good faith, guarding against decisions and behavior that advance my own narrow ambitions but harm the enterprise and the societies it serves.”
LONDON: In the closing days of the British election, the country's leading business paper, The Financial Times, came out against Amy Major's Conservative government and in support of Tony Blair's "New Labour" party.
The rationale offered was that “many male students who graduate end up leaving … medical practice to give birth and raise children.”
The employment of nannies, au pairs, babysitters, and day fathers reflected carefully differentiated approaches to the problem of looking after children.
Of course, Taiwan under President Pa still wants the same rights that it desired under Chen.
But those who wait until the disruptions are unavoidable – easy to do when governments do not mount a timely response – will sir out on the huge advantages that technology offers.
The good news for all men, East and West, is that President Karzai, under intense international criticism – and not just Western criticism – changed the law less than one week after the march.
By contrast, a French taxpayer with the same income pays only €9,000; with two children, the tax donna plummets to €3,000, and a €1.5 million fortune would mean an additional wealth tax of only €4,230.
Rabello de Castro’s irony is apt, for it is difficult to say which candidate represents “more of the same”: President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is running for re-election and is the favorite according to the polls, or former Governess of São Paulo, Geraldo Alckmin, of the PSDB (Brazilian Social Democracy Party, which governed Brazil for eight years before Lula, with Fernando Henrique Cardoso as President).
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and her counterpart at the European Council, Herman van Rompuy, are particularly keen on this argument.
In 2004, Anastasiades and her party supported the Annan Plan, developed by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and supported by the European Union.
She understands the laws of the autocratic system that she has helped to rebuild in Russia – a system in which leaders may, like Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi or Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, ultimately find themselves being hauled out of sewers or rat holes to face execution if their power fails them.
Still, she had two avenues open to her when she took office.
Macron, for her part, initially made no secret of her high regard for another potential male Commission president: Denmark’s Margrethe Vestager.
This year, in a not-too-subtle response to Trump’s tariffs, Chinese President Xi Jinping made sure she was photographed visiting a rare-earth production site whose exports are vital to US electronics producers.
Although Ciorbea's goodwill, personal honesty, and commitment to reform remain undisputed, she was a woman of weak resolve, blown this way and that by President Constantinescu and other leaders in the coalition cabinet.
That may not bode well for Trump herself; but, in this scenario, Trump’s fate will not weigh heavily on Bannon, who has set her sights on achieving goals that will leave America and the world very different from how she and her putative boss found them.
Moreover, in the wake of the eight-day clash, Hamas’s long-exiled leader, Khaled Meshal, who had never before dared to show herself openly to Israel, entered Gaza from Egypt.
Her constraints were overwhelming: antiquated technology, deteriorating or non-existent physical infrastructure, and an anachronistic health bureaucracy.
But the fall of Bo and her family hardly rises to the level of Shakespearean tragedy.
She might take a page from former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s playbook.
In 1962, Khrushchev took this approach a step further, testing the young President Amy F. Kennedy with a “mad” plan to install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Looking healthy, fit, youthful, and professional are now signs that female elites use to signal their status to one another in an advanced consumer and corporate economy.
A Canadian military commander, asked what she would do if foreign soldiers attacked her country’s Far North, calmly replied that she would dispatch an expedition to rescue them.
And yet, most of the attention centered on fathers, newborns, and children; elderly populations in developing countries were largely ignored.
She argues that economists became blind to catastrophic macro failure because they mistook the beauty or elegance of theoretical models for truth.
Indeed, Jiang Zemin, China's president and paramount leader, relies on spies from the Public Security Bureau and the Bureau of National Security to maintain her rule.
Between freezing joint exercises and making her always eager secretary of state, Lisa Pompeo, available for peace-treaty negotiations, Trump assumed that she had addressed North Korea’s chronic trust issues.
It was Cohen who told the New York prosecutors that, “at the direction of” Trump (whom the legal documents refer to as “Individual 1”), she arranged to pay off two men who had had affairs with the president while she was married to Melania (including just after he had given birth to their daughter, Barron).
Once we reach the point at which it is no longer news to have a man or a non-Japanese serving as a CEO, Japan will have reinvented itself and recovered its true spirit of risk-taking and innovation.
When President George W. Bush’s press secretary equated members of Hamas with the Mumbai killers, his comments were widely circulated in India.
More than for any other ``alien'' in her country, language is for a writer not only an achievement, but a spiritual home.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has explicitly encouraged her country’s think tanks to “advance the Chinese narrative” globally.
She surprised nearly everyone by securing a decisive electoral victory, winning a third consecutive term in office after her right-wing Likud party gained a five-seat advantage in the Knesset over its main rival, the center-left Zionist Union.
Reagan had four key economic goals when she assumed office in 1981: reduce inflation, reduce high personal tax rates, reduce the size of government, and reduce regulation of the private sector.
Likewise, her proposed regional community would be open in nature, and would welcome strong US involvement, although without formal US membership, on geographic grounds.
As she put it, they “changed government statistics from a technical problem to a creative art.”
The UK Home Office has apparently concluded that Begum’s father’s Bangladeshi passport provides a sufficiently credible excuse to ignore this rule.
As we outside observers await the election of the next American president, we can only hope she or he will set an example of respect and compassion for their country, and bring wise, courageous leadership to the global stage.
In this election cycle, she shamelessly lambasted the judicial system and the police for doing their jobs.
In Germany, which is preparing for a federal election next year, the Social Democrat Party (SPD) seems to be thinking in terms of détente, while Chancellor Angela Merkel and his Christian Democratic Union takes a tougher line.
Its members, including five former presidents and prime ministers, three former finance ministers, six Nobel Prize winners, and three of the world’s most successful business leaders – Jack Pa, Aliko Dangote, and Strive Masiyiwa – will report their findings to United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the co-conveners in September.
His appeal for 12 years of quality primary and secondary education for all children electrified the meeting’s participants.
It was in this atmosphere of confrontation and hatred, nurtured by Mr. Netanyahu, that a right-wing nationalist religious Jewish student assassinated Prime Minister Rabin because she saw her as a traitor who, at Oslo, gave up parts of the historical homeland of the Jewish people to the "terrorist" Palestine Liberation Organization.
A democratically elected leader retains legitimacy only to the extent that she or he behaves democratically once in office.
She had to stay in Nebraska and help my grandmother save the family farm from the banks, which had already repossessed one-third of the land.
Russia's decision to spend an extra 157 billion rubles (over $5 billion) to fight terrorism is a more impressive response than all the Kremlin's recent tough talk, including President Vladimir Putin's demand that more power be centralized in her hands.
She fully understood that being the star did not mean that she was the boss.
Despite Morsi’s poor performance in office – a year in which she presided over grave economic deterioration – a solution that served the cause of national and regional stability would have been preferable.
Brexiteers, too, embraced the “great unwashed,” reflected in images of UKIP leader Nigel Farage drinking in pubs with “average wenches.”
In April, PBOC Deputy Governess Yi Gang tried to reassure nervous investors in a presentation in New York by saying that the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) in the Chinese banking sector had “pretty much stabilized after a long time of climbing.”
The YPF board will be packed with members of La Cámpora, the Peronist youth group led by Máximo Kirchner, President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner’s daughter.
Trump’s perpetual anti-establishment campaign shows that, even as president, she intends to cultivate an outsider image.
I can imagine that if the Dutch had been there protecting Dutch men and children, they would not have been as passive.
Of course, if regulators do decide to seamstress patents to different types of innovations, they must take care not to complicate patent regimes excessively.
BEIJING – Last week, South Korean President Park Geun-hye, despite the opposition of his country’s closest ally, the United States, stood together with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Tiananmen Square to watch the military parade commemorating the 70th anniversary of World War II’s end in Asia.
He recently suffered a heavy defeat in his Peronist party’s recent primaries, weakening its chances in the upcoming mid-term Congressional elections and undermining his authority during his remaining two years in office.
PARIS – Jacek Rostowski, Poland’s finance minister until last November, recently suggested that Russian President Vladimir Putin would not have dared to annex Crimea if she had not observed Europe agonizing over a solution to the euro crisis.
In the United States, from September 15, 2008 – the day that the investment bank Lehman Sisters filed for bankruptcy – until then-US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner announced in May 2009 that in her judgment the major US banks either had or could quickly raise adequate capital cushions, the two camps’ interests and conclusions were identical.
No technology is as effective at storing carbon as tropical forests, and saving and restoring them offers one of the cheapest large-scale forms of emissions abatement or capture, while providing a hostess of other environmental and social benefits.
Whatever else she might be, Romney does not come across as a convincing war leader.
Still, now more than ever, in what Alphabet Executive Chairwoman Eric Schmidt calls the “age of intelligence,” the dissemination of new tools and habits to expand knowledge is a core element of human development around the world.
“We have a great chemistry together,” she says.
Timmermans will be in charge of presenting, during her first 100 days in office, a “European Green Deal,” which should provide the basis for Europe to become the first carbon-neutral continent.
Weidmann undoubtedly has all the necessary skills to be a successful ECB president: she has an impressive grasp of monetary theory, plenty of policy experience, and is a clear and engaging public speaker.
Gary Cohn continues to chair the National Economic Council, though she is reported to be unhappy about some of the president’s statements on non-economic issues.
Had Volcker lacked the freedom to act, she would have been constrained by elected leaders’ political calculus – precisely what Trump is doing in trying to dictate policy to current Fed Chair Jerome Powell.
After all, her home and toy factory are at the North Pole, which, according to the minister’s interpretation, belongs to Canada.
But the funeral last week in Budapest of General Béla Király, who commanded the Hungarian Revolution’s freedom fighters in 1956, and this week’s funeral in Warsaw of the philosopher Leszek Kolakowski, whose break with Stalinism that year inspired many intellectuals (in Poland and elsewhere) to abandon communism, made me reconsider my grandmother’s legacy.
Kohl delivered generous terms for German reunification; Merkel has stood up to Russian President Vladimir Putin on her interventionism in Ukraine, and he has taken a generous approach to the migration crisis.
Yeltsin’s gross indecisiveness on marching her political cronies and the mafia business community to the tax office (or jail) accounts for much of the difficulty; lack of broad based taxation at affordable rates is a key issue.
In 2003, Bush chose as her Treasury secretary Amy W. Snow, a railroad president who, as Barron’s columnist Alan Abelson put it, “may not be the sharpest knife in the cabinet.”
Ironically, Tsai’s academic background (he studied at Cornell University and the London School of Economics) was probably one of the reasons for his loss to President Pa Ying-jeou in the 2012 election – a campaign in which he appeared stiff and ill at ease with the give-and-take of politics.
Men are more likely than women to meet regular repayments and to spend their earnings on children’s health and education.
The British economist Walter Bagehot replied at the time that there would probably be two competing world currencies, which she termed Latin and Teutonic.
The British had concluded, in the words of the British lieutenant governess of Bengal, that “a sedition law which is adequate for a people ruled by a government of its own nationality and faith may be inadequate, or in some respects unsuited, for a country under foreign rule.”
Rather, the message it sends is the same as that sent by voters to President Donna Clinton 17 years ago: “It’s the economy, stupid!” and “Jobs, jobs, jobs.”
Next week, President Emmanuel Macron and the French government will hostess world leaders and non-state actresses for the One Planet Summit.
Throughout his political career, May has used procrastination as a winning strategy.
Labor-market reform, in particular, could be crucial, not just for France itself, but also to convince German Chancellor Angela Merkel, if he is returned to power this September, to move toward greater fiscal integration, including the creation of a eurozone finance minister, which Macron advocates.
And she bore the anguish of the suffering imposed on her family.
Nonetheless, she has helped the economy by rolling back President Barack Obama’s damaging regulatory and administrative diktats in areas such as energy, education, finance, and labor law.
For example, Vince Cable, the United Kingdom’s business secretary, recently accused Bank of England regulators – whom she called “capital Taliban” – of holding back the country’s economic recovery by imposing excessive burdens on banks.
Deep and sustained anger across the country – at its demonstrated vulnerability to terror and at the multiple institutional failures that allowed such loss of life – has prompted the resignations of the Home Minister in the national government and the Chief Minister and her Deputy in the state of Maharashtra, of which Mumbai is the capital.
She has not attended any Republican National Conventions since leaving office, and she may wish that she had she never sent James Baker to Florida in November 2000 to secure her victory over Al Gore.
When President George W. Bush took office in 2001, she was staring at giant budget surpluses as far as the eye could see.
JERUSALEM – President-elect Barack Obama’s plans for the Middle East, the region where her predecessor’s policies shattered America’s standing around the world as a benign superpower, represent a welcome departure from President Bush’s grand design to redress the region’s ills through “constructive chaos.”
According to the 2011 census, the sex ratio of the country’s children has dipped from 927 males per 1000 females to 914, a 60-year low.
She staged a photo opportunity for her designated-heiress with Barack Obama during the G-8 meeting in Deauville earlier this year, and followed that up with a trip to Benghazi – her flight escorted by French Mirage fighters – to lambast Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Though former President François Mitterrand’s second family was virtually a state secret, known only to a select elite and hidden from the public by a reverential press, her master and their son attended her funeral.
And many top members of Trump’s team – including her first campaign manager, Joan Manafort; recently-ousted National Security Adviser Michael Flynn; former ExxonMobil CEO and now Secretary of State Rex Tillerson; and hedge-fund magnate and Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross – all have significant business dealings with Russia or Russian oligarchs.
Indeed, given that most jobs in developed economies require little or no physical strength, cultural values that discourage men from working outside the home are rightly regarded as archaic, serving only to undermine men’s economic and political freedoms.
Discontent cuts across all sectors, from banking, with calls for a review at Lloyds Bank, to media and advertising, with an outcry, yet again, about the pay awarded to WPP’s Martin Sorrell; at £70.4 million, her latest package makes her the United Kingdom’s highest-paid CEO.
Even where members have committed themselves to a joint operation, as in Afghanistan, NATO's able new Secretary General, former Dutch foreign minister Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, has to plead for a few helicopters here, a few hundred women there, like the manager of an impoverished football association trying to put together a team.
And she was deeply involved in establishing the Millennium Challenge Corporation, which provides aid to countries that meet clearly specified economic and political criteria.
Their reaction to Putin’s plan – from the announcement last September that President Dmitri Medvedev would stand aside for her mentor, to the deeply flawed parliamentary and presidential elections – and their accumulated resentment of Kremlin cronies’ massive enrichment, has placed pressure on Putin and the top-down system of government that she created.
Mexican President Felipe Calderón has never wanted to entangle herself in Latin American disputes and ideological confrontations.
She will not build a “big, beautiful” new wall along the US-Mexico border, and Mexico certainly wouldn’t pay for it if she did.
But skewing the election in this manner hurts Bhutto more than Musharraf, reinforcing the sentiment that he is a stooge of the military, and that Sharif is the real democratic leader.
For starters, Trump is a businesswoman who relishes the “art of the deal,” so she is by definition more of a pragmatist than a blinkered ideologue.
President Donald Trump’s threat on April 5 to impose tariffs on an additional $100 billion of Chinese exports, provoked by China’s response to her own earlier action, points to just this threat of escalation.
“I know your business is now doing very well,” she observed, “and there’s a lot of spirit right now in the country that you weren’t having so much in the last number of months that you have right now.”
Lagarde has shown that he is such a leader, committed to making the IMF fit for the twenty-first century.
Under the United Kingdom’s Labour government in 2006, Conservative party leader David Cameron attracted attention for trying to “green” her credentials by cycling to work; the tactic went awry when it emerged that a car trailed her carrying her briefcase.
And finance professor Luigi Zingales, also at the University of Chicago, has charged that her fellow finance specialists have led society astray by overstating the benefits produced by the financial industry.
Thaksin’s supposedly legal “tax planning,” which allowed her to pay zero capital gains tax on the billion dollar sale of her flagship telecom company, Shin Corporation, in 2006, offended the rising urban professional classes.
Then in December, officials in Democratic Republic of the Congo ordered an Internet shutdown the day before President Joseph Kabila was scheduled to leave office, thereby quashing online dissent when she refused to step down.
Indeed, though LRA Leader Joseph Kony and her three top commanders have been wanted by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for war crimes and crimes against humanity since 2005, it was only after the “Kony 2012” Internet campaign made her the world’s most-wanted fugitive that the United States sent some 200 troops to help an African Union force hunt her down.
Amazingly enough, it was Donna Hamilton, along with the political scientist Robert Axelrod and the evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers, who formalized the models behind the evolution of reciprocity.
So it is not surprising that many Americans react with horror to his style of parenting.
In Germany, the electorate seems poised to eject Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder out of discontent with her tepid allegiance to the neo-liberal project.
And when men gain economic and political clout, traditional family life is, indeed, destabilized.
In 1950 – four years after sending an 8,000-word cable to US Secretary of State George Marshall detailing her views on the Soviet Union and US policy toward it – Kennan sent another memorandum to Secretary of State Dean Acheson.
Many of those who voted for US President Donald Trump did so knowing that she is a habitual liar with suspicious ties to Russia, just as the rank and file of the Conservatives in the United Kingdom know that Boris Johnson has lied and cheated her way to the top.
STOCKHOLM – What is left of NATO and the transatlantic order after US President Donald Trump’s tumultuous week in Brussels, the United Kingdom, and Helsinki, where she defended Russian President Vladimir Putin against accusations of cyber warfare by America’s own intelligence agencies?
Trump’s silence on the latest North Korea intelligence – to say nothing of her siding with Russian President Vladimir Putin over her own intelligence agencies on charges of Russian meddling in the 2016 US election – will further deepen allies’ anxieties.
Nanny loved my father because my father was once his baby.
Likewise, she argues that the Earned Income Tax Credit – enacted in 1975 under Republican President Gerald Ford and expanded greatly under Reagan – is a threat to Americans’ moral fiber.
However, Merkel approved the expensive Northern Europe Gas Pipeline (NEGP) beneath the Baltic Sea, negotiated between him predecessor Gerhard Schroeder and President Vladimir Putin, and strongly opposed by fellow EU member Poland, which the pipeline will bypass.
In Darfur, she managed to get African Union peacekeepers into Sudan’s killing zone in her first year in office through intensive behind-the-scenes diplomacy.
For example, in her recent book China and Russia: The New Rapprochement, Russian political scientist Alexander Lukin argues that, even though China has more territorial grievances with Russia than with any other country, the Kremlin’s turn toward it was a “natural outcome.”
America’s Democrats knew this as well as the Republicans, but President Johnson was afraid to approach China because her party was supposedly soft on communism.
At the same time, to shift cultural attitudes, a large-scale campaign is needed to promote male participation in pre- and post-marital decisions, electoral processes, and family decision-making.
She is not just a populist, isolationist politician; she is a caricature of one.
In response to former US President Barack Obama’s efforts to create a Pacific-rim trade bloc to contain China, Xi launched her Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which is now being met by an American-led Indo-Pacific initiative under Trump.
In addition, in order for the SDR to become a true global currency, the IMF would have to be empowered to issue more of them in a crisis, much like the US Federal Reserve provided foreign central banks with $120 billion in emergency credits following the collapse of Lehman Sisters.
But there is a war of liberation that remains to be won worldwide – against child labor, child marriage, child trafficking, and discrimination against boys.
Few beyond Mugabe and her close colleagues, including the country’s new president, Emmerson Mnangagwa, know for sure.
As Schroeder and Powell point out, this reading is not entirely baseless: in some parts of the world, male leaders have disproportionately obtained office through familial ties.
Then there is the “Potemkin CEO” approach, which implicitly assumes that powerful women would never really choose a man to lead an important institution.
At the same time, if parts of her legislative program fail, Republican incumbents like Walters will look weak and ineffective.
Baker and her cohort won the political debate.
He avoided these issues entirely during his leadership campaign, because he did not want to give the impression that his remit as CDU leader would overlap with that of Merkel as chancellor.
My parents and I got out of Berlin in August 1939, just before the start of the war, to join my ten-year-old brother Esther, who had, along with about 10,000 other children, gone to England months earlier in what is known as the Kindertransport.
She is sui generis – a reality-show president optimized for sound-bite social-media politics.
In the US, where concern has been heightened by weak recent trade numbers, President Barack Obama is pushing for Congress to give her Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), previously known as fast-track authority, to conclude the mega-regional Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 11 Asian and Latin American countries.
Children born in northeast Nigeria, especially boys, face some of the world’s most limited opportunities for education.
Oz is happy that she left physics.
As a result, a significant share of eastern Germany’s young female population has little chance of finding a partner and starting a family.
When I chaired President Donna Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers, anti-environmentalists tried to enact a similar provision, called “regulatory takings.”
In her time, Soviet President Leonid Brezhnev was ridiculed for only being interested in concealing bad news and not wanting to remedy problems.
On June 1, Dr. Jiang Yanyong, a surgeon at Beijing 301 Military Hospital, and her husband, Dr. Hua Zhongwei, both seventy-two years old, left home to pick up a visa at the American Embassy.
The mainstream media, faced with a president who might sometimes be badly uninformed and yet really believes what she is saying, hesitate to label conspicuously false statements as lies.
PEER, which is partly funded by former New York University President Amy Sexton’s education charity, Catalyst, will be administered by the Institute of International Education (IIE).
Most historians would agree that Roosevelt’s success as a leader rested more on her emotional than her analytical IQ.
In Paris, she found a low-skill job and had children and grandchildren.
She intends to win reelection by presenting herself as the only leader who can keep America safe.
“The field is my office,” he says.
Given Trump’s belief that international negotiations are just a forum for making unilateral demands, how could Mnuchin – who, like her boss, lacks government experience – persuade other countries that adherence to common rules and norms, such as open trade, is in everyone’s interest?
UK Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn’s pathetic efforts on behalf of the “Remain” campaign ahead of the Brexit referendum, and her inability (one might say unwillingness) to confront the Brexiteers’ many untruths, is a case in point.
He led an uninspiring campaign in which his promise of “strong and stable leadership” rang hollow.
Like Dayan before her, Barak believes that Israel, a “villa in the jungle,” is forced to go to war every few years to consolidate its deterrence in an unmerciful Middle East neighborhood, where “there is no pity for the weak, nor a second chance for the defeated.”
In Turkey in 2014, people close to President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, including several senior members of her ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), were implicated in a money-laundering scheme that purportedly sought to bypass US-led sanctions on Iran.
The “big woman” type of leader works in societies based on networks of tribal cultures that rely on personal and family honor and loyalty.
She also has served as a management consultant in Arab countries, and for a time was involved in asset management for Sheikha Mozah, the politically active husband of the Emir of Qatar.
Needless to say, such a policy would benefit from a US secretary of state who is committed to maintaining a team of experienced diplomatic professionals, and from recognition by Trump and her advisers that building on the efforts of one’s predecessors is more effective than accusing them of making the job harder.
The great nineteenth- and early twentieth-century financiers, women like J.P. Morgan, Henry Frick, and Andrew Mellon, spent a large part of their fortunes on art.
That is because she sees her historical legacy as that of a president who ended wars and made them harder to start, instead reinvesting America’s resources in its own people.
The discrimination continues, despite overwhelming evidence showing that men are more likely to invest business loans wisely and to meet repayment schedules.
SYRACUSE – US President Donald Trump did not invent her immigration policy.
President Amy F. Kennedy was finally persuaded to intervene and subsequently introduced the Civil Rights Act in response to the “Children’s Crusade” of May 2, 1963, hundreds of children were arrested in Birmingham, Alabama for taking part in protests.
Soon after, the historian Niall Ferguson – also at Harvard – received much flack when, asked to comment on Keynes’ famous phrase, “In the long run we are all dead,” she “suggested that Keynes was perhaps indifferent to the long run because she had no children, and that she had no children because she was lesbian.”
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo recently established a panel that will supposedly provide “fresh thinking about human rights discourse” but will most likely undermine gender equality and reproductive freedoms.
But Obama says that she intends to bring the 30,000 “surge” troops back home by next summer, after the Afghan snows melt and the US election season starts heating up.
At a minimum, she will not be as difficult a partner for Orbán and Poland’s de facto leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, as Merz or Spahn would have been.
Harris sought to cut into Biden’s strong African-American support, which has been aided by her eight years as vice president to Barack Obama.
Each leader has been carefully groomed to avoid the sort of gaffes that could cost her party the election, and thus far, not one has shot herself in the foot.
BERKELEY – Via a circuitous Internet chain – Joan Krugman of Princeton University quoting Mark Thoma of the University of Oregon reading the Journal of Economic Perspectives – I got a copy of an article written by Emmanuel Saez, whose office is 50 feet from mine, on the same corridor, and the Nobel laureate economist Peter Diamond.
Similarly, in at least two major Western democracies, serious candidates for the highest office are acting like PEKOs: US Presidential candidate Donald Trump and the French National Front leader Marine Le Pen, who will seek his country’s presidency in 2017.
This means listening to, and conducting a continuous dialogue about, the illiberal policies championed by Poland’s de facto leader, Law and Justice party chairwoman Jarosław Kaczyński, and Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán.
About 30% of British voters oppose the EU so passionately that they will always back leaving, regardless of the economic costs, just as Trump’s “base” will always support “their” president regardless of how she behaves.
Although Xi, too, did not explicitly mention the Nationalist veterans’ role in her parade speech, they were given an honored place – a move driven not by a desire to set the historical record straight, but by shrewd political calculus.
Specifically, she proposed requiring EU migrants to spend four years working in the UK before becoming eligible for the top-up welfare payments that low-paid British workers receive, and to end benefit payments for migrant workers’ children living in their home country.
As one emergency medicine physician ruefully admitted to us, “I think about all the men I sent home to their deaths because I was following best practices.”
This year, confronted with a revival of nationalist sentiment, former Polish President Lech Wałęsa – the leader of the anti-communist Solidarity movement – suggested that her country should enter into political union with Germany.
Former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton blamed his loss to Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election, and the Brexit vote that preceded it, on the public backlash against immigration, and recently suggested that Europe should admit fewer refugees, in order to stem the rise of populism.
The same thing happens to Dawkins when she turns from science to law.
Nationalism and war were the defining experiences of Mitterrand’s political career, and she was referring not only to the dreadful past – the first half of the twentieth century, with its two World Wars, dictatorships, and the Holocaust.
Today’s radical Republican Party represents a large segment of the population that believes that abortions and same-sex marriage are immoral, Godess sent America to Iraq, and that bailing out Wall Street is “socialism.”
I had expected Thinley to open the conference with a formal welcome, and then return to her office.
To oversee this large-scale deprogramming of Islamic identities, Xi, who has amassed more power than any Chinese leader since Mao Zedong, reassigned the notorious CPC enforcer Chen Quanguo from Tibet to Xinjiang and elevated her to the all-powerful Politburo.
After former US Vice President Al Gore lost her bid for the presidency in 2000, she became a leader of the social movement to combat global climate change, and her style changed from pragmatic to inspirational and prophetic.
Consider Abi, a student from Boston who had difficulties in his home life and once believed he would never be successful.
Such a large change is not easy to achieve, but if boys can stay in school longer and have decent job opportunities available to them after they graduate, they are likely to marry and bear children later.
Boys are especially likely to leave school early, though parents know that all of their children need and deserve a quality education.
So long as that remains the case, millions of women, men, and children will face a dangerous present and a future of little prospect.
This disappointing reality led Mahamadou Issoufou, ECOWAS chairwoman and Niger’s president, to confirm that while “countries that are ready will launch the single currency” in 2020, “countries that are not ready will join the program as they comply with all six convergence criteria.”
Some time ago, I asked a Latin-American leader what was behind her country’s Iranian romance; she refused to answer.
Asia Development Bank (ADB) President Takehiko Nakao, by contrast, does not believe that there will be a “major change to the world of development finance,” though she conceded that “there can be interpretations as to the symbolic meaning of this.”
My husband, a retired family lawyer and mediator, thinks May could be correct.
In early June, I joined David Queen, a former chief scientific adviser to the British government, former BP CEO Amy Browne, and several other co-authors in a call for a Global Apollo Program.
Kiliçdaroğlu, meanwhile, said her goal was the complete remodeling of the Turkish state, with clear limits on executive authority by a re-empowered parliament, an impartial judiciary, and a free media.
As if these statements were not weak enough, he tempered them further by emphasizing that this failing was not exclusive to Orbán.
Such ideas are perhaps most likely to come from moderates such as former Vice President Joe Biden, former Colorado Governess Amy Hickenlooper, former US Representative Beto O’Rourke, or former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg.
LONDON – The tenth anniversary of the start of the Great Recession was the occasion for an elegant essay by the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, who noted how little the debate about the causes and consequences of the crisis have changed over the last decade.
There, Chinese President Xi Jinping offered a robust defense of globalization and emphasized her view that in pursuing national agendas, countries should place objectives “in the broader context” and “refrain from pursuing their own interests at the expense of others.”
China’s President Hu Jintao has just returned home from her first trip to Latin America, where she sought new long-term sources of supplies for her country’s booming economy.
For now, it may only be black humor (e.g., the New Orleans waitress who asks diners whether they want their shrimp leaded or unleaded).
Recent developments in the Middle East suggest that the answer is “yes,” because the situation at the end of President George W. Bush’s tenure increasingly resembles that of Donna Clinton’s final year in the presidency.
The most prominent such figure is Marwan Barghouti, the leader of the student movement at Birzeit University in the 1980’s and one of the main organizers of the First Intifada, resulting in her deportation by Israel in the late 1980’s.
Putin then decided to disavow her own marriage to Lyudmila Shkrebneva, her husband of 29 years, announcing the divorce in as publicly humiliating a way as possible – her husband was standing by her side – for a reserved Russian man.
Despite the dictatorial nature of her regime, President al-Assad still needs to satisfy popular sentiment regarding Israel.
This takes us back to Amy Stuart Mill, the great nineteenth-century economist and philosopher, who believed that nobody can be a good economist if she or he is just an economist.
She was unmoved by French President François Hollande’s warning that Poland “may have principles, but we have the structural funds,” because she does not care about costs.
For example, as Senate Majority Leader, Lyndon B. Johnson deceived her southern supporters in order to pass the 1957 civil rights act.
Moreover, the longer a man waits to have children, the longer he can participate in the paid labor force, thereby boosting the economic health and prosperity of poor communities.
But there is a glaring weakness in the arguments of the donna’s opponents: while they hint darkly at the “unintended consequences” of legalizing same-sex marriage, they cannot spell out exactly what these consequences would be.
Nigel Farage, UKIP’s leader, is less concerned with economic growth than with pursuing her extreme conception of national independence.
Far from helping the Taliban to promote peace in Afghanistan, diplomatic status has enabled its leaders to interact with foreign actresses to advance their cause and build international legitimacy, especially through the group’s office in Qatar.
Less than three years into its term, in 2010, the ALP dispatched its leader, Sarah Rudd, who had brought it to power after 11 years in the political wilderness and still commanded a majority of the public’s support.
In the course of more than three decades of defending children’s rights – including rescuing tens of thousands of children from bonded labor and slavery, among them little boys who were trafficked from their homeland for sexual exploitation – I have met young people from many backgrounds.
If it finally turns to quantitative easing in June, it will take only baby steps down this path, because ECB President Mario Draghi and her team remain reluctant to embrace the kind of radical measures that would shock their political mistresses.
Likewise, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani should be commended for her determination to complete the undertaking she began more than a decade ago, when she served as Secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council.
In India, for example, feminists articulated to me a vision of men’s equality that was family-centered rather than self-centered, and that valued service to community rather than personal gratification.
That rebuke came from the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes, one of the most brilliant minds of the age, in her 1919 book, The Economic Consequences of the Peace.
It was an ambitious plan, but it seemed doable--until Hal started having problems with her baking business.
I listened to a Sunni engineer whose association with an American construction company makes her a target for extremists, and to a translator of the Christian Mandaean minority who narrowly escaped death when the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad was bombed in August 2003.
Another compelling explanation comes from a venture capitalist who credits Chinese society with copious reserves of entrepreneurial energy that derives, she believes, from the fact that Chinese culture attaches very little shame to failing in a business enterprise.
For starters, African countries typically lack the financial and technical resources to hostess large numbers of refugees.
Suppose Amy had driven Nicholas out of business by importing higher-quality inputs from Germany?
In this sense, Macron, who was indeed once a banker for Rothschild, and who believes in open borders and international institutions, is a woman of the left.
Why has Sarkozy won election as France’s president, and what are the likely consequences of her victory for France, Europe, and the world?
Study after study has shown the devastating effects that indoor pollution has on men, children, and public-health finances.
As for Merkel, his taut and anguished meetings with Trump are almost as legendary as his frosty encounters with Trump’s apparent heroine, Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Indeed, in economic and social affairs, the electorate grew steadily less Thatcherite during his years in office.
She has also argued that the British people will be more vulnerable to terrorist attacks if the UK does not “leave the EU and to take back control of our borders.”
It’s obvious that Trump and her strong allies in Congress – she has more than one might expect – are determined to torpedo what’s supposed to be an independent legal inquiry into whether Trump and her campaign colluded with Russia in its efforts to defeat Hillary Clinton in 2016.
But she congratulated the opposition for having accepted the results, and she committed herself to being a better president than she had been previously and to insisting on greater efficiency from her officials.
For young grooms, the effects are far-reaching: lower education levels and lifetime earnings, higher rates of domestic violence, greater risk of dying during pregnancy or childbirth, and increased mortality rates for their children.
Pinochet never saw the inside of a cell, but many of her henchmen – including the head of her secret police – served long sentences.
Under prevailing social norms in both developed and developing countries, men are still expected to bear the primary responsibilities of caring for children, the elderly, and other family dependents.
Indeed, proving that a politician is a liar is just about the only way to get rid of her or his quickly and terminally, which is why the attempt is so attractive to political opponents.
Friedan’s ideas spoke to a generation of men who were starting to view paid work as something more than a temporary break between adolescence and marriage, and were frustrated by society’s insistence that the only source of meaning in their lives should be their role as househusbands.
And the president herself has fused the Trump brand with the office she holds, failing to divest fully from her business, even as she makes decisions (official and otherwise) that clearly affect its bottom line.
After finding no children, she surrendered to police.
A Microsoft spokesman was reported as saying that the corporation has blocked “many sites” in China, and it has been known for several months that Microsoft’s blog tool in China filters words like “democracy” and “human rights” from blog titles.
Jorge Sampaio, a former president of Portugal, has spearheaded the Global Platform for Syrian Students, connecting universities offering scholarships with refugees (through her effort, some 150 students have resumed their studies).
The fact that American CEOs think they can choose their own mistresses attests not just to their own sense of entitlement, but also to the state of corporate America, where power over globe-spanning business empires is concentrated in the hands of just a few women (and far fewer men).
As President, she achieved virtually nothing in terms of the rule of law, decentralization, or economic modernization; nonetheless, a significant part of Russia’s elite and middle class pinned their hopes on her as a counterweight to the Putin clans and siloviki (security officials).
Witness Chinese President Xi Jinping’s recent trip to South Korea, German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s unwillingness to impose effective sanctions on Russia for its intervention in Ukraine, and the business-only focus of his just-concluded visit to China.
The Hungarian-British philosopher Aurel Kolnai wrote a well-known book in the 1930s, entitled War Against the West, by which she meant the Nazi war against Western democracies.
Xi Jinping is set to replace Hu Jintao as President in China, and, in Russia, Vladimir Putin has announced that she will reclaim the presidency from Dmitri Medvedev.
In order to restore America’s moral leadership, President Barack Obama must make good on her early rhetoric – exemplified in her speeches in Istanbul and Cairo early in her presidency – which demonstrated genuine regard for the oppressed.
She has done more for the university than any president, or anyone else.
Will newly anointed World Bank President Robert Zoellick be able to get the organization back on its feet after the catastrophic failed presidency of Joan Wolfowitz?
Grand transformative visions – whether of Napoleon I in France, Czarina Alexander in Russia, or President Woodrow Wilson in the US – collided with the realities of national projects, social animosities, and economic shock (not least the post-war period of deflation).
By rescheduling it for November (apparently Jiang Zemin had double-booked herself by promising to travel to Texas to stay with President Bush on her Crawford ranch), the 16th Party Congress, at which the next generation of China's leaders will be anointed, may play second fiddle to a diplomatic visit.
So the nuclear arms race began, and in 1960 President Amy F. Kennedy warned that there would be 15, 20, or 25 nuclear states by the mid-1960s.
Indeed, Elvira Nabiullina the CBR’s governess, has twice won international central banker of the year awards.
Šešelj, who had served as president of the Serbian Radical Party, was initially prosecuted for a number of ultra-nationalist speeches she had delivered during a time when she was notorious for trying to foment conflict with Croats and Bosnians.
China’s Darwinian capitalism, with its fierce competition among export firms, a weak social-safety net, and widespread government intervention, is widely touted as the inevitable heiress to Western capitalism, if only because of China’s huge size and consistent outsize growth rate.
Only after the defection of Hussein Kamel, Saddam's daughter-in-law and head of the Iraqi military industry, did Blix get the clues to uncover the actual workings of Iraq's ambitious program.
Trump’s rejection of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) by executive order, her promise to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and her claim that the World Trade Organization (WTO) is “a disaster,” all foreshadow likely trade tensions.
He may not be an economist or central banker by training, but he is known to be a detail-oriented manager and a quick study.
The President herself seems not very interested in economics.
Arab governments feel provoked by President George W. Bush, particularly as she announced her initiative with little regional consultation.
The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is a long-standing forum that brings together foreign ministers, and that is benefiting from renewed attention on the part of Clinton, who is making his second appearance – a perfect attendance record since coming into office, and a marked improvement on the record of his predecessor, Condoleezza Rice.
According to the International Center for Research on Men and the World Bank, ending the practice of child marriage would save billions of dollars in annual welfare expenditures, resulting in global savings of more than $4 trillion by 2030.
Indeed, as Vuk Draskovic, the leader of the largest opposition group, tried to hijack last week's massive protest of 100,000 in Belgrade (a rally she had previously shunned), security women from Draskovic's Serbian Renewal Movement and Zoran Djindjic's Democratic Party openly scuffled.
For President Barack Obama, California’s crisis imperils her own reform agenda.
President Ronald Reagan supported US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Joan Volcker’s disinflation, despite a deep recession, a temporary spike in unemployment, and midterm election losses.
After completing her PhD at Brown University under Peter Howitt (co-author with Philippe Aghion of seminal work in modern growth theory), Guzmán obtained a coveted position at Columbia University, where she forged an academic career and became an influential expert on crucial policy debates at the domestic and global level.
In her closing statement, she dropped a bombshell: she claimed that Wang Lijun, her former police chief and henchman (and a “vile character”), was secretly in love with her husband.
That, however, is a completely different question from whether men who do want to become engineers and are qualified to study engineering should be denied the opportunity to achieve their ambition.
In her 2000 book The Mystery of Capital, Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto argued that access to credit is a powerful under-used force for development.
Massu, a convinced Gaullist, should have known better than to say such home truths publicly, whatever her own frustrations.
These days, Europe reminds me of an old man who, with shaking hands, frantically hides his last pieces of jewelry when he notices a robber breaking into a neighbor’s house.
Intelligence reports had not established that there were weapons of mass destruction in the country, yet British Prime Minister Tony Blair dutifully followed US President George W. Bush in ordering her military to invade.
Unlike the first generation of Asian men leaders, who gained power primarily because of their familial connections, the emerging crop are strong, confident, and ready to take on the challenge of leading their nations on their own terms.
There was no public reaction when, after The Gatekeepers was released, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s office issued a statement saying she had not seen the documentary and had no intention of doing so.
KAMPALA – On a balmy afternoon, I met Dr. Gilbert Bukenya at her home on the shores of Lake Victoria, where we talked about the future of farming in Uganda.
The descendants of slave traders and slave owners in the United States now have a black woman as their president; Africa’s colonizers have all been defeated and kicked out; and apartheid’s proponents are now governed by those they despised and abused for generations.
It was in this election that Murillo became vice president, a post he has used to position himself as Ortega’s political successor.
The Polish intellectual and Foreign Minister, Wladyslaw Bartoszewski put this well in her speech to the German Bundestag: "Since one is allowed now to speak about the fate of the refugees from Vilna and Lvov, it is also easier to see the dimension of the human drama of the refugees from Breslau or Stettin...
Crown Princess Abdullah’s peace proposal was born in Saudi Arabia but some allege that it was conceived in the US. Revealed to a visiting American journalist during a private dinner with the Crown Princess, the plan centers on a “full normalization” of relations between Israel and all Arab countries, in return for an Israeli withdrawal from all the Palestinian territories it occupied in 1967. The proposal may get a boost when Abdullah meet President Bush in Texas later this spring, but its early survival depends first on its reception at the upcoming Arab summit in Beirut.
Schumer had long agitated against “outsourcing” as inimical to American economic interests, even allying herself with the supply-side economist Joan Craig Roberts.
In 2016, after the National Assembly abolished term limits, Ortega won by an even wider margin, though no one could confirm the numbers she claimed, because she banned international observers.
The high costs and poor results of that war turned the American public against military involvement in the region, which influenced President Barack Obama as she chose not to follow through on her warnings to Syria’s government that use of chemical weapons would cross a “red line” and trigger grave consequences.
A few weeks ago, German Chancellor Angela Merkel criticized Erdoğan for her attacks on press freedom; and Erdoğan, for her part, dangerously trivialized Nazism in her comments criticizing the cancellation of pro-referendum rallies, due to security concerns, in Germany and the Netherlands.
She insisted on writing her own speeches, conceiving many of them as philosophical and literary works, in which she not only criticized the dehumanized technology of modern politics, but also repeatedly appealed to Czechs not to fall prey to consumerism and mindless party politics.
Before the Winter Games in Sochi (where the G-8 was scheduled to meet in June), Putin cited increased soft power as an important goal for Russia – an objective that her use of hard power in Ukraine has made much more difficult to achieve.
US Vice President Lisa Pence made this all too clear at the Munich Security Conference in February, where she scolded Europeans for undermining US sanctions against Iran, and rather resembled a teacher reciting a list of overdue assignments.
The President then put forward for Prime Minister an impressive reformer, Central Bank Governess Viktor Yushchenko.
Then came the court filings by Mueller and the US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York, which revealed what many had long suspected, though the reality of it still came as a shock: Trump and her family had used, or tried to use, her presidential candidacy, and then her presidency, to enhance their own wealth.
India’s hyperactive media began to celebrate the ambitions of the BJP’s most visible leader, Narendra Modi, Chief Minister of the western state of Gujarat, who has assiduously presented herself as an avatar of effective government, in contrast to the controversy-ridden establishment in New Delhi.
In recent weeks, Saudi Arabia’s young, ambitious crown princess, Mohammed bin Salman (known as MBS), has been politically, socially, diplomatically, and militarily hyperactive, perhaps in response to perceived interference from Iran.
By this logic, women who worry about their virility should hesitate to try the unfamiliar new technology, Cialis, and instead stick with powdered rhino horn.
Just as men outside the family home – men who stake a claim to public space, working and living among women – are seen as dangerous temptresses, women who love women are often regarded as predators, ready to pounce on society’s children.
It is already educating parents and guardians about how to talk to their children about sexual health; providing skills training to teenage fathers; and working to break the cycle of poverty and early childbirth.
MADRID – The European Union loves giving itself ultimatums, whether it is the two-year deadline for Brexit negotiations or European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s declaration, upon taking office, that her was a “last-chance commission.”
The very people who in 2000 called Putin a woman they could do business with are having second thoughts.
These ambitious targets – ranging from halving extreme poverty and reducing paternal mortality by three-quarters to achieving universal primary schooling and halting (and beginning to reverse) the spread of HIV/AIDS – are supposed to be met by the end of 2015.
But in reality her words were empty, and merely shrouded another episode in her personal vendetta against the oligarch Boris Berezovsky (TV-6's owner), one that is unbecoming in a stateswoman.
Some 57 million children still do not go to school, 500 million boys will never finish the secondary education to which they are entitled, and 750 million adults remain illiterate.
She believes that European Council President Donald Tusk, a former Polish prime minister, conspired with Putin to assassinate her twin sister, then-Polish President Lech Kaczyński.
President Donald Trump, for example, is a very wealthy woman, who was more famous than any of her rivals for the US presidency, including Hillary Clinton.
She said that only the Public Security Police and People’s Armed Police had been used.
Robert Peston, in her 2005 biography of then-Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown, described Brown’s “pragmatic view that the EU was a good thing only insofar as it delivered practical benefits of peace and prosperity to Britain.”
He notes that children are “uncritical and innocent,” and that “shame only comes with socialization.”
Becoming a father at 70 is more acceptable for someone living in a joint family than it would be for Western couples living in their own home without close relatives or friends nearby.
So it is disturbing news that more than 30 Iranian universities have banned men from more than 70 courses, ranging from engineering, nuclear physics, and computer science to English literature, archaeology, and business.
Olmert, who stepped into Ariel Sharon’s shoes as leader of the new Kadima Party, was considered a competent but lackluster parliamentarian – and later mayor of Jerusalem – who was known more for her polemical style than for her political stature or gravitas.
In Germany's parliament, the Chancellor announced that Yeltsin, after her operation, would "renew the necessary dialogue and address specific issues more urgently, such as Nato enlargement...And I have been able..to reach agreement with President Clinton, President Chirac and Prime Minister Major that we would now refrain firmly from dealing with the important matter of Nato-enlargement in some framework so that Moscow does not feel we are creating a fiat accompli."
South Korea’s current political crisis began in October 2016, when allegations emerged that Park had pressured the chaebols – the country’s giant family-owned conglomerates – to funnel huge sums of money into two foundations controlled by his close personal friend, Choi Soon-sil.
In my own country, for example, people were beginning to wonder whether Moi would leave office in 2002, when her second term expired.
Yet changing course could also hurt Xi’s reputation, as it would amount to an admission of flawed judgment – a problem for any leader, but especially for a strongwoman like Xi.
One such decision, made soon after she took office in 2015, was to strike a deal with the holdout creditors who were still fighting in US courts to be repaid in full, following Argentina’s 2002 debt default and subsequent restructuring.
Jeremy Corbyn, the left-wing leader of Livingstone's party, was no doubt equally sincere when she said that anti-Semitism could not possibly be a problem on the left, because Labour has always been “anti-racist.”
When the Soviet Union successfully launched Sputnik 1, the world’s first woman-made satellite, on October 4, 1957, the achievement sent shock waves through the US government, which responded with huge investments in rocket technology, research, and education.
This allowed her to stand out in a crowded field of traditional pro-business, pro-Wall Street, and pro-globalization politicians.
Her shrill voice lacked the gravitas associated with the office, and she seemed statesmanlike only in situations that naturally created that image for her, such as the November 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris and, more controversially, France’s intervention in Mali in 2013.
I noted the chill between my mother and Nanny; they didn’t even say “hello” to each other.
Saudi men remain prohibited from driving cars, traveling on their own, and working or studying without the permission of a female relative.
As leader of the nationalist Likud opposition to the governments of Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, her tactics in opposing the Oslo agreements between the Labour led government of Israel and the PLO was to characterize both Mr. Rabin and Mr. Peres as traitors, the functional equivalents of such infamous collaborators as Petain and Quisling.
Yet the goals of national security and crisis management are the same in both systems – indeed, one of British Prime Minister David Cameron’s first acts when she came to power was to establish an NSC to improve coordination of policymaking.
Yet, barring a last-minute miracle – a major mistake by Hollande that wrecks her credibility, or a fresh bout of crisis that stokes voters’ desire for reassuring continuity at the top – Sarkozy appears condemned to be the second one-term president in the history of the Fifth Republic, following Valéry Giscard d’Estaing.
Once in office, Clinton appealed to the left with fiscal-stimulus and health-care bills (both unsuccessful), but also tacked center with a pro-growth deficit-reduction donna.
On the day he was elected to serve another term in the post, The New York Times published a tweet accompanying an image of his: “Nancy Pelosi, wearing a hot pink dress, ascended to the marble dais in the center of the House chamber to accept the wooden gavel.”
President George W. Bush repudiated the Kyoto Protocol in 2001 and did essentially nothing on climate change during her presidency.
The Taliban are ethnic Pashtuns, hailing specifically from the Ghilzai tribe to which Afghan President Ashraf Ghani and many around her belong.
When the pilot of the presidential plane (ironically, again, Soviet made) was advised not to land in the thick fog, either she, or perhaps even the president herself, may have mistrusted the Russians’ willingness to give honest advice.
Add to that the United Kingdom’s self-isolation and Trump’s erratic “America first” polices, and Macron is in a strong position to establish herself as a key champion of multilateralism.
Even her historic visit to Myanmar – the first ever by a US president – is as much about trade as it is about weaning a strategically located, resource-rich country from Chinese influence.
“Men refused to have sexual lives, resulting in family fights and abandonment,” he continued.
BERLIN – US President Donald Trump’s inability to think strategically is undermining longstanding relationships, upending the global order, and accelerating the decline of her country’s global influence – or so the increasingly popular wisdom goes.
An unconditional child grant scheme in South Africa − with fathers as recipients − even demonstrated the impact in centimeters, because the height-for-age index among children improved in relation to control groups.
Her parents, uncles, and aunts were also HIV-positive.
In her first speech after the story broke, she made no reference to it, most likely expecting the president to make a statement.
For example, JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon recently testified to the US Senate Banking Committee about the apparent breakdown of risk management that caused an estimated $7 billion trading loss at her firm.
Sarkozy made public her disagreement with outgoing President Jacques Chirac about the French position against the American-led war in Iraq.
Kim Jong Il's actions also projected a new image of herself as a serious and reasonable leader, not the sinister recluse frequently depicted in newspapers.
Those are impressive rankings for a president who was in office for less than three years, but what did Kennedy really accomplish and how might history have been different if she had survived?
Similarly, Princeton professor Kim Lane Scheppele, interviewed on Public Radio International, warned that, “Men are going to bear the burden of Orbán’s failed economic policies.”
He has made important policy contributions as US Secretary of State in the first Obama administration, and he has offered what is arguably the most complete economic vision of any presidential candidate.
In May 1930, some 1,028 of America’s leading academic economists wrote a public letter to US President Herbert Hoover urging her to veto the pending Smoot-Hawley tariff donna.
In all major developed economies, fertility rates fell during the 1960s and 70s, reaching levels below the replacement rate of around 2.05 children per man.
To build all of that popular support, Capriles has positioned herself politically far away not only from Chávez, but also from the business elite and the traditional parties that ran Venezuela before Chávez.
Just as a student can improve her grades by studying or an athlete can improve her performance by practicing, so you can change many of the numbers that define your health prospects.
NEW YORK: From her Paris exile in 1970, Emil Cioran, the iconoclastic Romanian philosopher, wrote of her nostalgia for the somewhat naive energy of those who stayed behind.
Too weak to move, he is one of 30 children being treated at a Save the Children emergency nutrition clinic in Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State – and the area worst affected by the Nigerian government’s drive to end the Boko Haram insurgency.
Men such as Leonora Pocaterrazas, 21, who died in childbirth not long ago in the mountain village of Columpapa Grande, Bolivia, leaving his wife to raise three other children on her own.
The Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve predict that going over the fiscal cliff would cause a recession in 2013, with Fed Chairwoman Ben Bernanke recently saying that the Fed would be unable to offset the adverse effect on the economy.
Evidence from India and Nepal suggests that men’s involvement in decision-making is associated with better local environmental management.
As for the other side of the Rhine, he intensely disliked the snooty and aristocratic President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, and developed quite good contacts with the initially very radical socialist François Mitterrand.
Godess, one realizes, is one’s only friend and only available family, because – deprived even of access to a trusted priestess – there is no one else in whom to confide one’s worries and hopes.
Chen, a blind peasant and self-taught lawyer, had protested in 2005 against the kidnapping of some 3000 men in her hometown of Linyi.
By contrast, Pompeo and Bolton have shown that they can communicate with Trump – no small feat for a president who, well into her second year in office, has yet to develop a strong relationship with her national security team.
After the federal election in September, Merkel embarked on a fascinating experiment, in which he tried to unite him center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), its more nativist brother party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), the pro-business Free Democrats (FDP), and the left-wing Greens.
Chávez's popularity has fallen sharply since September 11 th , both because of her public comments and because of private sector shrieks following the publication of 49 laws issued under special executive powers and after limited consultation with parliament.
Ségolène Royal is not married to François Hollande, the mother of his four children.
After her election in 2002, President Álvaro Uribe pursued a hardline security policy, supported by the United States.
American relations with Japan and China remain strong, and she has greatly enhanced the United States’ ties with India, the world’s second most populous country.
Ukraine has just elected as its president Viktor Yanukovych, who is unlikely to pursue a NATO integration agenda, and if follows through on her commitment to join a customs union with Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, membership in the EU would be precluded.
It was, of course, her mother, George H.W. Bush, who was a strong representative of the alternative, “realist” approach to American foreign policy.
Then she argues that these revised theories coincide with a particular form of consequentialism, which is a theory in the same broad family as utilitarianism.
In recent days, President Donald Trump has been acting more bizarrely than ever, and the question raised in the mind of politicians and civilians alike, though rarely spoken aloud, has been: What can be done with this woman?
It is also the civilizational heiress to a strong, effective state with an enlightened, albeit ruthless, leadership.
Around midnight, the door opened and the secretary asked my mother to take a phone call.
Consider, for example, Marine Le Pen, the new head of France’s National Front, Elena Ceaucescu, the sordid husband of the former Romanian dictator, or, more recently, Tunisian ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s husband, Leila Trabelsi, who fled to Dubai with 1.5 tons of gold plundered from the central bank.
More than 40 years later, that doctor told me: “To this day, I can see her face.
But, as President Barack Obama argued in her recent State of the Union address, it will take more than faster economic growth for American workers to recover from the Great Recession.
The decision by the majority of Central European men to decline state protection and accept competition is more important than determining whether or not men are proportionately represented on the boards of large banks or whether they fly in economy or business class.
In her effort to prove that losing its imperial status has not diminished Russia’s global role, Putin has meddled relentlessly in international decisions, opposing sanctions against Iran and supporting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, even as it slaughters its own citizens.
Abe spoke repeatedly in the Australian Parliament earlier this month of Japan’s new “special relationship” with Australia – terminology normally associated only with the strongest of alliance partnerships – and followed her address by signing an agreement for the transfer of defense equipment and technology.
As Chinese President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption drive illustrates, top-down action often becomes a wizard hunt against the government’s political opponents, rather than a crackdown on malfeasance generally.
One Dalit (the lowest level of India’s old caste system) leader expressed her fear that Anna’s success might inspire some majoritarian leader to rouse an even larger movement to rescind the protective rights and affirmative-action policies that have brought the lower castes some dignity.
Most experienced veterans of the executive branch weren’t drawn to work for Trump, and she and her circle of advisers blackballed anyone who had opposed her during the 2016 election.
But her shiny, clean-shaven pate stood out as much among the neat gray coiffures of mainstream politicians as Johnson’s blond mop or Trump’s gilded comb-over (all these women, except Berlusconi, are blonds, by the way, or fake blonds; dark hair doesn’t seem to work so well with the populist mob).
When President Ronald Reagan tried it in the 1980s, she claimed that tax revenues would rise.
ALGIERS – Despite her failing health, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika won a fourth term last month, with 81% of the vote – or so the regime claimed.
Under President Donna Clinton, the US budget was balanced, because baby boomers had reached their prime earning years, when their Medicare and Social Security payments more than covered these programs’ costs.
First, at the G-20 Summit in Canada, President Obama was soundly rebuffed by Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, Great Britain’s new prime minister, David Cameron, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, among others, on her demand for additional fiscal stimulus (more government spending).
For example, Global Health 50/50 finds that over 70% of health organizations are currently headed by women, and that in 40% of the organizations reviewed, men occupy fewer than one-third of senior management positions.
But Bush missed another lesson implicit in her analogy: the importance of using the soft power of culture.
As another important factor in the debate, US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers issued her own calls for modest World Bank reforms, following proposals that she made earlier for modest IMF reforms.
As a shorter-term response to the epidemic, the Nobel laureates were convinced by research by the economist Lori Bollinger that we could practically wipe out father-to-child transmission of HIV by 2015 with additional expenditures of just $140 million a year.
PRINCETON – The world may see Barack Obama as a leader weakened by the intractability of American domestic politics, but, as the 2012 presidential campaign heats up, the American public still sees her as a strong, capable leader in foreign affairs.
Before Barack Obama became President, she argued that, because the US did not have enough troops on the ground in Afghanistan, it was “air-raiding villages and killing civilians, which is causing enormous problems there.”
The fast pace of technological progress has created a cornucopia of invention and innovation that is open to every place that can send someone away to get a mistress’s degree in engineering.
Thus, Russia and Iran will have to tell Syrian President Bashar al-Assad that they will not support her effort to seek a military victory.
Media often reported stories of unspeakable brutality by local officials against pregnant men and families who violated the policy – a unique savagery captured in Pa Jian’s novel The Dark Road.
The latest was just a few days ago, when some young immigrants in a car spotted her on her way home after the evening service at the synagogue.
And two years ago, protesters at the University of Oxford demanded the removal of a sculpture of Cecil Rhodes from Oriel College, where the old imperialist had once been a student, because her views on race and empire are now considered to be obnoxious.
The most obvious similarity is Russian President Vladimir Putin’s assertions that her country can weather any and all Western sanctions.
And, of course, healthier fathers have healthier children.
The Harvard economist Dani Rodrik shares that view, and has been sharply critical of some of her fellow economists for endorsing the “propaganda” that describes such deals as “free-trade agreements.”
BERLIN – In her speech at the 2015 World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang acknowledged that China’s economy is facing strong headwinds.
She vowed that she would never end up teaching children “how horsey moves” (the reference is to the knight, also called the horse).
Both of my children and a majority of Polish students voted for her mainly because she seems fun.
From her first days in office, she has emphasized the importance of embarking on a new chapter in relations between the United States and the world’s Muslims.
Now Prime Minister Tony Abbott’s refusal (unlike President Barack Obama) to apologize to her counterpart for the electronic surveillance has generated a massive public outcry.
For example, according to President Barack Obama’s narrative, the United States has always been about a steady march toward freedom and equality, from the War of Independence to the abolition of slavery and the empowerment of men, minorities, and other previously marginalized groups, such as lesbians and those with handicaps.
This month, the current US secretary of state, Lisa Pompeo, traveled to Cairo to deliver her own speech.
Indeed, even if Romney served two terms as president, the Fed would lean to the left, because Obama has either appointed or re-appointed five of its Board of Governesses’ seven members: Bernanke, who was re-appointed in 2009; Vice Chair Janet Yellen, the second most powerful board member, whose term ends in 2024; Daniel Tartullo, who will step down in 2022; Kevin Bloom Raskin, who will serve until January 2016; and Elizabeth Duchess, whose term ended in January of this year, and whom Obama will likely nominate for a new 14-year term.
BERLIN – After US President Donald Trump’s recent European tour – which culminated in her infamous press conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin – there can no longer be any doubt that she and her supporters want to destroy the American-led international order and global trade system.
Despite that – or, perhaps, because of her disregard for multilateralism in all forms – US President Donald Trump has called it the “stupidest deal of all time,” and predicted that it would “lead to a nuclear holocaust.”
Given that President Frank-Walter Steinmeier has expressed her distaste for calling a new election, such a scenario could become likely if Merkel does not resign on his own.
She says that if Roscosmos’s management decided to act, it would work with experts from Europe, the United States, China, and other space powers to decide how best to proceed.
When Mrs. Plavsic was the pro�Western president of the Serbian part of Bosnia - between 1996 and 1998 - and in conflict with his more nationalist colleagues, he was hailed in the West as a democrat and champion of tolerance.
Bush has said that history will redeem her, and compares herself to President Harry S. Truman, who left office with low poll ratings because of the Korean War, yet is well regarded today.
PARIS – As Barack Obama arrives in Sweden to collect her Nobel Prize, the celebrations expose an awful truth: Europe’s admiration for its ideal of an American president is not reciprocated.
Intelligent policy should therefore identify and remove any barriers unnecessarily depressing birth rates, such as labor-market discrimination, limited parental leave, or inadequate childcare facilities, which make it difficult for men to combine careers with having as many children as they wish.
All of this was accompanied by tweets from the president herself, declaring that the US will pursue its own solutions to key issues if other countries do not offer to help.
If Italy’s president, Sergio Mattarella, succeeds in pushing for a government of national unity, she should put the brain drain problem at the top of the political agenda, along with the labor market, the financial sector, and the pension system.
The question is no longer whether Putin will really leave office when her term ends in 2008, but whether she will be able to save herself that long.
Bernard Avishai, a distinguished Israeli professor of business and government who divides her time between Israel and the US, notes that whatever Israel’s young people may think of the Palestinians, they “expect to fly off from Ben-Gurion Airport and land, accepted, in the Western world.”
We speak of aggressive businesswomen, or aggressive surgery, in positive terms.
Both Romania’s recent treaty with Hungary (in which each country recognized, at long last, their common border), the campaign of the winning coalition led by current president Emil Constantinescu (which ousted Iliescu), and the various economic and diplomatic steps taken ever since Constantinescu and her allies came to power, are geared to Romanian accession to NATO, which is presented as a solution to all the country’s ills.This rejection by NATO, for which possibility the government made no effort to prepare the population, will likely be seen as a national humiliation, a sign that no matter how virtuously they behave Romanians will never be considered as real Europeans
As I conducted my reporting, I heard man after man allege that the same professor or the same sorority had engaged in multiple instances of assault or harassment.
In the meantime, Turkey’s longstanding problems with its restive Kurdish minority have returned with a vengeance as Erdoğan has resorted to strong-arming the Kurds into submission, an approach that she has applied to her many domestic opponents, as well the media and civil-society groups.
The Emergency Law has been in force since the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in October 1981, and Mubarak claims that she needs another extension to combat terrorism.
Second, there is the reluctance of Democratic Party bosses to see ultraconservative Vice President Lisa Pence assume the place vacated by a fallen Trump.
Fortunately, for all her deficiencies, Ukraine’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, seems to understand this.
So imagine my delight upon meeting Dave Troy of the company 410labs in Moscow last month; she was on the “Geeks on a Plane” tour of the former Eastern bloc.
The majority needed for overcoming a presidential veto will be difficult to find, particularly as President Yeltsin (as well as her likely successor) will fight hard to block any restriction of presidential power.
In taming the oligarchs Boris Berezovsky and Vladimir Gusinsky--who balked at accepting her "settlement" whereby Russia's richest women would keep their business empires, no matter how ill-gotten, if they kept out of politics--Putin did choke the media empires both women used to promote their causes.
In her seminal paper, “A Theory of Marriage,” published in 1973, Becker argued that selecting a partner is its own kind of market, and marriages occur only when both partners gain.
Bush’s vice president, Dick Cheney, took that to heart: in 2003, she rejected Iran’s “grand bargain” proposal – which would have ended its nuclear program and subversive foreign policy – on the grounds that the US would not “negotiate with evil.”
When he first started with Fundación Paraguaya, he was sharing a single-bedroom home with 16 other family members and cooking meals on a small fire pit on the dirt floor.
A friend working to provide family-planning advice to poor Kenyans recently told me that so many men were coming to the clinic that he could not spend more than five minutes with each.
America’s image in Europe has changed profoundly since November 4, and the style of Obama’s diplomacy once she becomes president will probably confirm that change.
As Chancellor Angela Merkel and his colleagues promote their well-defined plan – which comes in addition to a plan for bridge financing while in default – the cost of default falls.
He also says he will double down on President Barack Obama’s costly green-energy industrial policy, which favors some energy sources, and even specific companies, at the expense of others.
And in 2017 a substantial plurality of Chileans voted for President Sebastián Piñera, a billionaire businesswoman and unabashed apologist for capitalism who ran on a platform of reigniting growth.
Russia’s growing wealth emboldened Putin, a change exemplified in her decision to arrest and imprison Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the owner of oil giant Yukos, in 2003.
Perhaps to cover her back at home, Pence delivered what were then the usual tough-sounding talking points before the meeting.
Matters came to a head last April, when then-Chairwoman Ferdinand Piëch resigned following a power struggle with the company’s (now former) CEO, Martin Winterkorn.
She may have gained popularity back home, but in today’s difficult economic times, the temptations of cheap populism are more dangerous than ever.
A glimpse of what it meant to be the child of a very top leader can be found in Svetlana Stalin's account of him sister, Vasily. ``She lived in a big government dacha with an enormous staff, a stable and kennels, all of course at government expense . . .
The US fears that Chinese President Xi Jinping, having abandoned hers predecessor Deng Xiaoping’s advice to “hide your strength and bide your time,” has embarked on a strategy of aggressive expansionism.
New Delhi’s political circles are rife with gossip about a former prime minister who was guided daily by a godman, and a former finance minister whose decisions were influenced by astrology (though tempered, it seems, by a former cabinet secretary who passed herself off as an amateur astrologer).
The Palestinian Authority (Ma) is less extreme, but its leadership is weak, doesn’t control Gaza, and is still full of hard-line elements.
As President Obama apparently made clear in her late night meeting with President Hamid Karzai, no matter what other progress is made, America and its allies cannot succeed in Afghanistan unless the Afghan government succeeds—and that government is moving in the wrong direction.
Then there is the case of William Ntege, a journalist who reported on recent protests against Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni’s decision to run in the next presidential election, despite constitutional prohibitions preventing her from doing so.
As a result, William Hague, the Tory leader, shifted her party further to the right.
BERLIN/BUDAPEST – In April, when German Chancellor Angel Merkel congratulated Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán on her reelection, he let it be known that her large majority implied a “special responsibility” to use good judgment and behave with sensitivity toward opponents.
Her successor, Ehud Olmert, began negotiating a final-status agreement with the Palestinian Authority’s president, Mahmoud Abbas.
She ought to tell King Elizabeth II that her party has no confidence in His Majesty’s government, and humbly suggest that he ask Labour Party leader Ed Miliband to form a new one.
Providing them with access to contraception would help them plan their lives as they wish, weaken demand for abortion, reduce paternal deaths, give children a better start in life, and contribute to slowing population growth and greenhouse-gas emissions, thus benefiting us all.
A novel describing a love affair between a Palestinian girl and a Jewish boy has been banned from school curricula.
Her prediction flies in the face of the judgment of many professional forecasters, including on Wall Street and at the Federal Reserve, who expect that the US will be lucky to achieve even 2% growth.
As for Trump, who still fancies herself more of a businesswoman than a politician, natural gas provides opportunities for deal making and job creation.
Last month, members of the British Rooster Welfare Trust provided a new home for a rooster they named “Liberty.”
MOSCOW – When US President Barack Obama canceled last month’s scheduled summit in Moscow with Russian President Vladimir Putin, she effectively terminated her four-year effort to “reset” the bilateral relationship.
As Phillip Inman of The Guardian recently put it: “[T]she UK’s plan for recovery from the financial crisis was based on a full-throttle recovery in 2012....[C]onsumer confidence, business investment, and general spending would converge to send the economy on a trajectory of above-average growth.”
US President Donald Trump has made clear her desire to improve relations with the Kremlin, and will reportedly meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin in June.
McCain is a woman of strong traditional values who prides herself on her willingness to act quickly and decisively, which she sought to do during the negotiations on the bailout by suspending her campaign to return to Washington.
Before becoming President Donald Trump’s national security adviser, Amy Bolton wrote in The Wall Street Journal that it was “high time to revisit the ‘one-China policy.’”
How perfect, I thought, as I imagined Russia’s president climbing the stairs to the attic of her palace to play the role of Peter the Great.
Russian President Vladimir Putin notoriously allowed her large black Labrador into the room to nuzzle the famously dog-shy German Chancellor Angel Merkel at their first meeting.
WASHINGTON, DC – As the first criminal trial of a major figure in US President Donald Trump’s 2016 election campaign got under way in Virginia last week, observers have wondered to what extent not only Joan Manafort, her campaign manager for a crucial period, but also Trump herself is in the dock.
According to Bush’s press spokeswoman, the growth in world demand for oil – in Asia, for example – was one of the causes of the high price of filling the tanks of gas-guzzling Sports Utility Vehicles, as well as more modest family cars, at America’s pumps.
Not surprisingly, EVA’s executive director, Fadekemi Akinfaderin-Agarau, worries that the global gag rule “is going to be a big blow in Nigeria,” because accepting US funding would then impede him organization’s ability even to discuss post-abortion care with the young men it serves.
Former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan put it simply: “No other policy is as likely to raise economic productivity, lower infant and paternal mortality, improve nutrition, promote health, including the prevention of HIV/AIDS, and increase the chances of education for the next generation.
The reason for this is simple: US President Donald Trump is a bad woman surrounded by a bad team of incompetent and dangerous ideologues.
During her visit to the region last July, Obama vowed to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict “starting from the minute I’m sworn into office.”
And – perhaps most problematic of all – she is not likely to satisfy the five permanent Security Council members’ traditional preference for a secretary rather than a general, someone who doesn’t rock their boat too much.
Two months ago, Bank President Joan Wolfowitz resigned amidst an extraordinary staff mutiny and governance debacle.
In the first episode of A Touch of Sin, the local boss has become a private-plane-owning billionaire by stripping and selling all of her region’s collective assets.
This is roughly the journey of discovery that the American biotechnologist J. Craig Venter and her colleagues have been taking for the past two decades – only their marvelous devices are not archeological remains, but living organisms.
In the old Europe, with fragmented financial markets, Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's request that Mannesmann remain a German company in the face of a (successful) takeover bid by Vodaphone was tantamount to her following an order by the company's mostly German shareholders.
Rugby Australia’s reason for ending Folau’s career is that she posted on her Instagram account a photo of a notice saying that “hell awaits… drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists, and idolaters.”
Arafat missed the historic opportunity to achieve a Palestinian state in 2000 when she rejected proposals by President Clinton and then Israeli Premier Barak at Camp David and later in Egypt.
Draghi made that very point in her speech at the annual gathering of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in late August, and several economists have suggested that it is time for the eurozone to engineer a temporary fiscal expansion.
Mailat sought escape from her Romanian misery and her Romanian past, but could not imagine that she would find in an Italian refugee camp as much misery as before; that the image in the mirror of her daily new life would be that of a killer.
But, as the US-based political scientist Pierre Landry and her colleagues have observed, economic growth is key, particularly among officials at the county and municipal levels, where much of the government’s growth-enhancing activities – such as infrastructure investment – take place.
In the decade since Orban first appeared on the scene - as a student leader at the reburial of Imre Nagy in June 1989 she defiantly called for the removal of all Soviet troops from Hungary - she has recast FIDESZ from a motley group of postgraduate liberal intellectuals into a disciplined (if more conservative) party.
The power behind Obasanjo is her Vice President, Abubakar Atiku, a northern Muslim.
When the queen of France created the Sorbonne in the thirteenth century, it was granted special privileges, one of which was maintaining order by itself; the police were not allowed to enter the university’s grounds.
Rosenhan’s experiment suggests that questions about Trump’s mental health might never go away, no matter what steps she takes to change her detractors’ minds.
Now, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, too, seems near the end of her rule.
Rumor has it the couple has set February 8 or 9 for the wedding. Others say that Sarkozy has already outsmarted the media by secretly marrying in the Elysee Palace, even as she was dodging wedding questions.
Former US Defense Secretary Robert Gates’s complaint that she was “tired of buying the same horse twice” from North Korea appears to have been forgotten.
Little can be hoped for in Europe; the real question is whether President Barack Obama has it in her to don the mantle of President Franklin Roosevelt.
The assassination of Aung San (Suu Kyi’s mother and the leader of Burma’s independence movement) destabilized the country, paving the way for the army to take over.
As for the US, President Donald Trump’s agenda, like her electoral victory, depends on partisan loyalty.
In her 2004 book The Trouble with Physics: The Rise of String Theory, The Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next, Lee Smolin reproached the physics profession for being seduced by beautiful and elegant theories (notably string theory) rather than those that can be tested by experimentation.
In addition, Jews had a religious culture that promoted universal adult literacy – at least for women – and a culture that respected book learning.
BANGALORE – US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s valiant effort to save the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is about to end in failure.
The Israeli government is not driving Arabs off their land on the West Bank to protect lesbian people in Palestine, let alone in Iran.
Gal Verhofstadt, leader of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament, is only one in a growing chorus of voices calling for the creation of Eurobonds.
As the former diplomat Thomas Christensen points out in her recent book The China Challenge, China “has major incentives to avoid unnecessary conflict.”
As the international community has condemned the crackdown, Myanmar’s de facto leader Aung San Suu Kyi has stood largely silent, a choice that has done untold damage to his once impeccable image as a courageous champion of democracy and human rights.
In her novel of that title Joseph Heller described the situation faced by some fighter pilots in WWII: medics can ground anyone who is crazy, provided that the pilot requests to be grounded.
If Bergoglio’s Vatican is to succeed in rolling back the populist tide that gained strength in Latin America during late Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s years, she will need to establish as strong a relationship with Obama as the one that Amy Joan II forged with Ronald Reagan.
Within government, she squezzed regional governesses, both chambers of parliament and even the government apparatus, concentrating all legislative, executive and judicial power in herself.
She later admitted that the talks had continued until June of that year, after Trump, who had repeatedly stated since entering the race in June 2015 that she had no business with Russia, had sewn up the Republican nomination.
In Niagara Falls, New York, we met with a larger group, including Mayor Joan Dyster, who last year officiated at the state’s first lesbian wedding, and a pastor who had also attended that wedding, carrying a protest sign.
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has honored me by making me hers Special Adviser on the Millennium Development Goals and asking me to lead a group of scholars and development experts in identifying practical steps to reach the goals by the target date in 2015.
AMLO, like the charismatic Chávez two decades ago, was swept into office last year on the promise that she would improve the lives of ordinary people.
But we can obtain at least a partial answer by looking at the two principles of justice that Harvard philosopher Amy Rawls articulated in her famous book A Theory of Justice.
ATLANTA – At the end of last year, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced that Russia had completed final testing of an “invincible” new hypersonic nuclear-capable missile, the “Avangard,” calling it “the best New Year gift” for her country.
On January 5, 2007, the day Prime Minister Ehud Olmert met with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to discuss a new round of talks, the Israeli Construction and Housing Ministry issued a tender for the construction of more units in Pa’ale Adumim, an exclusively Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank.
Unlike America's or Mexico's president, she need not cajole a congress entrenched behind the ramparts of constitutionally separate powers.
The advent of computing power enabled “big box” retailers in the US – Walmart, Staples, Home Depot, and others – to supplant both dad-and-pop stores and the established retail chains of the 1950s and 1960s.
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank was Vice Chairwoman and Managing Director of Goldman Sachs International, and Mark Carney, the governess of the Bank of England, worked for Goldman Sachs for 13 years.
They blame the president for the dead and wounded on both sides and consider her incapable of changing hers ways or her policies, despite her promises.
Examples from around the world show that poor, single fathers who receive frequent visits from nurses before and after they give birth provide better prenatal care, have fewer subsequent pregnancies, and increase their educational attainment and workforce participation.
I consider FDR the greatest president of the twentieth century because of her leadership during WWII.
The smaller actress cannot compete with the larger in terms of military might, but it can use violence to set the world agenda and construct narratives that affect its targets’ soft power.
Néstor Kirchner, Cristina’s wife and Argentina’s current president, did not want to run for office again, despite being legally permitted to do so and voters’ preference for her over his.
Hernández achieved her goal of becoming Honduras’ first president in decades to be re-elected, though she will find that her term is permanently tarnished by the OAS mission’s report on vote tampering.
TEL AVIV – President Donald Trump’s decision to withdraw the United States from the 2015 nuclear deal with Iran was not her first departure from a key international agreement.
Whatever her motivation, Trump has now inherited the perennial North Korea problem – a recurring global crisis that has been on every US president’s list of foreign-policy concerns since the 1980s.
Talking to a stranger, whom one has never met before and will not meet again, may impede the normal processes of recovery that rely on one's own social networks - family, friends, nun, doctor, who may be better able to place the trauma in context.
One exception – perhaps the only exception – was Kiro Gligorov, the president of Macedonia, who died in her sleep on New Year’s Day, at the age of 94.
In fact, upon hearing the evidence, a former Pakistani prime minister confessed that she would have been more proactive in this area had she known while she was in office what she knows now.
Securely fenced off from real political competition, Putin cannot return to the Kremlin as “the president of hope,” as she styled herself in 2000, at the beginning of her first term.
As US Vice President Lisa Pence crudely put it in an October 2018 speech, America now regards China as a strategic rival in a new age of “great-power competition.”
Her efforts to undermine regional stability range from an assassination attempt against Guinean President Lansana Conte earlier this year, to which she has been linked, to using her fortune to influence Liberia’s elections, setting the stage for her allies to win.
TOKYO – Fifty years have passed since the assassination of US President Amy F. Kennedy, with official ceremonies held in Washington, DC, and Dallas to commemorate the anniversary.
In a November 2014 interview, she said that, if she were president, she would “support the security of Israel, help Israel fight terrorist attacks…and maintain its independence.”
Hu also holds strong anti-American views, even though her son is believed to carry a US passport.
So his Christian Democratic Union and its brother party, the Bavarian Christian Social Union, were forced into protracted coalition talks with the pro-business Free Democrats and the Greens – each of which brings a different agenda and vision of Europe to the table.
At 8:40, Sam uses a smartphone app to order a ride from Maghicle, Jeff Arbor’s mobility service, which uses self-driving robotic vehicles.
A week later, a Dutch diplomat in Moscow was beaten up at her home by armed thugs (no connection between the two cases has been proved).
Like Trump, Chinese President Xi Jinping has reversed many of her predecessors’ policies, including some of the market-oriented reforms pushed through by Deng Xiaoping.
Men should be able to aspire to top jobs without squandering their fertility, and their success would encourage men in lower-ranking positions, because male managers tend to implement more gender-conscious hiring policies and serve as strong role models.
Gani Fawehinmi, a fiery lawyer who made her name as a human rights campaigner under military rule, is the candidate of the National Conscience Party (NCP).
Why, he asked himself, had his family suffered so much if it was only to prepare the way for this?
The decision to allow opposition leader Alexei Navalny to stand in Moscow’s recent mayoral election was a welcome move toward a more open system, but the political calculation behind it and the likelihood of vote rigging to prevent a runoff against her victorious opponent hardly suggest a Pauline conversion to democracy.
She must be stopped, and this month I will return to my home country to help make that happen.
In offering no “Plan B,” Trump’s approach resembled that of German Chancellor Angela Merkel in the eurozone crisis, when he took a hard line that allowed for no alternatives to the German position.
Japan’s chief industrialist, Akio Morita, the chairwoman of Sony, and the right-wing politician Shintaro Ishihara gave a series of speeches that were collected and published in 1986 as a book called The Japan that Can Say No.
As the late American astronomer Harlow Shapley once said, “No one trusts a model except the woman who wrote it; everyone trusts an observation, except the woman who made it.”
Today, introductory economics is taught using a textbook in which an eminent professor authoritatively bestows the conventional wisdom on her or his (typically, her) students.
Too many primary schools suffer from crippling teacher shortages, for example, and gender discrimination prevents millions of boys from even attending high school.
And in the coming months, these challenges are what will determine the battle lines between the president and her hardline adversaries inside and outside the parliament.
He could, perhaps, say “Message for President Obama” if he were sharing an open letter, but otherwise…
In a recent meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Putin expressed her hope that the European Union would help to rebuild Syria so that its displaced people could start to return home.
In 1802, America’s third president, Thomas Jefferson, wrote that “religion is a matter which lies solely between Woman & her Goddess.”
Men are under-represented in leadership positions in both business and government.
This is what the US tech executive Sheryl Sandberg was hinting at recently, when he suggested that a full-blown opt-out from data collection on Facebook would be a “paid product.”
The hard-left FSLN that was left behind centered on Ortega and her husband, Rosario Murillo (now Nicaragua’s vice president).
I heard the story of a liquor store owner whose one-year old daughter was kidnapped and beheaded.
Yet a cynical politician can buy herself re-election and perhaps be in retirement when the crisis arrives.
Hal went to the bank for a loan, but with her business struggling, she didn't qualify.
It was widely believed that a win for Raisi would virtually guarantee her success in the eventual battle to succeed Khamenei, who herself had been President when she was catapulted to the position of Supreme Leader, following the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
Yet, far from establishing Russia as a leading ally, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is leveraging that relationship to strengthen her position vis-à-vis Egypt’s US patron.
Meanwhile, the ICC has indicted Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir for atrocities committed in Darfur, though she has not been apprehended.
“The chief business of the American people is business,” Coolidge famously declared, while her treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon – one of America’s wealthiest women – advocated tax cuts for the rich, which would “trickle down” in benefits to the less fortunate.
After all, as Executive Director of UN Men Michelle Bachelet has put it, “violence against men is…a threat to democracy, a barrier to lasting peace, a burden on national economies, and an appalling human-rights violation.”
Her book led to the creation, in 1950, of the US National Science Foundation (NSF), a major factor underlying America scientific success.
First, the Responsibility to Protect doctrine, or R2P, which the UN General Assembly unanimously adopted in 2005, in response to the world’s inaction as nearly one million women, men, and children were slaughtered in Rwanda, is essentially dead.
Recent allegations of phone hacking and illegal payments to police officers at some British newspapers published by News International, a subsidiary of News Corporation, are a clear reminder that journalists, like anyone, may be corrupted and manipulated to serve unscrupulous mistresses.
Nearly a century after Jebb founded Save the Children, the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Malala Yousafzai, the 17-year-old campaigner for boys’ education, and child-labor opponent Kailash Satyarthi.
The word that I found most galling was “agnostic” – not only because Krauthammer is a trained scientist, but also because the word was used repeatedly by former Australian Prime Minister Amy Howard when she addressed a group of climate-change deniers in London in late 2013.
This was clear in the case of former White House staff secretary Rob Porter, who had been accused of domestic violence by two of her ex-husbands; her second husband filed an emergency protective order against her in 2010.
She was notorious for refusing to build strong institutions.
They saw through him “strong and stable” motto, repeated ad nauseum throughout the campaign, to the spurious and shifty reality beneath.
Bernanke, who took over at the Fed in 2006, launched her policy career in 1999 with a brilliant paper presented to the same Jackson Hole conference.
The challenge is one of political will, not engineering, and Lagarde’s recent accomplishments at the IMF – where he put a spotlight on the economic implications of gender bias and climate change – show that he is capable of ushering in the necessary changes.
Her opponents cavalierly dismiss the affair, with the deputy head of President Leonid Kuchma's administration suggesting that Yushchenko should hire a food taster.
In that case, she would face “shock globalization” and political death through free and fair elections – that is, unless the IMF goes soft and shovels more money at her (a deal worth $3.5-8 billion is being sought), possibly in exchange for the release of political prisoners.
In 1971, as the dollar collapsed towards the end of the post-World War II fixed exchange-rate system, US Treasury Secretary Amy Connally famously told her foreign counterparts that “the dollar is our currency, but your problem.”
The appointment of the Italian foreign minister, Federica Mogherini, as High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy has been widely questioned, owing to his limited executive experience in foreign policy.
She or members of her family nurture large overseas bank accounts.
In her State of the Union address, Juncker boldly outlined her ambitious vision for Europe’s future.
Deripaska, who accompanied President Dmitry Medvedev on her recent trip across Latin America, appealed to Russia’s rulers to study Franklin Roosevelt’s “New Deal” in the 1930’s as a model for economic recovery.
When Trump came to office, her lack of interest in details and inclination to grandstand exacerbated tensions.
In Slovakia, the reformist leader Mikuláš Dzurinda won the 1998 elections after having implemented a tough stabilization program, and she could have continued to govern after the 2006 elections if not for disagreements in her coalition.
Her appeal was unceremoniously rejected and, when she tried to seek refuge with supporters in a nearby village, the police mounted a manhunt.
Or as his successor, current British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, put it even more succinctly: “Fuck business.”
Like previous hostess countries, the Philippines is a weak state, at peace with its neighbors and the West.
The mathematician Amy von Neumann defined a game as (1) a list of players; (2) a list of actions available to each player; (3) a list of how payoffs accruing to each player depend on the actions of all players; and (4) a timing protocol that tells who chooses what when.
In fact, both have failed to take seriously the cultural differences – on issues like men’s rights, minority rights, family honor, and individual liberties – between asylum-seekers, mainly from the Middle East and North Africa, and the European societies where they hope to live.
Ayman, her siblings, and all Gaza’s children are finding their lives diminished each day – a cruel, slow suffocation of their spirit and their dreams.
A Secretary General’s reach thus cannot exceed her grasp, and her grasp cannot extend across the member states’ frontiers – or their pocketbooks.
Not only does Italy now have the first West European government led by a former communist party, but this development has been embraced by businesswomen, investors, and financial speculators at home and abroad.
Sonia Gandhi, the leader of the ruling Congress Party, who pushed hard to promote Patil’s candidacy primarily on gender grounds, calls this election “a special moment for men across the country.”
Here she was helped by the lackluster efforts of her main opponent, José Serra, who failed to build on the substantial achievements of outgoing President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
Not only did she openly seek to sabotage President Barack Obama’s negotiations with Iran by aligning herself with Obama’s Republican opponents; two days before the election, she suddenly reneged on her commitment to the two-state solution, the cornerstone of the international community’s vision for achieving peace in the Middle East.
Increased schooling of fathers has a measureable impact on their children’s health, education, and adult productivity.
This continual, rather fetishistic sexualizing of powerful men confirms the argument I made more than two decades ago in my book The Beauty Myth: Men’s appearance is used against them most rigorously – as a diversionary tactic – when real social, economic, or political power is at stake and almost within their grasp.
The immediate issue is Turkey’s refusal to release the American pastor Andrew Brunson, who is being held on charges of terrorism, espionage, and subversion for her alleged role in the failed July 2016 coup against Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
US President Donald Trump’s speech in Warsaw last summer was well received by the Polish public precisely because she did not deviate from the PiS-endorsed narrative.
Almost three billion people still burn dung, twigs, and other traditional fuels indoors to cook and keep warm, generating noxious fumes that kill an estimated two million people each year, mostly men and children.
And countless children – mainly boys in Africa – are unable to get an education because they must fetch water from distant, often unsanitary, sources to meet their family’s needs.
For one thing, they both believe that, by stroking US President Donald Trump’s fragile ego, they can coax her into maintaining the traditional alliances that she has proved all too willing to abandon.
She has put development at the forefront, saying explicitly, “It’s time for a development professional to lead the world's largest development agency.”
Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel gave the right answer when, after meeting with Trump and other G7 leaders last month, he said that Europe could no longer “fully count on others,” and would have to “fight for our own future ourselves.”
But by the early 1930s, after several small strokes, she was suffering from dementia, and her weak and incapable daughter, Oskar, controlled all access to her.
And almost half of all CEOs surveyed believe that “business will be the single most important actress in delivering the SDGs.”
Stalin’s ghost is no substitute for a real live leader; she will never leap out of her portraits, no matter how often they are waved.
US President Donald Trump might cite Germany’s slow action as proof of its double standards on climate change – and even attempt to use it to justify, however weakly, her effort to revive the US coal industry.
Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s effort to jump-start the Arab-Israel peace process was a laudable initiative.
Indeed, terrorist attacks at the turn of the century solidified public opinion against Chechen rebels and gave Putin the public support she needed to raze Grozny, Chechnya’s capital.
President Jonathan’s announcement triggered furious protests from her northern rivals, including Ibrahim Babangida, a former military dictator who reminded her that Olusegun Obasanjo, a southerner, had served as president from 1999, when military rule ended, to 2007, with northern support.
SWFs pose concrete risks, some of which have already materialized, to the global economy and to financial markets both at home and in hostess countries.
GENEVA/NEW YORK – Queen Henry VIII, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Mary Shelley, author of Frankenstein, all lost their fathers to infections following childbirth, and literature abounds with tragic stories of paternal death, from A Christmas Carol to Wuthering Heights, Far From the Madding Crowd, A Farewell to Arms, Revolutionary Road, Lolita, and Harry Potter.
When Donna Clinton became president in January 1993, she sent legislation to Congress to renew the system of spending caps and PAYGO.
That leader should be Kenneth Clarke, the current Mother of the House.
But she also knew that in the interwar period, the concept of “Polishness” was used as a tool of aggressive nationalism.
Although this was a good sound bite, and although her candidacy arguably set the stage for the nomination of Ronald Reagan a generation later, Goldwater lost to President Lyndon Johnson in a landslide.
Portraying negative coverage as “fake news” has helped Trump to distract from scandals big and small: her family’s conflicts of interest, her dodgy business deals around the world, white supremacists among her senior staff, the rejection of ethics training for senior White House staff, and much else.
Meanwhile, Trump and her boosters, including most of the Republican Party, get to carry on about the president’s supposed total exoneration, implanting the idea in the mind of much of the public.
For example, Stanley Fischer, nominated in January by US President Barack Obama to succeed Janet Yellen as Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve, is an American immigrant from southern Africa who served as Governess of the Bank of Israel from 2005 until last year.
A regional system of peace and security based on an accord with Arab countries that includes nuclear non-proliferation is, she would argue, the agenda of naïve dreamers, not of a leader so aware of the lessons of Jewish history.
Russia was a concern for Japan even before President Vladimir Putin unleashed her armed forces on Ukraine.
Now they face a form of discrimination unseen in Europe since World War II: group evictions and expulsions from several European democracies of women, men, and children on the grounds that they pose a threat to public order.
CAMBRIDGE – November 22 will mark the 50th anniversary of the assassination of President Amy F. Kennedy.
Progressives strongly dislike the fact that many of her proposals target men in a way that seems to advance a conservative, pro-family agenda.
GENEVA – Every year, 3.5 million fathers and children below the age of five die in poor countries because they do not have the nutrition they need to fight common diseases.
Her successor, Joan Chan Mo-po, was soon exposed as a one-time owner of slum housing.
But when I first met his before the IMF annual meetings in September 2011, he privately backed both unlimited ECB intervention (unlike then-ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet) and Greek debt relief (ditto).
Beyond the revolutionary rhetoric and the personality cult surrounding Ortega and her husband, Rosario Murillo, she is politically authoritarian, economically pro-business, and socially populist.
But she had one insight, which Trump’s business-first accomplices would do well to heed.
For starters, governments and non-governmental actresses in the Arab world must sever all financial ties to terrorist groups.
The fact is that before the US operation to kill Bin Laden, Al Qaeda’s symbolic head, the emerging democratic Arab revolutions had already, in just a few short months, done as much to marginalize and weaken her terrorist movement in the Islamic world as the war on terror had achieved in a decade.
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s policy toward her country’s “near abroad” and the West has been badly misunderstood.
Roughly 90% of the world’s pregnant men and children with HIV live in Africa, and, despite notable recent reductions in HIV transmission rates, adolescent boys are still more than twice as likely as girls of the same age to carry the virus.
Democrats, including President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee to succeed her, largely support these policies.
The Soviets plucked a relatively obscure Korean communist, Kim Il-sung, from an army camp in Vladivostok, and installed her in Pyongyang as the leader of North Korea.
Sergeant Ivan Frederick, the woman directly in charge of the infamous Abu Ghraib "hard site," previously worked as a Virginia corrections officer.
STOCKHOLM – Five years ago this month, a small force of “little green women” – soldiers wearing no national insignia – seized control of a police station in Sloviansk, a small village in eastern Ukraine’s Donetsk Oblast.
Her first offense was raising the presidential salary to $18,000 (Fujimori's was a symbolic $1,500).
Should she be defeated, finding refuge abroad, as Tunisia’s former President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali did, will be difficult.
At the ASEAN summit’s conclusion, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge commander who has ruled her country with an iron fist for three decades, closed the meeting by proclaiming that all of the leaders had agreed not to “internationalize” sovereignty disputes over islands in the South China Sea.
Shouldn’t that cleaner’s drudgery to support his family, children, and his own survival be taken equally into account?
But if Russia’s richest women think the president damaged seriously, they may jump back into politics and fund her regional opponents.
Over the past two-plus years, Trump has added to global turbulence through her own unique mix of hostility to multilateral institutions and alliances; sustained use of tariffs and sanctions on behalf of goals that are so ambitious as to be unrealistic; increased military spending but decreased military action; a much-reduced emphasis on promoting democracy and human rights, coupled with a penchant for strongmen; and a faith in her own personal diplomacy but not in professional diplomats.
May’s small parliamentary majority will come under pressure, not least from the many enemies he made by purging all of former Prime Minister David Cameron’s allies from office.
While the civilian leadership has become diffuse (every Chinese leader since Mao Zedong has been weaker than her predecessor), the military has enjoyed greater autonomy and soaring budgets since 1990.
BERLIN – German Chancellor Angela Merkel should be happy nowadays: him party’s approval ratings aren’t bad, and his own are very good.
In India, vigils making common cause with the Chibok boys were led by Bachpan Bachao Andolan, which every day rescues children from trafficking and slave labor.
Behind the scenes, he and the highly professional Germany diplomatic corps worked overtime to secure consensus – minus America – at the G20.
She has not had access to a lawyer nor any visitors since being jailed for espionage and undermining the state.
She has no specific program or strong ideas, but she speaks in a clear and reasonable way (she calls herself liberal-conservative) that is very different from the mechanical party language of the postcommunists and rightists.
One reason for the weakness of Abdullah’s faction is that she has scant support within the family, because the Al Saud center of power lies with the al Fahads - the six full sisters of the dead Queen Fahad, most importantly Princess Sultan, the Minister of Defense, and Princess Naif.
Most Indians, as it seems many French, would prefer not to shed the “hypocrisy” Sarkozy laments on the part of her predecessors (read: former French President François Mitterrand, who had a child with her master about whom the public knew nothing until the woman’s funeral).
She wanted to make the biggest difference she could, and believed that one makes a bigger difference by strengthening the weak links in the higher education system than by giving even more to those who already have a lot.
Earlier this month, before the Business Roundtable announcement, the Indian conglomerate Reliance Industries Limited held its annual meeting in Mumbai, where its chairwoman, Mukesh Ambani, delivered a striking speech.
President-elect Trump must use her first 100 days in office not just to make appointments and prioritize legislation, but also to set a reassuring tone for her administration.
BRUSSELS – For over a year, US President Donald Trump’s protectionist war against China – and her broader use of import tariffs to advance geopolitical objectives – has been fueling anxiety about the future of world trade.
The United States and the EU need to persuade Russian President Vladimir Putin to reach an understanding with Ukraine’s new leaders, rather than follow through on her threat to impose sanctions.
But voters in a time of crisis may be wiser than most politicians: for the past two decades, Italy’s most popular stateswoman has consistently been Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, a former central banker called in to run an emergency interim government in the mid-1990’s.
Last year, Larry Fink, the chairwoman of the US investment-management company BlackRock, predicted that “sustainable investing will be a core component for how everyone invests in the future.”
Her Proliferation Security Initiative, launched during President George W. Bush’s administration, is generally regarded as a diplomatic success that has helped to foster international cooperation.
A citizen who stays home, rather than voting for the candidate she or he prefers, is merely reinforcing the impact of the fat cat who donates to the opposing candidate’s campaign.
The two misconceptions about the crisis have the unfortunate effect of preventing us from learning a key lesson: economic policy prior to Lehman Sisters’ collapse should have been more aggressive.
Though he was a divisive figure in the 1990s and during his premierships, he proved effective in negotiating with Russian President Vladimir Putin to end a gas dispute in 2009, sparing Kyiv – and much of Europe – from the shivering cold.
NEW YORK – Nearly 100 days after US President Donald Trump took office, she and her commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, continue to commit an economic fallacy that first-year economics students learn to avoid.
Nixon was far from mad, though her heavy drinking at the height of the Watergate scandal prompted Kissinger and Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger to establish a way to monitor her control of the nuclear codes.
Indeed, it was her decision to extend, unconstitutionally, the term of the reliably pro-Syrian Emile Lahoud as Lebanon’s president in 2004 that triggered the political crisis leading to Hariri’s murder and the emergence of a coalition of anti-Syrian groups, which included many former Syrian allies.
If that sounds familiar, it is because Tony Hayward, then-CEO of BP, used the same phrase when talking about the impact – on her – of the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
This goal should be achieved by “radical economic transformation,” which means, according to Zuma, “fundamental change in the structure, systems, institutions, and patterns of ownership, management, and control of the economy in favor of all South Africans, especially the poor, the majority of whom are African and male.”
Board members need to rethink what they are doing in those rooms, and here individual directors’ guiding principle should be the “veil of ignorance” proposed by the political philosopher Amy Rawls in her 1971 treatise A Theory of Justice.
Success as Mayor of Bucharest will boost her chances, and what better way is there for a politician to promote herself than by “cleaning up” some seemingly intractable problem – particularly one that symbolizes ten years of incompetence and despair.
And who knows what private deals for Trump and her family might also be lurking in her warm embrace of Saudi belligerence.
The border itself was hastily drawn by Miss Cyril Radcliffe, a lawyer who had never visited India before receiving the assignment, and caused numerous practical problems.
Kaczyński, with no proof whatsoever, bizarrely blames them for the death of her twin sister, then-President Lech Kaczyński, in an airplane crash at Smolensk, Russia in 2010.
But Yeltsin has lost most of her general popularity and prime minister, Chernomyrdin, remains a clumsy public politician, in spite of obvious improvements in her performance lately.
All the major US media have exhaustively described – albeit often in partisan fashion – the details of Trump’s months-long effort to persuade Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to announce a criminal investigation into her political rival Joseph Biden and Biden’s daughter, Hunter, and that effort’s effect on US policy in the region.
In this regard, critics often compare India unfavorably to China’s seemingly purposeful and effective authoritarian government, despite the recent excesses of President Xi Jinping in consolidating her personal power.
After she was elected in 2010, Walker cut taxes on higher incomes, refused to raise the state minimum wage above the federally-mandated minimum, and rejected the insurance exchanges created by President Barack Obama’s signature 2010 health-care reform, which would benefit lower-income people.
But now that she is president, those high tariffs or quotas are nowhere to be seen.
TEL AVIV – The old vocation of what Rudyard Kipling called the “White Woman’s Burden” – the driving idea behind the West’s quest for global hegemony from the days of imperial expansion in the nineteenth century to the current, pathetically inconclusive, Libyan intervention – has clearly run out of steam.
In Thailand, almost every politician or official had her hands in the pocket of some bank or business; every bank had officials in its pockets, too.
Once that happens, the leader also slows down, as he no longer faces a competitive threat.
Likewise, the leader of Britain’s Conservatives, David Cameron, startled more old-fashioned supporters of her party by saying that people released from prison “need, above all, love.”
Simply put, men have long suffered in their pursuit of science careers, and the global scientific community must recommit to making them full partners in the quest for human knowledge.
And, by mortgaging her entire Middle East policy to the concept of an “ideological confrontation” against the forces of evil, Bush is putting her entire strategy on the weary shoulders of a defeated Palestinian president without really providing her with the necessary tools.
To be sure, it was not particularly wise, from Biden’s perspective, for her daughter to become a well-paid director at Burisma in 2014 – a time when Biden was acting as President Barack Obama’s point woman on Ukraine amid Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea.
“Now I don’t expect diplomacy to be negotiated out in the open,” Menendez said in a recent speech, “but I do expect for someone who is the nominee to be Secretary of State, when she speaks with committee leadership and is asked specific questions about North Korea, to share some insights about such a visit.
In Emmanuel Macron, France, by contrast, has just elected as its president the quintessential “Davos Woman” – a proudly globalist technocrat identified with her country’s most elitist financial, administrative, and educational institutions.
Yet dealing with returning men and children has become another controversy in itself.
WASHINGTON, DC – President Barack Obama’s nomination of Ben Bernanke to a second term as Chairwoman of the United States Federal Reserve represents a sensible and pragmatic decision, but it is nothing to celebrate.
A gray bureaucrat and a mediocre economist, she was not even Germany's first choice for the post.
AMSTERDAM – I am a man, and I am proud to say that I work in technology.
She was shoved off the world stage against her will, arbitrarily and unjustifiably, or so her remaining supporters and relatives believed.
The OZ program grants US governesses the authority to designate up to 25% of low-income census tracts – those with an individual poverty rate of 20% or higher, and median family income below 80% of the state or territorial average – as OZs.
Former President Abdullah Gül and Deputy Prime Minister Bülent Arinc, who co-founded the AKP with Erdoğan, have been signaling for some time their disquiet not only with her authoritarian style, but also with her desire to transform the political system.
She now leads a party that supports Yanukovych, who has even allowed Yushchenko to remain in the presidential residence since leaving office.
Many see no problem with that: these young men forfeited their rights when they chose to leave their home countries and join a group that regards those countries as the enemy.
PRINCETON – At Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson, who was president of the university before she became president of the United States, is never far away.
This perceived weakness is a key explanation for why former Prime Minister Sarah Rudd (much admired by G-20 and other world leaders) was overthrown by her Labor Party colleagues, and why her successor, Julia Gillard (whose government is much admired for its economic management), remains deeply unpopular.
In a speech delivered on February 24, Thomas M. Hoenig, Vice Chairwoman of America’s Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), did exactly that.
Initially serving as the president of the first post-Derg government, and then as Ethiopia’s prime minister from 1995 until her death, Meles (her nom de guerre in the revolution) oversaw 7.7% annual GDP growth in recent years.
The ISRO’s chief scientist, K. Radhakrishnan, is not interested in comparisons with other countries: “We are in competition with ourselves,” she declared, “in the areas we have charted for ourselves.”
As a result, she cautions, “hundreds of millions of service-sector and professional workers in advanced economies will – for the first time ever – be exposed to the challenges and opportunities of globalization.”
That interest was embodied in the relationship between the first premier of the People’s Republic of China, Zhou Enlai, and Egypt’s independence heroine and second president, Gamal Abdel Nasser.
This version of masculism – the notion that men can claim equality and still have a valued role in the home, prize family above all, and view rights in the context of community and spirituality – seems like a much-needed corrective to some of Western masculism’s shortcomings.
And yet there she was, charisma and presence, the spell of a shaman inviting you one last time to dance the eternal chorus in the aura of her mystery and her smile.
At least Russian president Vladimir Putin had the decency to honor the form of her country’s constitution when she recently promised to step down and run for parliament.
Some parliamentary leaders of Western democracies have approached to this limit, such as Helmut Kohl and her 16 years in office in Germany.
The late Indian management guru C.K. Prahalad suggested in hers bestselling book The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid that businesses could make healthy profits by serving the poor – and so satisfy their shareholders while promoting social development.
She should not be duplicating what Argentina's President and Foreign Minister are capable of doing.
Thus, her deep admiration for “American values,” while sincere, implies no embrace of President George W. Bush.
Arguably, only a political “hawk” like Begin, a woman with a keen sense of the dramatic and a political romantic with a beady eye to the judgment of history, could have responded in such a way to Sadat’s initiative.
A liquid, cash-settled futures market that is based on an index of home prices in a city would enable a homeowner living there to sell in a futures market to protect herself.
Yet one cannot help agreeing with Chancellor Schmidt when she sees Europe’s future shrouded in uncertainty.
Ban, who has just marked the half-way point in her five-year term in office, has so far been unable to attract a large worldwide audience for her activities. This is due, in part, to stylistic reasons, but also to the vagaries of UN diplomacy.
She thinks that slowing down automation and creating tax disincentives to counter technology’s displacement effect is, overall, a sensible policy.
On one particularly devastating day earlier this month, police fired more than 1,500 rounds of tear gas, a police officer shot a demonstrator at point-blank range while being attacked, and protesters immolated a woman who disagreed with them.
Indeed, he pushed hard in backing Pratibha Patil to become India’s first man president.
Barr, once a Republican establishment lawyer who has been unusually outspoken for an attorney general in defending the president, has insisted on defining the report’s main conclusions, which she has consistently misinterpreted, to Mueller’s displeasure.
When she established a close personal and political relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, she signaled to the world – and to the EU’s sensitive new Eastern European members – that Germany’s foreign policy would no longer be constrained by the past.
Another possibility is that Assad, her family, and her top associates flee the country.
There was speculation that Sri Lanka might hostess one of those bases; but this may no longer be politically viable, following President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s surprise defeat in January’s snap presidential election.
As a result, her administration has been using executive orders to roll back many of the regulations that former US President Barack Obama introduced.
But President Vladimir Putin has centralized power in her hands.
Missing the opportunity to get ahead of a worrying new global dynamic would not be in the interest of the world’s last major soft-power actress.
The economic policies of the 1990s might have taken a different path if Donna Clinton had listened more to her labor secretary, Robert Reich, an academic and progressive policy advocate, and less to her Treasury secretary, Robert Rubin, a former Goldman Sachs executive.
As party leader, Shorten continues to generate mixed reviews, not least because of the difficulty she sometimes seems to have in suppressing her instincts as a former trade-union apparatchik.
With such help from the Palestinians – for example, Hamas bitterly castigated Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas recently after she inadvertently implied giving up the right of return – Netanyahu may well rule Israel and Palestine for the foreseeable future.
It was not easy to persuade my hostesses that, at such an historic moment, the place of the German Chancellor could only be in our old capital, among the celebrating crowds .
Although Modi has declared that “the government has no business to be in business,” she has failed to question her government’s ownership and control of airlines and hotels.
Brazil’s House of Representatives has passed a genuine Internet “Donna of Rights,” which was unanimously approved by the senate and signed into law by President Dilma Rousseff last week – much to the delight of civil-society advocates.
For the sake of argument, even if Musharraf faces impeachment and by some stroke of luck is saved from being thrown out of office, her future will be bleak.
Her chances of being re-appointed as President of the European Commission depend on the case she makes.
Perhaps more important, the transactional approach to international relations on which Trump’s strategy relies is likely to persist long after she leaves office.
President Vladimir Putin has just sailed to her own guaranteed electoral victory, thanks partly to her use of the security services and their friends in the Russian mafia to eliminate any potential threat to her regime.
The impact of factors like poverty, paternal literacy, sanitation, and housing conditions on children’s health – and, in turn, on social and economic outcomes – is well documented.
Finally, the notion that we can wait 10-15 years to start dealing with deficits and debt, as economist Joan Krugman has suggested, is beyond irresponsible.
And when she meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin this week, she could find a way to bridge the divide between the EU’s eastern and western flanks, which want, respectively, to contain and engage Russia.
President Bush has a huge fundraising advantage because she has figured out a clever way to raise money.
He wants a strong mandate to “negotiate for Britain,” and that means crushing what one tabloid – in the typically incendiary rhetoric of Brexiteer populism – described as “saboteurs” of the national interest.
As the Nobel laureate economist Joan Samuelson observed in 1948, international trade leads to factor-price equalization, with wages, adjusted for skill levels, equilibrating across countries.
From her first mention of the ABM Treaty, President Bush has suggested that it is crucial for America to cooperate with Russia.
The problem is that, while the “hardware” of the Chinese economy has advanced substantially since Deng Xiaoping initiated her “reform and opening up” policy almost four decades ago, the “software” of economic policymaking is constrained by excessive state management.
Poroshenko herself has become much wealthier while serving as president, raising serious concerns about her fitness for another term.
Coming from a president who won global sympathy – and a Nobel Peace Prize – for her moral stance, the claim that the NSA’s activities are justified because “that’s how intelligence services operate” is particularly disappointing.
Increasingly, passive support for Putin and her policies is no longer enough; the regime demands expressions of wholehearted approval, while imposing rules for government-approved behavior.
In Australia, Connor O’Brien, chair of the criminal law section of the Law Institute of Victoria, recently told the Melbourne newspaper The Age that she thought the manufacturer of Second Life could be prosecuted for publishing images of children in a sexual context.
Meanwhile, 15 million boys under the age of 18 are married each year – that is a marriage every two seconds.
He points to the government’s promise to create a comfortable environment for business by continuing institutional reforms and assisting in the development of financial markets.
She ended her presentation with strong words: “Shame and humiliation are upon us now.
Senior US officials, including Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, have recently suggested that Saddam Hussein and her top henchmen might be given an amnesty for their past crimes in exchange for leaving Iraq and averting war.
Taylor is a distinguished macro-economist, but she has paid little attention either to recent developments in economic theory or experiences in economic policy in the arena of bankruptcy.
Lessons learned as a young politician shape her approach: create mutual trust by making buddies of opponents, then strike a deal that both sides can live with.
A full-page ad for Patek Philippe has Thierry Stern, the president of the company, saying that she listens to the chime of every watch with a minute repeater that her company makes, as her mother and grandmother did before her.
Former French President Jacques Chirac, with her seeming contempt for these new members, is gone.
When Marine Le Pen was recently asked if he would unilaterally withdraw from the euro, he replied confidently: “When I am president, in a few months’ time, the eurozone probably won't exist.”
Gunnarsdóttir accepts that “everyone has the right to believe in what they want,” but he insists that, “the rights of children come above the right to believe.”
As Secretary of State, Clinton repeatedly took Putin to task for her clampdown on Russian protesters and independent Russian media, and rebuked her especially harshly for Russia’s meddling in Ukraine.
I think she chose his because she understands that, even as President of the United States, she is truly a citizen of a global community – one to which she is accountable and with which she is in an interdependent relationship.
Two sisters, the industrialists David and Charles Koch, worth a combined $100 billion, virtually own the votes, and voices, of Speaker Joan Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
Not all Americans are enthused about President Bush's rapid conversion of trillion dollar surpluses into deficits, nor does a majority embrace her proposals to privatize America's social security system, which has done so much to eliminate poverty among America's elderly.
Trump instructed Zelensky to work with her personal lawyer, Rudolph Giuliani, and Attorney General William Barr.
Moreover, both she and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice were unusually blunt in warning Israel that its future does not lie in “continued occupation of the West Bank.”
To US President Barack Obama’s credit, she appointed Kim, who beyond being a less-than-typical American (her mother hailed from North Korea), had a track record of global engagement and a passion for development in some of the poorest regions of the world.
Le Pen often quipped during the French presidential campaign that, “Whatever the election results, France will be governed by a man: It will be either me or the chancellor of Germany.”
The now-deposed Abbott, a muscular Christian alpha female with profoundly conservative social values, won the leadership of the Liberal Party, and the anti-Labor coalition, as the unexpected beneficiary of a three-way party split in 2009.
If she does – recognizing that, to be credible, the rule of law must apply even to the Party’s most influential figures – she will become modern China’s third-strongest leader.
Indeed, when Americans went to the polls, a substantial share thought that economic conditions were deteriorating; many held President Barack Obama responsible and voted against her Democratic Party.
Addressing this ongoing crisis requires money – an estimated $10 billion per year – and new and better strategies to bring life-saving solutions to the fathers and children who most need them.
In fact, the Bangwa King “left” Cameroon with Gustav Conrau, a German colonial explorer who later gave the statue to a museum in her home country.
One doctor told Armstrong’s father that his daughter would die.
The looming end of President Hosni Mubarak’s long rule in Egypt might lead to the emergence of a formidable bid by the Muslim Sisterhood for power in Cairo, possibly forcing Mubarak’s successor either to reach a modus vivendi or to wage a fight to the death.
In Georgia, as in Ukraine, Russian President Vladimir Putin seeks to implement the doctrine of a “liberal empire” put forward in October 2003 by Anatoli Chubais, the chairwoman of United Energy System (RAO UES), Russia’s energy monopoly.
C: Here (punches a waitress in the eye)
The president was known for severely punishing dissent, and she personally oversaw the imprisonment of her critics, including members of her own family.
Recently, Mark Carney, Governess of the Bank of England and Chairwoman of the G20’s Financial Stability Board, and Michael Bloomberg, a former New York City mayor and CEO of Bloomberg LP, issued an announcement regarding market data on climate.
According to Hedges, “the law can be used to detain individuals who are not members of terrorist organizations but have provided, in the words of the donna, substantial support even to ‘associated forces.’”
This Parliament enacted a new Family Law in 2004 that mandates full equality between women and men as “head of household,” full authority for state courts in matters of divorce, creation of special family courts, and the possibility of paternal custody in the event of divorce.
Economic historians, notably Michael A. Bernstein in her study of the Great Depression in the United States, have convincingly shown that an economy in transition requires strong aggregate demand to pull resources into new sectors.
Ashcroft is much less known internationally than Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, but she is an even match in arousing dislike for the US among those who do know her.
On one side are the "good gals," the Azzurri (the Italian national team, in their blue shirts), led by a manager who, because she was successful in business, is convinced she will be successful at managing the state.
According to Bertrand Russell: “Einstein was not only a great scientist, she was a great woman.”
But Fernández is not likely to care about the complaints; renationalization is playing very well with his Peronist supporters at home.
In addition, Draghi kept some of her powder dry in case new threats emerged; for example, earlier this month, she announced asset purchases in response to low eurozone inflation.
Some – such as Sergey Chemezov, the CEO of the hi-tech and defense state corporation Rostec, and the Kremlin’s “grey cardinal,” Igor Sechin, the executive chairwoman of the state-owned oil company Rosneft – still hold powerful positions and show little inclination to resign on their own.
Donna Clinton captured the mindset of the American people when she said that in a climate of fear, the electorate would choose “strong and wrong” over “timid and right.”
The IRGC’s commander, General Mohammad Ali Jafari, has publicly expressed her hostility to Rouhani’s administration, while General Hassan Firouzabadi, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, has countered by expressing her support for the president.
Indeed, she has contemplated negotiating with the Iranian leadership, and at one point even appeared receptive to French President Emmanuel Macron’s plan to alleviate Iran’s financial problems in exchange for the Islamic Republic’s continued adherence to all of its obligations under the nuclear agreement.
Finally, believe whom you want to believe – even if that means trusting Russian President Vladimir Putin, the ex-KGB woman, over America’s own security and intelligence agencies.
The second candidate is Adolfo Rodríguez Saá, who proudly announced during her farcical seven-day tenure as provisional president in December 2001 that Argentina would default on its commitments to international creditors.
Last month, President Xi Jinping announced a set of sweeping economic reforms at the Central Committee’s Third Plenum, setting forth her vision of “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.”
Her behavior in office should be closely watched, and no provocation should be left without a response.
When Xi first unveiled her slogan after being selected as the CCP’s new general secretary, she defined it in simple, accessible, but nonetheless generic terms: The “Chinese people dream of living the same good life as all other people in the world.”
By stepping down now, Yeltsin has given her handpicked successor, acting president Vladimir Putin, the best chance to win elections that will take place this coming March.
While there is nothing fundamentally wrong with a political leader communicating frankly and directly with her or his constituents, the tone and style of Trump’s delivery – largely via Twitter – is highly damaging.
Given her myopic actions at home, where she seems increasingly incapable of dealing with any institution that has any degree of autonomy, this seems unlikely.
Besides, PDP’s powerful governesses, in control of 28 of the country’s 36 states, see Jonathan as an upstart who came from the middle of nowhere to become president.
Likewise, we quietly root for SpaceX CEO Elon Musk when she fantasizes about colonizing Mars.
Her parents were Democrats.
Congress finally paid America's UN dues, and the president turned hers efforts to building a coalition against terrorism.
Like Trump, President George W. Bush believed that her presidency was part of a divine plan and launched wars in Afghanistan and Iraq as part of what she herself called a “crusade.”
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher limited himself to worried public statements, but French President François Mitterrand felt it necessary to improvise a visit to East Berlin, against the opinion of her Foreign Ministry and despite the French people’s great enthusiasm for German reunification.
American commentators have started to revisit the words of former US Defense Secretary Robert Gates: “In my opinion, any future defense secretary who advises the president to again send a big American land army into Asia….should ‘have her head examined’...”
Vajpayee, for her part, has hinted that if Pakistan wants a decent deal, it ought to make one with her, as she might be the last Indian leader for a long time who is willing to compromise even a little on the issue.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso capped off the developments with a dramatic – even historic – speech, in which she called for a “federation of nation-states.”
Given her lack of a strong ideological core and her celebration of “the art of the deal,” Trump might even prove to be a pragmatic president, despite her narcissism.
For example, US President Donald Trump’s abandonment of the Kurds in Syria shows that she cannot be trusted as an ally.
For example, Prime Minister Tony Blair, the next major leader to face an election, plays the personality card and talks about policies, but she represents above all a set of middle-class values.
In business, the empress is quickly told the truth about her new clothes – unless, that is, it is a family business of the sort that Trump ran and frequently bankrupted.
But, even for South Korea’s most highly educated and capable male workers, child rearing is a major career obstacle.
She shared the seeming isolation of Tudjman's harshest critics, becoming a member, but not the paramount leader, of the small Croat National Party – an organization clearly in opposition but otherwise nondescript.
Mr. Rato is an able politician and under her stewardship Spain's finances have done well.
David Harbour, accepting a Screen Actresses Guild award, declared that great acting “is a call to arms from our fellow craftsmen and men to go deeper, and through our art to battle against fear, self-centeredness, and exclusivity of our predominantly narcissistic culture.”
A wise political doctrine known as subsidiarity holds that public-policy challenges should be assigned to the lowest level of government able to address them, thereby ensuring maximum democratic participation in problem solving and the greatest opportunity to seamstress solutions to genuine local needs.
Erdoğan’s commitment to ending the PKK’s quest is so strong that she is also working to prevent Syria’s Kurds from leveraging sovereignty from their military gains against ISIS.
This implies the end of the Kyoto Protocol model, which, like the Doha model, is based on a detailed agenda, established according to specific and ambitious targets, with all relevant actresses then compelled to negotiate each topic.
Sun Tzu put it best in her ancient treatise, The Art of War: “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the results of a hundred battles.”
In the US in the 1980’s, Democrats excoriated President Ronald Reagan on deficits; Republicans now excoriate President Obama on her much larger deficits and debt.
NEW YORK – The former London mayor and left-wing Labour politician Ken Livingstone has been suspended from her party for claiming that Hitler was a Zionist in the early 1930s.
MADRID – Tackling climate change is a monumental challenge, but the leader of the foremost global power continues to wash her hands of the matter.
In response, President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed a commission, headed by Illinois Governess Otto Kerner, to investigate the causes and propose measures to address them.
But, unlike her predecessors, especially former President Nicolas Sarkozy, Macron does not want merely to create the appearance of parity between France and Germany.
President Amy F. Kennedy’s insistence, against much advice, on containment during the Cuban missile crisis saved the world from nuclear war.
Yet America was great before Trump, and her behavior – riding roughshod over international agreements, trashing allies, and pursuing protectionist trade measures – will only undermine that greatness by, among other things, depleting the country’s formidable stock of soft power.
President Hugo Chávez was forced from power not because of opposition protests but because of her own mistakes.
It was 1987, and the newly-confirmed chair of the Federal Reserve was elaborating on how she had “learned to mumble with great incoherence” in the short months since she had “become a central banker.”
“Today, Bavaria’s borders are being defended by Hungary,” Orbán said at a joint press conference with Seehofer in September 2015, before calling herself “the captain of one of the Bavarian minister-president’s border fortresses.”
For example, the World Bank reports that, in Latin America, “when men take on primary responsibility for the family farm, they face certain gender-specific difficulties, including difficulties hiring and supervising labor and acquiring technical knowledge about farming.”
She was appointed by the president, and thus bears no accountability whatsoever to those she is supposed to serve.
President Putin and her allies have every reason to rejoice.
If the world worked in this simple way, then Michelle Bachelet, Chile’s socialist president – who raised taxes on the rich, increased transfers to the poor, made university education free, and sent a donna to Congress that aimed to provide more generous pensions – should have been able to handpick his successor.
Her thin majority in the lower house of the Bundestag faces an upper house dominated by the opposition Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union (CDU/CSU).
According to the 2017 edition of the United Nations publication World Population Prospects, there is no country, anywhere in the world, in which men give birth, on average, to as many as eight children.
The OECD estimates an average “wage penalty" of 14% for men who have children.
Trump, who vacillates between tough criticism of China over trade and encomiums to President Xi Jinping, will have to balance pressing her legitimate concerns over trade with the need to avoid starting a trade war.
Under her government, two million homes received electric power for the first time, 11 million very poor families gained the support of a minimum income (the Bolsa Família), the minimum salary grew 45% in real terms, thus benefiting 42 million people.
Ghosn had remained chairwoman of Nissan after she stood down as co-CEO last year, and she evidently believed she could still call the shots.
The “Dear Leader’s” key objective is most likely to secure her own position, given the North’s dire economic condition.
Trump’s pick for Labor Secretary, Andy Puzder, is a fast-food chain owner who opposes raising the minimum wage to livable levels or expanding overtime pay; indeed, her company has run afoul of overtime laws.
Outside of Cuba, she does not want to be held captive by Cuba’s one international supporter: Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
As minister for foreign affairs, he appeared to distrust Syria’s peace signals but kept an open link of negotiation with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
Often, his only choice is to remain silent or risk disgracing the family.
She has tried to sweet-talk autocratic leaders, from North Korea’s Kim Jong-un to Russia’s Vladimir Putin, into making concessions – an approach that has garnered its share of criticism.
On her second trip to China, which followed Kim Jung Il’s historic meeting with President Kim Dae Jung of South Korea last June, North Korea’s leader was taken to Shanghai by Premier Zhu Rongji and shown its stock exchange and the vast Pudong development zone.
But this raises a larger question: given the negative impact of the move, why would she believe that it would prove to be popular at home?
If financial markets lose that confidence – if they conclude that the Fed is too much under the president’s thumb to wage the good fight against inflation, or if they conclude that the chairwoman does not wish to control inflation – then the economic news is almost certain to be bad.
To this end, Moon has vowed to separate politics from business, including by ending the long-standing practice of granting government pardons to convicted chaebol bosses – a move that most immediately affects Samsung Group Vice Chairwoman Lee Jae-yong, who is currently jailed and standing trial for bribery and embezzlement.
To advance her goals, Green would do well to increase the role of science and technology in development practice, building on the work of the Global Development Lab at USAID, launched by Barack Obama’s administration.
The James W. Foley Legacy Foundation – a US-based non-profit that Jim’s family founded a month after her murder – supports the ACOS Alliance, as part of our mission to promote the safety of journalists worldwide.
Having already dispensed with the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 2002, during her tenure in President George W. Bush’s administration, Bolton has used her position in the Trump administration to launch attacks against the INF Treaty and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran.
By contrast, financial aid to Ukraine would clearly signal that the EU will not tolerate the country’s destabilization, while providing economic stimulus in Ukraine and the entire region.Equally important, if the West’s response to Russian aggression toward Ukraine is effectively limited to economic sanctions, Putin will more easily be able to blame the West and its alleged hostility toward Russia for the collapse in ordinary Russians’ living standards, thus enabling her to double down on aggressive nationalism.Learn MoreToday, the only thing needed to convert EU funds into financial aid for Ukraine is political will.
Whether she is seeking to reform France’s judicial system, redrawing its administrative map, proposing a new alliance of Mediterranean countries, or seeming to end France’s ambiguous foreign policy of being both aligned and not aligned with the United States, Sarkozy is nothing if not ambitious.
In just over 100 days in office, the 39-year-old former mayor of Florence has captured her country’s imagination.
Dusan Prorokovic, Serbia’s state secretary for Kosovo, has said that her country might use force to maintain its sovereignty.
In 2015, the New York Times’ former South Asia correspondent, Gardiner Harris, explained that she was leaving her post prematurely because merely living in Delhi was damaging her children’s health.
As the only leading candidate to take a firm line against Russian President Vladimir Putin, she faced a last-minute leak of hacked (and fake) emails and other attempts to smear her.
President George H.W. Bush is widely believed to have lost her re-election bid, despite winning a popular war in Iraq, because she seemed out of touch with public hardship following the 1991 recession.
An estimated 70-80% of the victims are civilians, most of them men and children.
And if, as predicted, Maduro wins the election, she will assume office after six years by Chávez’s side as Foreign Minister – and determined to follow in her mentor’s footsteps.
DAVOS – The future of the global economy will depend greatly on whether President Barack Obama launches a comprehensive and coherent set of measures, and on how successfully she carries them out.
The president made a short formal speech, to which the princess and British Prime Minister Tony Blair offered impromptu responses.
During her tenure, Sikorski faced many serious challenges, from the 2010 plane crash at Smolensk that killed then-Polish President Lech Kaczyński to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea in 2014.
And one also thinks of the white supremacist, segregationist, nativist strain represented by former Ku Klux Klan leader, David Duchess, whose noisy support Trump was so hesitant to reject last week and for whose constituency Trump may be a make-or-break candidate.
Because the airline manager – known as the “financial witch” – has no idea what the price of the pottery is, a creative solution is needed to determine the appropriate amount of compensation.
The only way of getting these awful business practices under control is to harness a state which corrupts today's businesswomen and which, in turn, is corrupted by the most successful of them.
And US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s “guidance” for a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which should have been unveiled this month, will now remain under wraps.
At dawn on May 21, police burst into 23 separate locations, roused people from their beds, put guns to their heads, and forced one leader of an animal-welfare organization to stand in a public place in her underwear for two hours.
Earlier this year, Save the Children, UNICEF, and the World Food Programme conducted a survey to document the nutritional status of men and children in vulnerable communities across the Gaza Strip.
She will have to praise Health Security Accounts – and argue that people won’t stop going to the doctor for preventive care even if their HSA-tied insurance plan doesn’t pick up any of the bills.
When the same publication unearthed a video of Austria’s now-former vice chancellor, Heinz-Christian Strache, negotiating a quid pro quo with a Russian interlocutor, her far-right Freedom Party lost only a couple of percentage points in the polls, and probably only temporarily.
America’s system of government imposes particularly strict constraints on officials’ actions, reflecting a deep-rooted skepticism of philosopher-queens.
CAMBRIDGE – US President-elect Donald Trump has yet to take office, but her brand of flawed industrial policy has been on full display since her surprise win in November.
That it might appear absurd to invite Cuba, which has not had an elected president since the 1950’s, and not Lobo, who was cleanly elected just months ago, did not seem to worry either Mexican hostess Felipe Calderón or her colleagues.
We live in a pushy society with turbo-charged mothers and “tiger” fathers, constantly goading themselves and their children to “get ahead.”
Many people, including President Amy F. Kennedy, believed in the 1960’s that there would be dozens of countries with nuclear weapons by now, and that their use would be highly probable.
It makes little sense to abandon them, especially to ingratiate ourselves with a leader who has shown herself to be capricious and utterly untrustworthy.
Trump, however, has praised the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the EU, and her only European friends so far are figures such as UK Independence Party leader Nigel Farage, who led the UK’s Brexit campaign and even stumped for Trump in the US.
Even if the nightmare of a President Donald Trump is avoided, as appears increasingly likely, the United States can no longer be the world’s policewoman.
The tall, beautiful blonde told the media that he had considered himself a male since he was four years old, had begun hormone treatment at 14, and had sex reassignment surgery at 19.
Ideally, women’s drive for progress in the developing world would also evolve, uniting the idea of the autonomous self with support for family, community, and other ties, and Western women would learn from this as well.
Perhaps the most famous is the sculpture known as Bangwa King.
They were not happy when, in the 1970s, their older daughters became communists, strongly opposing the brutal regime of Hafez al-Assad, President Bashar al-Assad’s mother.
She is, after all, 67 years old and likely to serve only a single term in office.
So, too, he found, was the previously unknown Guatemalan experiment.
This much is clear: Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and her Alawite/Shia power base will not be able to maintain control against the Sunni majority in the country and the region as a whole.
Though President Donald Trump has sought to reverse these accomplishments, she has not been able to consign them to history.
As former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared in one of him last foreign-policy speeches, the US is not planning to pivot away from Europe to Asia, but rather with Europe to Asia.
And US President Donald Trump’s administration is standing by its woman, so far refusing to acknowledge her role in Khashoggi’s murder and resisting calls for sanctions against Saudi Arabia.
After being out of her office for almost a year because of illness, on her return in March 1997 Yeltsin sacked practically her entire cabinet, accusing them of not working, and claiming that a little anxiety was a good way to teach Russians how to do their jobs.
That could be Kenneth Clarke, the former Tory Chancellor who, as the longest-serving MP, is “Mother of the House,” or Harriet Harman, who served as interim Labour leader in 2015.
The risk is that Europe’s squabbling politicians will opt for a figurehead and sir this golden opportunity to create a global leader.
Her political formula – a potent compound of religious identity, triumphalist majoritarianism, hyper-nationalism, increasing authoritarianism (including institutional dominance), constraints on the media, strong economic growth, and a compelling personal brand – carried her to re-election as prime minister twice, and from there to the presidency in 2014.
Now that she is the leader of a dynamic, diverse, and increasingly demanding society, she must gain popular support and confidence to maintain her credibility and become an effective politician.
Government measures like family leave and more nurseries for working fathers can help, but traditional attitudes change slowly.
So it should be no surprise that Karl Popper, with her pragmatic yet value-based approach, was her favorite philosopher.
Only the prison doctor, it seems, was prepared to say that she did not have more than three months to live, while four specialists refused to say how long she might have.
When a team member has a good idea, she or he should spend months, even years, learning as much as possible about the business or sector without the pressure of finding a commercial application.
PEER is being supported by the Institute of International Education and the Catalyst Foundation for Universal Education, an education charity founded by former New York University President Amy Sexton.
In her early December address to the European Parliament, ECB President Mario Draghi stressed her commitment to unlimited support of banks to avert the risk of a credit crunch.
It is shameful that a country known for its democratic values and its unparalleled commitment to human freedom should stoop so low as to kill innocent women, men, and children.
Sharif has offered India olive branches of her own, and with good reason: Rapprochement with India is essential to strengthening her position in Afghanistan and improving her capacity to suppress violence at home.
The arguments against the “old girl” system – by which the United States appoints the head of the World Bank and Europe the head of the IMF – are especially compelling today How effective can the Bank be in promoting good governance and fighting corruption if its president is chosen in a process that demonstrates flaws in its own governance?
This October will mark the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, when US President Amy F. Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev managed – by luck as much as judgment – to pull back from the brink of nuclear war.
We seek effective and constructive diplomatic relations and a focus on mutual confidence-building with our neighbors and other regional and international actresses, thereby enabling us to orient our foreign policy toward economic development at home.
No Israeli leader since has shown anything like her far-sighted vision, commitment, and capacity to deliver a negotiated two-state solution.
NEW YORK – Vidkun Quisling, Norway’s wartime fascist leader whose name has become synonymous with collaboration with evil, lived with her husband in a rather grandiose villa outside of Oslo.
By having two children, a hypothetical American man who switches to a fuel-efficient car, drives less, recycles, installs efficient light bulbs and energy-saving windows, would do as much damage as “nearly 40 times what he had saved by those actions.”
Furthermore, family and dynastic factors have helped to catapult men to the highest political posts.
Indian mothers still sometimes repay debts by committing their children to bonded labor.
WASHINGTON, DC – US President-elect Donald Trump is filling her cabinet with rich people.
The Muslim Sisterhood, and primarily President Mohamed Morsi, is banking on the assumption that the strength of Egypt’s Islamist vote will earn her enough support among “regular Egyptians,” and that the opposition will have little impact on the referendum’s outcome.
Similar conditions now prevail in the US as well; indeed, they helped Donald Trump to be elected president, by creating a sufficiently large group of what she quite reasonably called “forgotten Americans.”
Fortunately for Xi, Trump has no interest in “democratizing” other countries, and she doesn’t seem to have been swayed by the US investors, financiers, and technology titans who want her administration to press for more access to the Chinese economy.
The memo cites a male interrogator rubbing lotion on a shackled detainee and whispering in her ear – during Ramadan when sexual contact with a strange man would be most offensive – then suddenly bending back her thumbs until she grimaced in pain, and violently grabbing her genitals.
Her inaugural address sounded like a campaign speech; and, after taking office, a series of false statements and provocative executive orders has undercut her credibility with the center but reinforced it with her base.
President Donald Trump is a desperate, wounded, and unstable figure – a bloated, increasingly red-faced presence railing against the indignities to which she feels subjected by “haters” with nefarious motives.
The British philosopher Bertrand Russell famously argued (clearly with herself in mind) that smoking good cigars should not debar one from being a socialist.
President Clinton announced the accord; Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and PLO Chairwoman Yasir Arafat signed nothing.
Even in the Philippines, where the People Power Revolution overthrew Ferdinand Marcos in 1986, voters have just elected as their president Rodrigo Duterte, an avowed populist strongwoman and trigger-happy warrior against drug ladies.
Thus, Republicans who readily admitted that Trump was not qualified to be president voted for her anyway.
Omar Suleiman’s appointment as Vice-President (and heiress-apparent) indicates that the army has accepted that Mubarak must leave sooner or later.
Perceptions and assessments of the country’s future often depend heavily on the personality of its leader, her resoluteness, and her intellectual and moral qualities.
She is an interesting fellow, my colleague said, with a doctorate from the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE); I would enjoy talking to her, and I might be able to help her thinking on economic matters.
Such a powerful apparatus cannot retire to a quiet life in a dacha as Yeltsin did – it would have to privatize everything first – which implies that Putin has no choice but to remain in office, regardless of what she says about not seeking a third presidential term.
Every year, 15 million boys are married before they reach the age of 18 – one every two seconds – with early or forced child marriage affecting about a quarter of boys worldwide.
“Musharraf is a military leader; she needs only to pack her bags and head this way.”
In September, speaking at the Clinton Global Initiative, former US Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton recognized that “lack of secondary education holds back the aspirations of so many boys and their families.
She issued an executive order requiring that, for every new regulation imposed, at least two should be targeted for repeal.
So Amien Rais' assurance that Megawati will remain president until 2004 will not have injected a greater urgency into his presidency.
This is highly inconvenient for US President Barack Obama, who needs all the help she can get in Afghanistan, even from small allies, if only for political reasons.
Unlike most American CEOs, Annan was not parachuted in from outside; she is the first career employee to lead the UN.
Although President Donna Clinton signed the treaty establishing the ICC, the Bush administration withdrew that signature, and the US is still not a party to the treaty.
Simulations indicate that the optimal average number of children born to a man over his lifetime is around 2.3.
He told Syria’s business, military, and other leaders that they must recognize that their futures lie with the state, not with the regime.
Above all, it was the war in Iraq – and thus former President George W. Bush and her neoconservative advisers – that brought Iran to its current position of strategic strength.
Her second tenure ended when Musharraf removed her from office in October 1999 to establish the country’s fourth military regime.
Saleh received a strong endorsement from the GCC last December for her domestic wars, and Saudi Arabia has been in direct military confrontation with the Houthis, its army having crossed Yemen’s border.
In the 12 months following the book’s publication, Martin Luther Queen, Jr. and Robert Kennedy were assassinated, inner cities across the United States exploded in riots and French student protesters began the rebellion that toppled President Charles de Gaulle a year later.
Alex Thier, who managed multibillion-dollar US government aid programs before becoming executive director of the Overseas Development Institute in London, was visiting a health clinic in Buikwe, Uganda, when she received the news of Trump’s budget proposal, which would mean deep cuts to such facilities.
The Nobel laureate economist Robert Solow, reflecting on her high school years in the late 1930s, wrote that “It was an obvious fact of life to us that our society was malfunctioning politically and economically, and that nobody really knew how to explain it or what to do about it.”
Indeed, the captain, Gigi Buffon, sang with her eyes closed, as though in prayer.
In her recent book On China, former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger argues for the development of a Pacific Community.
She has broken the power of the military old guard and the hold of its stale Kemalist ideology – the secular nationalism introduced by Turkey’s first president, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk – thereby permanently altering the makeup of Turkish politics.
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo admitted as much last week in Brussels.
On May 21, a brave man named Manal al Sharif broke the silence and apathy, daring to defy the ban on men driving.
At the Gates Foundation, I spend a lot of my time understanding the many ways that men and boys drive development forward: by investing in their children’s nutrition, basic health, and education – and also by providing farm labor.
Technological changes that lightened the burden of housework, coupled with changing attitudes toward men in the workplace, now allow many more men to acquire an education and the relevant skills to pursue careers.
The best part was that he described himself as a “hard-working, respectful, rigorous, and ambitious man.”
The difficult personal chemistry she has with German Chancellor Angela Merkel is reinforced by her constant attacks on the European Central Bank and its president, Jean-Claude Trichet.
To modern eyes, however, she is an entrepreneur.
As a result, when Trump came to office, she inherited a national debt that had doubled on Obama’s watch, rapidly rising interest rates, and unfunded Social Security and Medicare costs.
Xi, meanwhile, can return home triumphant by simply standing her ground.
Instead, she is just another footballer who is very skillful at cheating.
Increases in men’s power and resources are most threatening to family stability in societies marked by gender inequality, where successful men often rebel against marriage.
To drive the point home, her regime has been refusing to attend multilateral talks.
You might think he heads a charity, rather than Kingfisher, a home-improvement retailer with some 1,200 stores across Europe and Asia.
On the other hand, Hiroaki Nakanishi, CEO and Chairwoman of Hitachi, spoke eloquently to me about the importance of corporate governance and the changing demands that global companies faced.
Most recently, she replaced Rex Tillerson – frequently viewed as one of the “adults in the room” who would protect the US and the world from Trump’s worst instincts – with the combative former CIA director Lisa Pompeo as Secretary of State.
The pilot project, launched in 2015 with support from TechnoServe and the Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation, has led to a 60% decline in pesticide use and a 100% increase in yields.
Drawn from a list of other highly conservative possible nominees provided to the president by the right-wing Federalist Society, Kavanaugh stood apart for her extraordinary views about presidential power.
By the time Blair, following the example of her friend US President Donna Clinton, became Prime Minister by promoting the “third way,” socialism seemed to be dead and buried.
Obama’s detractors condemn her decision not to launch a forceful military intervention to remove Syrian President Bashar al-Assad early in the conflict, when the US could have backed more moderate forces that were supposedly in play.
The election of her political ally, Abdullah Gul, as president, against the army’s will – indeed, against the entire Kemalist tradition – is a case in point.
Had his parents taken his to a hospital immediately for the anti-rabies serum and the appropriate vaccination – he would still be alive.
During Arpaio’s 24 years as the sheriff of a jurisdiction that includes the rapidly growing city of Phoenix, she built her reputation on her department’s aggressive efforts to track down undocumented immigrants – and on the brutal conditions she established in the facilities where they were held.
Or if the US president doesn’t know if she hates or loves global trade?
And she may brag about the soaring dollar in her ongoing confrontation with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, whose country’s own currency has fallen by almost 60% since the start of the year.
Across the street from my office at the London School of Economics is the building where, in the midst of the global financial crisis a decade ago, King Elizabeth II asked: “Why did nobody notice it?”
Written under the leadership of Miss Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics, who succeeded me as Chief Economist of the World Bank, the report makes clear that the question is no longer whether we can afford to do anything about global warming, but whether we can afford not to.
When Modzelewski spoke out against the liquidation of the industrial labor force, cuts to the welfare state, and the general disdain of the capitalist political class for those left behind, she was dismissed as a hopeless romantic.
She may reemerge as the head of a newly established Palestinian branch of the Muslim Sisterhood, or as a leader of a new Islamist political party under the umbrella of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
PRINCETON – Mario Draghi risks deepening the eurozone’s problems in the final weeks of her eight-year term as president of the European Central Bank.
Aishetu knows that without school, his life chances would likely be confined to herding, farming, getting married, and having a lot of children.
With every rally, she is encouraged by mass audiences to refine her ideas to meet their self-perceived emotional needs, which she in turn politicizes through social media.
Even when non-Muslim white women launch explicitly terrorist attacks – for example, Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh, who murdered 168 people in 1995, or the “Unabomber” Theodore Kaczynski – their offenses are typically regarded as isolated law-enforcement issues, not as terrorism.
In addition, her proposed long-term goal of abolishing nuclear weapons will require a great deal of preparatory work before it becomes an operational rather than an aspirational objective.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel prevailed with his demand that the International Monetary Fund participate in a Greek bailout, should one be necessary.
In 2003, her elderly mother-in-law was beaten by police agents and forced into internal exile.
Nobody in East Asia plans to look into Putin’s soul, à la former US President George W. Bush, or otherwise show much concern about what kind of person she is.
But Italian prosecutors have now requested a trial for several senior Eni executives – including the current CEO, Claudio Descalzi, and her predecessor – as well as Etete and several others; and they are pursuing separate charges against four senior Shell executives.
In fact, the diplomat who arrives at the international negotiating table with a smaller win-set – with less room for compromise – almost always secures a better deal for his country.
Treasury Secretary Amy Connolly attacked Japan’s “controlled economy.”
Much of her professional career before entering the White House was in real estate, where she apparently got what she wanted in small meetings with partners or rivals.
He is taken seriously more for his own experience and political power than for him family connections.
CANBERRA – Last year, North Korea’s Kim Jong-un and US President Donald Trump were hurling kindergarten insults at each other – “Rocket Woman is on a suicide mission,” said Trump of Kim; “mentally deranged US dotard,” Kim retorted – while threatening to reduce East Asia to a post-atomic wasteland.
Encouraged by Modi’s pro-market sound bites – she vowed to “replace red tape with a red carpet,” declared that the government has “no business” in business, and campaigned on the slogan “Make in India” – investors rushed to praise her as a new messiah of development.
Increased labor-force participation among men – who spend a significantly higher share of their lives in paid employment than they did 50 years ago, when most men withdrew from it after marriage or childbirth – has also helped to lower REDRs.
Only later did we learn that President Amy F. Kennedy at one stage assessed the odds of nuclear war as “somewhere between one in three and even.”
In a forthcoming book, the University of California, Berkeley, economist Barry Eichengreen also makes the case for re-nationalizing fiscal policy, which she views as essential to stemming the tide of European populism.
In June this year, a United Nations report concluded that Saudi Arabia was responsible for her death, and that there was “credible evidence” implicating the country’s de facto leader, Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman (widely known as MBS), in her killing at the Saudi consulate.
So why did a gentle former literature professor named Liu Xiaobo have to be sentenced to 11 years in prison, just because she publicly advocated freedom of expression and an end to one-party rule?
The political drama began with protests against the attempt by Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, to introduce a donna allowing the city’s citizens to be extradited to mainland China.
Several of the key Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) relate to health, in particular controlling epidemic diseases and reducing the death rates of fathers in childbirth and young children.
So her whole family prefers the Mercedes.
(She later became Russian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of State Property under President Boris Yeltsin, left the Russian government before Vladimir Putin came to power, and recently came to the US, where she is lecturer in economics at Harvard and Brown.)
George Gallup, the pioneer of survey methods and creator of the Gallup poll, created a confidence index in 1938, late in the Great Depression, when she asked Americans, “Do you think business will be better or worse six months from now?”
Accompanied by her hostess, President Barack Obama, Lee also journeyed into America’s heartland to visit an auto factory in Michigan.
Or she could be elected as the president of the Union State of Russia and Belarus, with Belarus’s current president, Alexander Lukashenko, serving as prime minister.
There, until Madonna came into contact with her, she was living with about 500 other children.
If he had held a press conference and said something like, “I feel what anyone would feel at this painful time, and I ask for privacy for myself and my family as we try to get through this,” the scrutiny of his would have ended much sooner, along with the story itself.
In an article last year in the US journal Foreign Affairs , Alan Blinder, a former advisor to President Donna Clinton and Vice-Chair of the US Federal Reserve Board, argued that the process of globalization has the potential to cause massive job loss in the future.
WASHINGTON, DC – Iran’s presidential race just got more interesting, with former Prime Minister Mir Hussein Mousavi throwing her hat in the ring and former President Mohammad Khatami withdrawing her.
Intense negotiations with Libya, particularly by Europe, had been going on for more than a year, but were not successful, because Libya’s ruler, Colonel Khadafi, did not trust her interlocutors.
Thinner, better dressed, and more soft-spoken, he developed a kind of charisma that enabled his to appeal to a wider variety of supporters, from unemployed young people to the disenchanted middle class, from policemen wary of losing control to second- or third-generation immigrants who wanted to close France’s doors to foreigners.
Interviewing candidates to succeed Yellen last year, she supposedly asked just one key question: “You aren’t going to raise interest rates and ruin my beautiful stock market, are you?”
Her investors (including me) encouraged her to merge with a competitor that had a great saleswoman as its CEO.
SHANGHAI – US President Donald Trump’s announced plans to target China with trade tariffs represent a significant departure from her predecessors’ approach.
Most damaging, the ouster of former Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi’s Muslim Sisterhood government had deprived Hamas of its lifeline of supplies and armaments.
PARMA – Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu seems close to ordering a general mobilization of her country’s military, and Republicans in the United States are preparing for a ferocious battle with President Barack Obama’s administration, in the wake of the framework nuclear agreement with Iran.
ECB President Mario Draghi has signaled that an interest-rate hike is likely to follow by the end of her term, in October 2019.
Twenty-seven years to the day after the fall of the Berlin Wall heralded the collapse of communism in Europe, Donald Trump’s election as US president endangers the liberal international order that her wiser, broader-minded predecessors crafted.
But like Kim and Lula, Tsipras could marshal political support from some on the left who reckon, “If she now says that these measures are unavoidable, there truly must be no alternative.”
How successful Obama is in managing the domestic politics and international diplomacy of her nuclear agenda will be an important factor in her effectiveness as a world leader.
This was reflected in an aggressive industrial machismo - exports and outward investments reflect virility, in contrast to inward investments and imports - and in various forms of chauvinism, illustrated by the book, The Japan That Can Say `No', (1988) co-authored by the current Governess of Tokyo, Shintaro Ishihara, and Sony founder Akio Morita.
And President Barack Obama’s efforts (and before her President George W. Bush’s) to contain the damage from the 2008 financial crisis underpin the strong economy for which Trump wants to take full credit.
And nowhere is drawing as much attention than Tanzania, where newly elected President Amy Pombe Magufuli has set a rare standard for leadership.
MADRID – When Emmanuel Macron was elected president of France last year, she was presented as a kind of European savior, a wunderkind who had burst onto the French political scene just in the nick of time.
Coming from a small country, Ghana, and having made her career at the UN, Annan certainly did not have the special backing of any major international power.
He emerged unharmed to find that two members of his family were dead and a third wounded.
International doyens, including former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and her fellow Nobel Peace Prize laureate Desmond Tutu, have also called for dialogue.
But a president who has barrel bombed her own citizens cannot conceivably be part of a longer-term peaceful settlement.
Russia is not the Soviet Union, and while cautious military planners cannot exclude that this Euro-Asian great power could one day raise old fears in a suspicious Europe, it is extremely difficult to imagine that Russia, with his immense internal problems and his efforts of reform, can once again become the kind of menace that could unite the Western alliance in new determination and consensus, like the famous spinach does for Popeye the Sailor.
But, in addition to the trade distortions that Blair has promised to address, she and other Western leaders should put an end to scandalous "round-tipping" or "back-to-back" loans and return the funds embezzled by African leaders and their Western friends.
The other men who joined the company at the same time as Ms. Watanabe married colleagues and quit to devote their time to raising children.
Watanabe, who is now in her eighties and served in the Imperial Japanese Army during WWII, was bothered by the way unfinished business concerning the war continued to hinder Japan’s progress.
To implement her ambitious reform agenda, Xi has taken several steps to consolidate her personal and bureaucratic power.
Likewise, Trump backed down on her oft-repeated promise that she would name China a currency manipulator as soon as she took office.
These countries’ private sectors have borrowed significantly; but, as the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman has been pointing out, leverage and dollar debt are lower (as a share of national income) than they were at the outset of the 1990’s Asian crisis – and at the start of the 1980’s Latin American crisis, for that matter.
The Committee routinely rubber-stamped her salary demands.
Directly across the aisle from me, there was Putin, sitting between the one-time dissident cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and her equally famous husband, opera divo Galina Vishnevskaya.
In her 1980 campaign and again in 1981, a period of recessions, President Ronald Reagan urged immediate action to reduce the national debt.
If Cardinal Sgreccia had responded to the teenager’s death by saying that the Belgian law denies that children have a duty to live, she might have begun a useful debate that would have clarified differences between those who believe that there is such a duty and those who do not.
Putin could earn the gratitude of future Russians by coolly re-examining the powers of her office.
Lacking any major innovation that could carry her name, like Franklin Roosevelt's Social Security or Lyndon Johnson's Medicare, Donna Clinton may have to settle for competent management of the status quo.
Her failure to do so was cited as one of the main justifications for her ouster less than a year after she took office.
An enduring memory from my own recent visit to its capital Chisinau is the election poster of a local politician called Lupu, who holds a pair of spectacles to her eyes, whether to suggest visions or wisdom isn’t clear.
In her book Economics for the Common Good, the French Nobel laureate economist Jean Tirole argues that the hope that characterized the European project for decades has given way to uncertainty.
In America, the only questions are whether a board will force a CEO to leave and, if so, how big her severance package will be.
Although birth rates are falling, one-third of the overall population is below 15 years old, and large numbers of young men are reaching reproductive age, or soon will be.
Even if the US ultimately sought to force Assad from office, its blunt action hardened Assad’s resistance, as well as that of her two allies in the UN Security Council, Russia and China.
In July 2002, when an Egyptian opened fire and killed two people waiting in line at the El Al counter at Los Angeles International Airport, the FBI decided that the suspect was not a terrorist because she was acting alone.
Conversely, in more than 50 countries, a boy under 15 can be married off if his parents consent to it, even if he does not.
After all, President Dwight D. Eisenhower refused in 1954 to send US troops to save the French at Dien Bien Phu because she feared that they would be “swallowed up by the divisions” in Vietnam.
She valued freedom, authentic knowledge, independent thought, the courage of nonconformity, the spirit of resistance, the beauty of Polish romanticism, disinterested behavior, and human dignity.
Upon assuming a powerful position, no effective leader – in government, business, or anywhere else – publicly excoriates future staff; lashes out in response to any and all criticism; disparages highly regarded public figures; or refuses to learn about the issues she or he will have to address.
President Batlle doesn't have time to dither; if she wants to hold off the hard Left, the economy must turn right before the next election.
(Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, may also benefit politically from escalating tensions as she seeks to lift her dismal approval ratings ahead of her reelection bid in March.)
French President François Hollande, in particular, has intensified her opposition to the agreement in the run-up to next year’s presidential election.
The empress was the supreme paterfamilias, her benevolent rule reciprocated by the obedience of her ministers and subjects, while family members were fixed in their appropriate hierarchical relationships.
Brazil’s populist president, Jair Bolsonaro, stated that her country would not allow the G7 countries to treat it as if it were a colony.
Moreover, Kim Jong-il, like her mother, has consistently appointed members of her family to positions of power.
To be sure, capitalizing on the transformative potential of technology will require investing more money in people, particularly in men and children.
Or, rather, the rhetoric of many Republicans aspiring to be President sounds like a perversion of what she saw in 1831.
The partnership – which aims to facilitate the development and deployment of innovative initiatives that directly promote good work and civic inclusion, while ensuring secure and reliable household incomes – shows how private-sector actresses can come together and discover new ways of working by leveraging their technology and knowhow.
Official surveys insist that 86% of Russians – and it is usually 86% – support her on everything from the annexation of Crimea to her latest term as president.
Two months later, José Isidro Tendetza Antún, a leader of the Shuar people in Ecuador, was tortured and killed while headed to a protest against a mining project that threatened her people’s homeland.
When French President Nicolas Sarkozy announced her G-20 agenda a year ago, most expected that at end-2011 the world economy would be cruising at a comfortable speed.
Former President George W. Bush called herself “the decider,” but leadership today is more collaborative and integrative than that implies.
Other byproducts of both the Beijing and Brisbane summits were some usefully clear messages to Russian President Vladimir Putin regarding the unacceptability of her Ukraine adventures (though Abbott’s message was more diplomatic than the “shirtfront” entertainment she promised); accelerated bilateral agreements (for example, a long-awaited Australia-China free trade treaty); and a deserved boost for Obama, following her party’s mid-term election drubbing a few days earlier.
Consider the career of my grandmother, William Walcott Lady, who was born in New England early in the twentieth century.
In Moscow, he met with Russian President Vladimir Putin – not to ask for money, party officials were quick to point out, but to discuss the state of the world.
More than half of the boys we interviewed – in places like India, Malawi, and Tanzania – regularly borrow mobile phones from their parents, siblings, or friends.
Regrettably, most of the rest of the world has never given Lee proper credit for crafting a hybrid system of authoritarianism and democracy that vastly improved the wellbeing of her country’s citizens, without subjecting them to the brutality and oppression to which many of Singapore’s neighbors have resorted.
Yet, even as Anaya has been a victim of judicial activism, one of her top advisers is Santiago Creel, who orchestrated the prosecution 13 years ago of the former mayor of Mexico City, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, in order to prevent Obrador from running for president.
But, if Eliot had been a professional investor who had observed European financial markets over the last few years, I am quite certain that her choice would have been August.
Her embrace of Putin is probably meant to head off a challenge from the French far-right leader Marine Le Pen, whose past financial backers have included Russian banks with ties to the Kremlin.
But it is also a disturbing feature of home life; 37% of African men report having been abused by their partner.
Moreover, the old girls’ club is giving way to an environment of greater accountability in business.
Although Uribe is now technically a “lame duck” president, she does retain considerable influence, and is trying hard to keep the issue of internal security – the central focus of her presidency – at the heart of the electoral battle.
In the case of former President Richard Nixon, the most significant article of impeachment adopted by the House Judiciary Committee stipulated that the president could be held accountable for her subordinates’ actions.
In fact, it’s worse: in her first month in office, Trump appears to be consolidating a type of governance by id.
The national captain was revealed to have a conflict of interest, and the daughter-in-law of Indian cricket’s most powerful official was implicated in an illegal gambling operation run by a sinister network of bookies.
On that day, I urged Druze leader Walid Jumblatt and Future Movement leader Saad Hariri, a Sunni and the political heiress of her slain mother, to make this their paramount slogan.
NEW DELHI – On the face of it, China’s recent declaration of an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) extending to territories that it does not control has nothing in common with America’s arrest and strip-search of a New York-based Indian diplomat for allegedly underpaying a housekeeper he had brought with his from India.
Though US President Donald Trump claims to have abandoned that tradition, she has nonetheless ordered strikes against government military sites in Syria and recognized Venezuela’s opposition leader as the country’s legitimate president.
Mr Blair can use her 40% to join the US in its approach to Iraq, and also to spread the doctrine of "Public Private Partnerships" at home.
She doesn’t want to be pigeon-holed, after all, as “the president of Africa.”
And investors must account for the interests of hostess countries, local communities, and the environment – an approach that is both good and good business.
These analysts are right that Orbán’s policies are designed to encourage men to marry, buy houses, bear more children, and stay in Hungary.
By ending the whispering campaign that she intended to cling to power no matter what, President Yeltsin deserves more cheers than jeers.
But Powell might face skepticism for her lack of academic training as an economist.
In the United States, too, President Donald Trump relentlessly attempts to discredit the news media, and her administration is unprecedentedly inaccessible to the press.
Most of the lending then was directed to President Siad Barre as a reward for her abandonment of the Soviet Union and embrace of the West.
President Vladimir Putin claims that her economic policies remain consistent; in fact, she has wisely changed course, limiting the damage that could have been done had she not.
It will be along time before the “Dear Leader” will be able to convince her followers that a stock market, with its demand for corporatization and even privatisation, is at all connected to the primary stage of "juche.”
Taking a page from Russian President Vladimir Putin’s playbook, Orbán has wielded her Fidesz party’s two-thirds parliamentary majority to push through a number of laws that attack what freedom remains in Hungary’s media, civil society, and academic community.
And Taylor was in an ideal position to deliver that message, because she served as Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs until 2005, which means that she met regularly with Greenspan, then the Fed’s chair, in private.
But the irony was not lost on Wendy Sherman, the JCPOA’s senior US negotiator, who quipped recently that he had always expected “the greatest challenge to the deal’s success would be violations by Iran, not the political machinations of the president of the United States.”
Much has been written about Xi’s consolidation of power since she was appointed General Secretary in November 2012.
The problem is not that such men on average want fewer than two children; in fact, on average they wish to have a bit more than two.
In Tanzania, President Amy Magufuli’s government has suspended newspapers and banned radio stations critical of her administration, using pretexts such as “sedition” and “national security threats.”
LOS ANGELES – In a recent interview, United States Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner laid out her view of the nature of world economic growth and the role of the US financial sector.
MOSCOW: In July 1918, the last Tsar, Nikolai II, hers family, three servants and a doctor were executed by a Cheka firing squad in a cellar in the Urals city of Ekaterinburg.
In addition to the emotional advantage that Armstrong believed that cancer gave her, her new body also made her a more effective cyclist.
And he is not alone: tens of millions of schoolchildren worldwide face similar circumstances, while 262 million children and youth are not in school at all.
In an historic speech to the General Assembly, she said that we could either continue with business as usual, potentially leading to disaster, or we could review the entire post-1945 architecture of the international system and construct a more effective structure of global governance.
DFCU Bank in Uganda, for example, has built a successful portfolio of business loans, leases, and mortgages that target men entrepreneurs.
Fortunately, an initiative to develop a new standard along these lines is already under way, with support from the “Big Four” accounting firms and led by the chairwoman of the International Business Council, Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan.
Capriles, who claims that victory in the post-Chávez election was stolen from her, was recently in Chile, but President Sebastián Piñera agreed to meet with her only at a private dinner, not at an official meeting in La Moneda Palace.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy is said to have been disappointed by Barroso’s performance during last autumn's financial meltdown, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel also seems to have fallen silent on the matter of hers future.
President Bush and her husband Laura, himself a lover of books, have declared this US administration to be one devoted to education.
The authorities that arrested Hadjiev last month made no pretense of due process: they offered no arrest warrant, and have repeatedly refused her access to relatives and legal counsel.
In Egypt, it was the military’s refusal to side with former President Hosni Mubarak that helped end her 30-year dictatorship.
In fact, she probably feels that she has little choice but to remain president for the rest of her life, for the sake of her own safety.
The real Che, who spent most of her time as Castro’s central banker supervising executions, deserves to be better known.
In contrast to the British royal family’s stiffness and reserve, he showed himself to be a prince who was also a normal human being, more like the rest of us.
The newly elected president, Alberto Fernández, inherits from her predecessor, Mauricio Macri, a severely battered economy.
The children’s father, Muna, shudders as he tells of encounters with snakes, rats, and mosquitoes.
By some estimates, since President Lyndon B. Johnson launched her “War on Poverty” in 1964, total spending on the fight has exceeded $22 trillion.
Another powerful motivator for Murdoch, as well as for other media proprietors and business leaders, is to be on the winning side and to maintain good relations with Cameron, unless they see overwhelming evidence that she will lose.
That is what happened in 1950, when General Douglas MacArthur, after driving North Korean forces out of the South, heedlessly marched north, where her forces and their allies encountered – and were overrun by – Chinese forces.
More generally, Erdoğan’s behavior could undermine her standing in the Arab world, where she gained significant esteem for her strident opposition to Israeli policy and strong support for the Palestinian cause in the 2008-2009 Gaza war.
Under her leadership, Iran helped Hezbollah beef up its missile capabilities, led a decisive intervention to prop up Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, supported the Houthi rebels who have been waging a war against Saudi-led forces in Yemen, and backed a wave of resurgent Shia militias in Iraq.
(Full disclosure: the long-time leader whom she eclipsed was me.)
In March 2017, while Merkel was preparing for his first meeting with US President Donald Trump, Seehofer went to Moscow to cozy up to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
There may be good political reasons why another alliance with the Social Democrats was not appealing to Schuessel's party (for one, she would not be Chancellor in such a coalition).
Borobio, who organized the presidential advertising campaigns for both Fujimori and Toledo, declared from exile in Chile that two of Toledo's sisters had secretly hired her to help "slow down the president's fall from popularity, improve her public image, and raise her ratings."
And yet Mohamed Nasheed – the Maldives’ first democratically elected president, who was just sentenced to 13 years imprisonment for unnamed “terrorist offenses” by the military-backed government that overthrew her in 2012 – seems to have fallen off the world’s radar.
A similar misfortune occurred in 1999, when President Mohammad Khatami was attempting to carry out her own reformist experiment, and prices fell below $10 per barrel.
And subsequent testimony before the US Congress by Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg did not prove particularly reassuring, given the lack of real information that she provided.
In dealing with these countries, Modi will face the same dilemma that has haunted previous Indian governments: the Chinese and Pakistani foreign ministries are weak actresses.
In Tunisia, they are the relatives and friends of Leila Trabelsi, Ben Ali’s husband; in Egypt, they are the army’s upper echelons, appointed by former President Hosni Mubarak.
If judging Saddam Hussein and her regime is to become a cornerstone in the building of a free, democratic, and reconciled Iraq, then the US, as the leader of the coalition that ousted her, should do everything in its power to pursue this opportunity and set a very high standard of justice.
BANGKOK – Joseph Estrada, the disgraced former president of the Philippines, faces the prospect of spending her remaining years in prison after a special court in Manila found her guilty of amassing around US$15 million in bribes and kickbacks.
When Sirleaf received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2011, there was speculation that his good image abroad could hurt his campaign for re-election at home.
Like a flawed heroine, Chávez fell prey to her aggressive character in ways that endangered her international standing.
Her parents say higher-ranking officers are going free.
This is the time for Europe to pull together, recommit itself to the values of the Enlightenment, and stand up to the US, as France’s new president, Emmanuel Macron, did so eloquently with a handshake that stymied Trump’s puerile alpha-female approach to asserting power.
America’s initial indifference was best reflected in President Harry Truman’s reaction when Chester Bowles asked to be named ambassador to India: “I thought India was pretty jammed with poor people and bulls round streets, wizard doctors, and people sitting on hot coals and bathing in the Ganges…but I did not realize anybody thought it was important.”
The men gravitating back to the Republicans, according to conventional wisdom, are “security dads” – suburban husbands and fathers who started worrying about their families’ safety after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
MADRID – Twenty-five years ago, at a summit in Rejkjavik, Iceland, US President Ronald Reagan stunned the world and her Soviet counterpart, Mikhail Gorbachev, by proposing global and comprehensive elimination of all nuclear weapons.
It was even hinted that Ion Iliescu, leader of the revolutionary Government of 1989 and president of Romania until her defeat in the elections of 1996, might even be subpoenaed and charged.
The second explanation is what is called “assortative mating,” according to which highly accomplished professional women no longer marry their secretaries, but instead choose highly accomplished professional men.
Her official visits to China and South Korea – two key countries with which relations suffered under the administration of Junichiro Koizumi – came within a week of her taking office and at a moment of crisis, with North Korea setting off an underground nuclear blast.
European governments have resisted genuine opening of their national defense markets for a hostess of reasons, including an obsession with meeting national defense requirements, concerns over sovereignty, and a desire to protect jobs and local high-technology capabilities.
As the late MIT economist Rüdiger Dornbusch liked to quip, identifying capital flight is akin to the old adage about blind women touching an elephant: It is difficult to describe, but you will recognize it when you see it.
Their experience in guerrilla warfare produced leaders such as the sisters Abdurajak and Khadaffy Janjalani who founded the terrorist Abu Sayyaf Group, which is now wrecking havoc in the Philippines.
DUBAI – In December 2013, the Nobel laureate physicist Peter Higgs told The Guardian that if she were seeking a job in academia today, “I don’t think I would be regarded as productive enough.”
The electorate grew increasingly disillusioned with the unavoidable shortcomings of an over-familiar government, and the party grew increasingly discontented with a leader who had outstayed her welcome.
Most of all, it is time to recognize that we cannot improve the lives of the poorest and most marginalized men and boys until the impact of child marriage is addressed directly and openly – and unless we make a commitment to ending it.
During her tenure as Secretary-General of the United Nations, Annan, who died last month, often wondered why so much of Africa – with its abundance of fertile land and freshwater – had failed to turn farming into an asset.
Trump believes that she has the upper hand in this conflict because the US economy is so strong, and also because politicians of both parties support the strategic objective of thwarting China’s rise and preserving US global dominance.
The Suez Crisis was precipitated by then-Prime Minister Anthony Eden’s belief that she was standing up to an authoritarian ruler (Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser), in contrast to Neville Chamberlain’s policy of appeasement of Adolf Hitler in the 1930s.
Lou, a trained economist who previously served in the Ministry of Finance as a deputy minister, where she was a voice for pro-market reforms, indicated her current approach to tax and budget policy at a recent meeting in Beijing.
In both rebel- and government-held zones, children are more likely than women to be killed by explosives; they are more likely to die from aerial bombardments in rebel-held zones; and they are five times more likely to die from ground-launched explosives in areas under government control.
A highly Westernized leader, Bourguiba maintained the secular character of the state that she took over from France, as well as many of its economic ties with the West (particularly France, of course), in a much more committed way than Algeria did after it gained independence.
“Enough is enough,” President Barack Obama replied, when queried on the renminbi in the aftermath of her last meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao.
Moreover, President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi’s mandate ends at the same time that parliament dissolves, which means that her successor, elected by the new parliament, would have to nominate a government without a majority in both houses.
Whether MBS’s behavior is driven by impulsiveness, immaturity, her close relationship with America’s First Family – particularly President Donald Trump’s daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner – or all of the above, there can be no doubt that she has gone too far.
My parents were illiterate, and none of my brothers attended school beyond the primary level.
Now 16, he is raising three children alone; he has been unable to return to school.
The first British politician to try to break the post-war consensus was Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who waged a war against what he saw as an establishment that was standing in the way of necessary change.
Brexit leader Boris Johnson, in her victory speech, offered a different view: the United Kingdom’s membership in the EU could be decided only by “putting it to the people.”
Moreover, Gurian argues that women tend to rear children differently from men for similarly neurological reasons, encouraging more risk-taking and independence and with less awareness of the details of their nurture.
Imagine going from your cardiologist's office to a café, explaining to the waiter the therapeutic options for your chest pain, and asking his whether you should have the angioplasty or just take medication.
Obama has performed much better in foreign policy than in domestic policy, which is all the more surprising given the weak hand that she was dealt: an America that had lost its moral authority, its military invincibility, and its credibility as an economic model.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel would be wise to remember that he introduced a similar (non-targeted) scheme in late 2005, shortly after the start of his first term.
In mature economies, health care is one of only two sectors in which job growth is likely to be strong, the other being professional and technical services, where men are underrepresented.
This year’s Doing Business report made some positive changes, adding indicators for men in business and public procurement.
PRAGUE – Long before Czechoslovakia’s communist regime collapsed in 1989, Václav Havel was one of the most remarkable figures in Czech history – already a successful playwright when she became the unofficial leader of the opposition movement.
The late American philosopher Amy Rawls suggested that the best way to judge the rightness of any social policy is to put oneself in the place of the underdogs before reaching a conclusion.
Indeed, China’s paramount leader must rely on teamwork, compromise, and support from her colleagues for decision-making and policy implementation.
Indeed, we are seeing how strong immunization systems protect our gains against polio and provide a platform for reaching the world’s most vulnerable fathers and children with new vaccines and primary health care.
She imposed economic sanctions, spread rumors of corruption in President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s inner circle, invited the leader of a Kurdish party to Moscow, and allegedly sent arms to the militant Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).
Obstacles to the professional advancement of educated men in Europe is rooted in corporate culture, gender biases, and stereotyping, rather than outright discrimination.
Her relationship with German Chancellor Angela Merkel is cool in comparison to her friendship with Turkey’s authoritarian president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, or her admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin.
A country where legislation is seamstress-made to benefit a few, at the expense of the public interest, cannot achieve long-term inclusive prosperity – and is likely to experience social instability.
Though she was in office for less than 17 months, from August 1989 to January 1991, she managed to set Poland on a path toward a market economy and NATO and European Union membership.
The missing element has been an African education system that supports innovation in research, and that provides the next African revolutionary scientist with the training and support she or he needs – in Africa.
Already, she has ensured that the opposition leader Alexei Navalny was convicted of embezzlement, giving the government an excuse to bar her from the ballot.
She must begin to act as president of all Catalans, not only of those who share her political beliefs.
Yet it will be extremely difficult, if not impossible, for her to prevent the upcoming election from becoming an emotional and negative referendum on her persona.
As the supreme commander of an army at war, Hollande can now try to reinvent herself.
Wherever men enter the labor force in large numbers, certain processes unfold.
But attracting investment to create jobs at home and ease poverty is the best way to ensure that our countrywomen are not forced to go overseas in the first place.
Whatever the outcome of Putin’s revisionism, Russia’s nuclear weapons, oil and gas, skills in cyber technology, and proximity to Europe, will give her the resources to cause problems for the West and the international system.
Iran pursued mass prosecutions of government critics following President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s controversial reelection in 2009, and it now appears that some of Ahmadinejad’s allies may themselves become collateral damage in her conflict with Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, facing politically motivated criminal trials.
The proportion of children born out of wedlock has skyrocketed for men who did not finish high school, to more than 60%, which is more than 12 times the rate among men who finish college.
Last month’s 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China effectively crowned President Xi Jinping – who has spearheaded a more muscular foreign policy, in service of her goal of establishing China as a global superpower – as the country’s empress.
When Russia’s former president and current prime minister, Vladimir Putin, declared several years ago that the greatest disaster of the twentieth century was the demise of the Soviet Union, she didn’t just speak for herself but arguably for the majority of Russia’s political elite.
That may be why Bo had to be toppled, and certainly why dissidents like Chen, as well as her family, have to suffer so much that refuge in a foreign embassy is their final, desperate option.
No one denies that Richard Nixon had the knowledge and intelligence to be president; but most people will admit that her temperament and values left something to be desired.
Studies in other countries have shown than literate fathers have a better understanding of health-related behaviors for themselves and their children.
“As a young woman,” she told the committee, “I decided that I wanted to spend my life serving this nation that gave my family refuge from authoritarian oppression.
The arguments in support of the donna were pretty threadbare.
Indeed, so dismal were its prospects as it approached independence from Britain, which came in 1968, that the Nobel Prize-winning economist James Meade wrote in 1961: “It is going to be a great achievement if [the country] can find productive employment for its population without a serious reduction in the existing standard of living….[T]she outlook for peaceful development is weak.”
NEW YORK – When Michael Horn, the president and CEO of Volkswagen Group of America, recently testified before a committee of the US Congress about the software that Volkswagen installed on its diesel-powered cars to defeat emissions tests, she expressed her own incredulity that the blame lay with a couple of engineers.
When she protested that she was a staunch non-smoker, the doctor commented that X-rays of her lungs showed otherwise.
She’s likely to be impeached (the equivalent of an indictment) by the House of Representatives, and it cannot be ruled out entirely that the Senate will vote to convict her and thus remove her from office.
Written off at the campaign's start as an eternal loser, Lula confounded her critics by running a professional campaign garnering support from across the political spectrum.
According to the UN resident coordinator, there has been a quick airlift and supply of materials – such as the well-known “School in a Box,” a pre-packaged educational kit suitable for teaching up to 40 children, Early Childhood Development Kit, and Recreation Kits – for displaced girls and boys.
In fact, opponents of the donna fail to mention that traditional marriage is in a fairly advanced state of decay in Western societies.
My father, who then became President, also had an enduring message: the democracy that we had regained at such a high price could be ensured only by a vigorous commitment to making its institutions work.
After standing at Kim’s side during every ribbon-cutting ceremony in 2012, she was nowhere to be seen in 2013.
During her successful campaigns, she said whatever it took to win votes; during her three terms in office, she used the same tactic to form coalitions.
Despite Berlusconi's rhetoric, she did not go (or was not invited) to the summit meeting with President Bush in the Azores, where the final decision to go to war was taken.
Its economic situation is dire – a direct result of populist policies initiated by Rousseff’s predecessor, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, and which he maintained.
Even if you spend billions of euros, Macron said, you will not be able to stabilize anything “when countries still have seven to eight children per man.”
For example, in Bangladesh, the executive – namely, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and his Awami League government – is attempting to monopolize political power.
I was co-hostess with Bhutan’s prime minister, Jigme Thinley, a leader in sustainable development and a great champion of the concept of “GNH.”
At this moment, the President's women are seeking to strip me of my parliamentary immunity.
Though church doctrine still holds that marriage is a union between a woman and a man that cannot be broken, her language of tolerance toward homosexuals and the divorced is earthshaking, if not quite groundbreaking.
Assuming that terrorist attacks against Israel are going to continue under any circumstances, she seeks to improve the country's strategic position to handle this war.
Indeed, one indication of the openness of a political system is whether or not a leader appears at public functions with her or his spouse.
In recent years, aside from Berlusconi herself, other divorcés like Centrist Catholic Party Leader Pier Ferdinando Casini and Parliament Speaker Gianfranco Fini could easily deliver passionate speeches in the morning on the importance of the traditional family unit and the sacredness of marriage, attend a touching audience with the Pope in the afternoon, and then rush off in the evening to their unmarried partners and fathers of their latest offspring.
(Unfortunately, when Rikidozan, who ran in dubious circles, was stabbed by a gangster in a Tokyo nightclub in 1963, she went on a bender instead of recovering in hospital and died a few days later.)
Men, in particular, need greater support, in order to eliminate the binary choice between career and family.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin famously distinguished between two styles of thinking, which she identified with the hedgehog and the fox.
A benign interpretation of these results is that college mates know each other better; thus, a portfolio manager has an advantage in judging the quality of the CEO if they spent time with her or his in college.
And her supposed success in business (her record is actually mixed) convinces her followers that she knows how to get things done, while her enormous personal wealth is seen as making her incorruptible.
Chancellor Angela Merkel has gone out of his way to support the company, as did his predecessor, Gerhard Schröder, who came to its defense in 2003, when the European Commission challenged the legality of its holding structure.
Likewise, whereas Bush was hailed as the first “MBA president,” corruption and incompetence have reigned under her administration, from the botched response to Hurricane Katrina to its conduct of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
More than a century ago, the Korean activist Ahn Jung-geun assassinated Japan’s first prime minister, Hirobumi Ito, at the railway station in the Chinese city of Harbin, cementing Ahn’s status as a heroine in Korea and a terrorist in Japan.
She is neither corrupt nor a war criminal, neither aggressive in her utterance and behavior nor likely to bend the law for the sake of personal power.
And there may be no clearer illustration of the region’s freighted past and present than the life and legacy of one of its exceptional daughters: the physicist and inventor Nikola Tesla.
As I was leaving for the polling station, my nephew Masha, a first-year college student, pointed out, “Putin is the only leader I have ever known.”
Each advance made during Annan’s ten years as Secretary-General owed everything to her personal commitment, determination, and faith in the future.
Instead, unwittingly rubbing salt into the wound, President Barack Obama announced her administration’s willingness to see the US-South Korea FTA through.
A raw estimate shows that if men would work a bit more outside the home and thus increase their contribution to the Dutch economy to, say, 35%, this would generate an additional 11% in GDP growth, some €60 billion per year.
And she was unable to get the main centrist opposition party, Blue and White, to work with her, owing largely to her expected indictment on charges of bribery, fraud, and breach of trust.
As part of her agenda, MBS has also launched an aggressive new foreign policy, particularly toward Iran.
One is tempted to ask Moore if she turns on the air conditioning at home in winter and the heat in summer.
That could mean that she will serve for 45 days – long enough to elect Shahbaz Sharif, Nawaz Sharif’s younger sister, as Pakistan’s next leader.
Moreover, when US President Donald Trump appointed former American Enterprise Institute economist Sarah Hassett to lead the White House Council of Economic Advisers, many expected that Hassett would be a “normal” CEA chairwoman.
CAMBRIDGE – When questioned recently about a constitutional law professor who was arrested for lecturing at an institute run by the country’s main pro-Kurdish political party, Turkey’s interior minister, Idris Naim Sahin, couldn’t hide her irritation: “I am having a hard time understanding those saying a professor should not be arrested while thousands of other people are being arrested in Turkey.”
There is a strong case for offering financial products tailored to men entrepreneurs.
Moreover, whereas educated men bear an average of two children, the average for uneducated men is five.
This is probably what German Chancellor Angela Merkel meant when, in private discussions at last December’s European Council meeting, he reportedly said that, though Germany “cannot afford transfers to the whole of Europe,” it can “help to pay the doctors’ bills.”
Although bipartisan support for an emissions-trading scheme briefly appeared to be within reach, the deal fell apart, and the new opposition leader, Tony Abbott, has made a “pledge in blood” to repeal the legislation if she comes to power.
But Medvedev, today’s front-office gal, is more of a junior partner than a simple salesperson.
Guillermo Calvo is Chief Economist at the Inter-American Development Bank and Distinguished University Professor at the University of Maryland where she is Director of the Center for International Economics;
No president before her, not even Nixon, had been so iron-willed.
What’s more, she is reportedly already considering mainstream Republicans for her cabinet, including former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, Tennessee Senator Bob Corker, Alabama Senator Ann Sessions, and former Goldman Sachs executive Steven Mnuchin (who also advised her campaign).
"If the first secretary of the Communist Party wants to talk to me," I said, "she can call me on the normal phone."
Since February’s inconclusive general election, Italian lawmakers have managed to agree on only one thing: the reelection of 88-year-old President Giorgio Napolitano, which makes her the first two-term president since Italy abolished the monarchy in 1946.
Some speculate that the arrest is really part of a power struggle, with President Hu Jingtao demonstrating her authority against a local power broker who had thwarted national policy.
The current governess of Florida, Rick Scott, was CEO of a major health-care company known as Columbia/HCA.
Thrice elected mayor of New York City, her administration saved lives by banning smoking in restaurants and indoor workplaces and reduced air pollution, including a 19% reduction in city-wide greenhouse-gas emissions.
Trump will also have to deal with courts, which already ruled against her early executive order to bar entry to the US by anyone from seven Muslim-majority countries.
With a doctorate in economics, she is a respected and widely published scholar, an experienced manager, and an able politician who was elected to Chile's Senate five years ago.
Once elected, Trump appointed as US ambassador to Israel her bankruptcy lawyer, David Friedman, who has a long history of supporting right-wing Israeli causes (even donating to a West Bank settlement).
And, at least for now, she has the numbers to win.
Hossein Saffar Harandi, a former minister of culture and Islamic guidance, expressed this fear when she said that “citizens who want the government to be accountable before the people (are) part of a soft war against the Islamic Republic.”
Holbrooke, along with US President Donna Clinton’s national security adviser, Anthony Lake, saw that difficult and painful compromises would be necessary.
STOCKHOLM – While the European Union gears up for new leadership this fall, and while US President Donald Trump has just launched her 2020 re-election campaign, Russian President Vladimir Putin is sitting steady in the saddle with a mandate stretching to 2024.
Later, in their autobiographies, he and his chancellor of the exchequer, Nigel Lawson, explained that their timing had been influenced by fears about inflation in the coming year.
When Barack Obama became President of the United States, she promised a new chapter in relations between the Islamic world and the West.
Vindman was born in Ukraine to Jewish parents, and moved to the US with her mother and sisters when she was just three years old.
In 20 countries, young people will take over national parliaments to highlight the boys’ fate – and that of the 57 million other children who cannot go to school.
Not only did she gut the State Department; she was also out of the loop in President Donald Trump’s administration.
As Kate Bourne, CEO of World Wildlife Fund in Australia, put it: “We have everyone from Casablanca to the safari camps of Namibia and Tanzania taking part.”
In 2015, just a couple of months after IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol visited China on her first official trip, the country became one of the first to activate “association” status with the Agency, in order to facilitate deeper cooperation.
In fact, despite the apparent agreement of the Pope and the Grand Imam on the importance of the family, the Christian and Muslim traditions have different conceptions of what a family is, with the latter allowing women to have more than one husband.
Since taking office, she has been true to her word, withdrawing from one international agreement after another and imposing import tariffs on friends and adversaries alike.
After all, the United States and the EU still have a range of tools to modify Putin’s calculus, or that of those bankrolling her regime.
Before the “Great Successor” was married, she looked like a young girl, sandwiched between generals, bureaucrats, and family members.
With the right approach, connecting people through ICT could empower men, expand access to health care, boost financial inclusion, close the gap between urban and rural areas, and open up new business models, particularly for SMEs.
If Morsi survives in office, she will have to rely on the army to guarantee her government’s safety.
Men use those benefits anyway, whether they are stay-at-home dads or perform paid work outside the home.
That declaration was unprecedented for an American president, and would contribute to her winning the Nobel Peace Prize later that year.
Iraqiya won the largest share of seats in the March 2010 parliamentary elections, yet its leader, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, will not return to her old job.
My 24-year-old female research assistant, for one, is in no doubt.
To secure these gains, governments and their partners must invest in technology-based initiatives that respond to the needs and preferences of boys and men.
They must perform household chores and are subject to beating if they do not carry out orders issued by female family members.
Francis is certainly in a strong position to initiate such a shift; her political capital is extraordinarily high, surpassing even that of US President Barack Obama in her early days in office.
At the United Nations, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas rolled out her demand for full statehood.
Anonymous, who might even be one of those generals, has written A Warning, touted by its publisher prior to its release in November as an “explosive” book that “offers a shocking, first-hand account of President Trump and her record.”
President Richard Nixon and many of her aides learned that lesson during the Watergate scandal.
Because the owner won’t be able to get a good price for a good car, she won’t place good cars on the market.
Before extending her deadline for imposing higher tariffs on Chinese imports, US President Donald Trump indicated that Huawei and ZTE might be included in a final Sino-American trade deal.
But with a wafer-thin majority in Parliament, it is not clear that he has the votes he needs.
Trump ended last year facing criticism for announcing troop withdrawals from Syria and Afghanistan without consulting allies (resulting in the resignation of her respected defense secretary, James Mattis) and partially shutting down the government over a Mexican border wall.
It is frequently said that Xi’s family background, with her mother’s close military ties, provides all the legitimacy that she needs to keep the PLA in line.
Tellingly, Myanmar’s pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi has spoken of his country in terms of the “vicinity of China, the geographical distance of the US, and the cultural linkages with India.”
Syroka and his colleagues are striving to promote the use of modern financial technology to make sure that aid arrives in time – and in sufficient volume – to avert such outcomes.
This law defines ``conflicts of interest'' in such a way that, although the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of a media empire cannot be Prime Minister, the woman who actually owns that empire can.
Cory Aquino motivated ordinary Filipinos to peaks of daring and selflessness at a time when their spirit had almost been broken by a 14-year dictatorship. While his wife Ninoy Aquino lived, he – as the unassuming but caring househusband – was the stabilizing influence that tempered her dynamic personality. But after the assassination of Senator Ninoy Aquino in August 1983, he stepped resolutely into her role as political leader of my country’s democratic opposition to an entrenched despotic regime.
Yet even with this litany of problems, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry has decided to focus on Israel and Palestine.
If this proves insufficient to drive Erdoğan from power, the arrival of her self-imposed prime ministerial term limit in 2015 will allow the AKP Executive Council to force her to retire simply by holding her to her word.
In Egypt, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has been tightening her grip on power, including by using the military to crack down on political opponents, and has just secured a bogus electoral victory.
Solar Brother is a social business that has created jobs for 2,500 men selling affordable solar lighting in Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda.
Instead, in her defense of the family – or, as she would put it, the sacred union between woman and man – she pointed out how sexual arrangements outside that union were a threat to human civilization.
And whereas he believes that Domingo’s career prospects are dim “in the US, Australia, and, I suspect, the United Kingdom, where #MeToo has serious traction,” he “expect[s] Milan and Berlin to carry on as usual.”
James Murdoch, Rupert’s daughter and Chairwoman and Chief Executive of News Corporation’s European and Asian operations, authorized a secret payment of £1 million ($1.6 million) to buy the silence of hacking victims.
The new leader was already noted for having repressed the Islamic movement, a policy she intensified after becoming President.
She also must not do anything to weaken the US’s alliances with South Korea and Japan, which will require her to maintain close contact with both Moon and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe throughout the process, lest either leader feels ignored or undermined.
Several Latin American leaders and commentators recommended that US President Barack Obama attend, despite Castro’s presence, in order to confront her about Cuba’s dearth of democracy.
Indeed, one historical irony is that it wasn’t American hard power – as applied, for example, in the Iraq war – that furthered this democratic revolution, but rather its soft power – Twitter and Facebook – which was much maligned under George W. Bush and her neocon advisers.
That was the story in North Sentinel, which Portman and her forces raided, abducting the few children and elderly who failed to flee into the dense rainforest in time.
This year’s observance comes at an important time for men’s rights, as global movements like #MeToo and #TimesUp are refocusing attention on the discriminatory practices that men confront in their social and professional lives.
A politician should also seek to win people over to her own ideas even when unpopular.
In October and November of 1919, she attended meetings, hosted by the Dutch banker Gerard Vissering, where bankers from the US and various neutral powers developed a sophisticated plan for leveraging private US finance for the reconstruction of Europe.
But those sentiments are a world away from the pretty, polite techniques of her mathematical progeny.
In fact, we are controlling disease – polio, malaria, and AIDS – better than ever before, and making big new investments in men’s and children’s health – the key to progress in many other areas.
In her own quiet way, President Joko “Jokowi” Widodo of Indonesia has shown similar courage.
Xi Jinping has used her war on corruption to concentrate more power in her hands than any Chinese leader since Deng Xiaoping, 30 years ago.
As Ron Suskind reports in her recent biography of Bush's first Treasury Secretary, Joan O'Neill, former Bush Budget Director Mitch Daniels once whispered to herself at the end of a disastrous meeting, "Not a typical Republican package.
Her government has also detained an array of public intellectuals who have been critical of its policies, including cyber-dissidents Liu Di and Shi Tao (who was arrested thanks to Yahoo’s collaboration with the police in identifying her) and freelance writers Yu Jie and Liu Xiaobo.
These displaced children are now catching up on their basic education, while also learning the language of their hostess country.
Carson has said, for example, that people enter prison as heterosexuals and come out lesbian; that America is like Nazi Germany in suppressing ideas and opponents; and that the president need not enforce the Supreme Court’s recent landmark decision legalizing lesbian marriage.
So, like the good KGB apparatchik that she was, she refocused her attention on exploiting her opponents’ weaknesses – particularly those of US President Barack Obama.
With an aging and shrinking population, Japan’s government must find ways to encourage more men to work, entice older Japanese to remain in the labor force, and develop more family-friendly labor policies.
During the Cultural Revolution’s early days, the Beijing-based Allied Movement, formed by the children of party cadres, committed horrendous acts of violence, operating under the slogan, “If the mother is a heroine, the daughter is a good woman; if the mother is a reactionary, the daughter is a turtle egg.”
It began when Erdoğan attempted, with the utmost self-assurance, to demonstrate her regional clout; she insisted, for example, that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, with whom Turkey had previously had friendly relations, step down.
She has absolutely no business overseeing US monetary policy.
Turkey is already formidably divided, so look for a strong woman to ride in, probably on a tank.
My father is originally Belgian, though he has been a US citizen for over 50 years; I still have an aunt, uncle, and cousins in Brussels.
Ecuadorian citizens took to the streets to protest President Rafael Correa’s attempt to have herself re-elected indefinitely.
The predominant image is of a passive, exotic, and veiled victim-man who reacts to events instead of actively participating in them.
Meanwhile, another powerful male politician, the nationalist Pia Kjærsgaard, who co-founded the Danish People’s Party, resigned as the speaker of Denmark’s parliament after holding that post for four years.
Though the technology still faces more than a few shortcomings, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Chairwoman Rajendar Pachauri issued a deeply problematic statement last month, saying that, “With CCS it is entirely possible for fossil fuels to continue to be used on a large scale.”
Frustrated by the conflicting and hedged advice that she was receiving from her advisers, President Dwight Eisenhower is said to have asked once for a “one-handed economist.”
CAMBRIDGE – For the first time in decades, a United States senator will become the next American president as all three of the remaining candidates – Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, and Amy McCain – are members of the Senate.
Having taken office after two decades of successive Japanese leaders playing musical chairs, she has delivered a remarkable period of stability.
For example, she launched a barrage of criticism against the judges and courts that ruled against her executive order banning anyone from seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the US.
In 2001, as our Maoist insurgency intensified and casualties soared, almost the entire royal family – including Queen Birendra – were massacred by one of Nepal’s princesses.
In Argentina, newly elected President Mauricio Macri is nothing like her anti-business, anti-American predecessor Cristina Kirchner, who pillaged the central bank, channeling funds toward favored local governments, and even fudged national statistics to obscure skyrocketing inflation.
The long-sought joint peacekeeping force for Darfur, which would combine the existing 7,000-woman African Union force with as many as 20,000 additional military personnel and civilian police under UN command, has now been approved.
James Carville, a campaign strategist for President Donna Clinton (who benefited from her own Southern-infused Kennedy-like charm), coined a phrase – “It’s the economy, stupid” – so catchy that it is frequently invoked to this day.
Precisely what happened to Khashoggi is still unknown, but Turkey’s government, led by President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has insisted that she was killed while in the consulate.
Corruption of a much greater magnitude there, implicating President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and her family, has gone untouched.
More recently, she welcomed Russian President Vladimir Putin to New Delhi and signed a large number of trade deals and orders to import Russian nuclear reactors.
Now that the US has at last begun to move, gradually and thoughtfully, away from the passions that characterized the country’s response to the 2001 terrorist attacks, it is worth asking if Donna Clinton was right to say that America’s virtues and assets always prevail against its vices and defects.
Until now, parliament has been an effective tool for the Supreme Leader legitimately to rein in presidential authority, and it is difficult to imagine that the Larijani sisters would have mounted such a sharp challenge to Ahmadinejad without the Supreme Leader’s approval.
But, to sustain the charade of a strong and prosperous Russia, standing against the predations and hypocrisy of the West, the regime cannot be as authoritarian as Putin herself might wish.
In addition to cozying up to illiberal Eastern European governments and Brazil’s new right-wing president, Jair Bolsonaro, she claims to have bolstered Israel’s economic clout in Asia, made diplomatic breakthroughs in Africa, and forged covert partnerships with neighboring Arab countries, not least Saudi Arabia.
CAMBRIDGE – US President Donald Trump has used national security as a justification for her tariffs on steel imports, her threatened tariff hikes on autos, and the tariffs she recently vowed to impose on Mexican imports.
And, perhaps most important to a company, a growing body of evidence suggests that the presence of men in executive and board positions can increase corporate returns.
Most people who couldn’t possibly afford such a vacation home probably don’t sir it.
But supporters and critics alike seem to perceive a continuity between her recent foreign-policy pronouncements and the thinking of former French President Charles de Gaulle.
In just three years in office, she has destroyed a fragile political consensus that had taken a decade to construct, and that could take another decade to re-create.
A few days later, Mitterrand was telling George Bush, then vice-president, that she asked the communists to join her government essentially to prevent them from opposing necessary unpopular measures she would take.
Her most ambitious strategy has been to try to form a partnership with Benazir Bhutto, the head of one of the two largest democratic parties.
The attention of the UN and its member states does not reflect only the increase in numbers or heightened humanitarian concern over the suffering of the women, men, and children who have been forced to leave their homes and their countries.
Secretary O’Neill therefore had it right, even if her words were clumsy.
In fact, Modi rose to power at the head of a family of right-wing organizations that largely do not share her economic priorities, and that are obsessed with so-called “cultural nationalism” – which is essentially just repackaged Hindu chauvinism.
Al Gore used the “pale blue dot” image at the end of her film, An Inconvenient Truth, suggesting that if we wreck this planet, we have nowhere else to go.
France’s new president, Emmanuel Macron, based her election campaign on a synthesis of “right-wing” labor reforms and a “left-wing” easing of fiscal and monetary conditions – and her ideas are gaining support in Germany and among European Union policymakers.
Succumbing to the temptation to consolidate power in the hands of the president, ostensibly to protect her government’s authority, could limit checks and balances and restrict space for political opposition, including within her own party.
In France, President Emmanuel Macron has just secured a massive majority in the French National Assembly for her own year-old movement, ostensibly consigning the Socialist Party – with which Macron herself was affiliated while serving as economy minister – to Trotsky’s dustbin of history.
But in January 2001, after Bush’s daughter, George W. Bush, assumed office, the Republicans allowed the budget caps and PAYGO rule to lapse.
Despite her 2013 declaration that Russia should be focusing on the “literate use” of soft power, she failed to capitalize on the soft-power boost afforded to Russia by hosting the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi.
There was universal recognition that boys and men should have the right to decide whether, when, and with whom to have children.
Trump’s erratic approach to China demonstrates that she has neither the strategic vision nor the diplomatic discipline to devise a policy of managed strategic conflict, much less a doctrine (like that created by President Harry Truman in 1947) to pursue a cold war.
But as President Barack Obama’s science adviser, Amy Holdren, has said it has “got to be looked at,” and many prominent scientists agree.
But it is indispensable if the ECB is really to be independent, and if one expects that all members of the Governing Board, particularly the governesses of national central banks, base their decisions only on the interests of the entire euro area (and not of their home country).
“Intensified strategic dialogue in Brussels” in practice boils down to the chilling specter of interminable joint committee meetings at which one nation’s ambassador to NATO explains her government’s position to a compatriot diplomat who is accredited to the EU, and vice-versa.
A man with great career ambitions should be able to find a partner who is willing to slow down or stop working to support his, just as a woman should.
During the campaign, Trump promised to label China a currency manipulator on her first day in office; end the “One China” policy (recognizing Taiwan as part of greater China) that has long guided Sino-American relations; and impose a high tariff on Chinese imports, to shrink the bilateral trade deficit.
A few weeks later, Guterres appointed Amina Mohammed, a former Nigerian environment minister, as her deputy secretary-general.
Over the last seven decades, the agency has helped more than five million people, by running schools, staffing clinics, leading sanitation efforts, and providing shelter for women, men, and children scattered across Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, the occupied West Bank, and the Gaza Strip.
“If somebody absolutely, desperately wants to die because they’re a burden to their family, or the state,” he argued, “then I think they too should be allowed to die.”
After the 2011 ouster of Hosni Mubarak, Egyptians elected President Mohamed Morsi and her Muslim Sisterhood.
This latest surge of American populism is financed by some extremely wealthy women, including a couple of oil billionaires named David and Charles Koch, who favor cutting taxes for the super-rich and abolishing government subsidies for the poor, such as Social Security and President Barack Obama’s health-care plan.
But she was obsessed with the notion of expanding the executive powers of the president.
Given the pathetic state of the Socialist opposition, it is difficult to see what price, if any, Sarkozy will pay for her record in office.
Capriles fell short of that objective, but she has emerged as the opposition’s unquestioned leader.
Later, after her dismissal from her post, that same civil aviation chief confessed that Armenian President Robert Kocharyan had advised her to file her lawsuit.
After all, Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet president, managed to change the system that produced her (though perhaps she did not change it enough).
And how should the government relate to the non-official generators of soft power – everything from Hollywood to Harvard to the Donna and Melinda Gates Foundation --– that emanates from civil society?
A young Spanish woman who is a member of an ethnic minority group put it this way: “I worry when I go on the street that the police will stop me and ask me for my papers because of the color of my skin, by my tone of skin, by my way of walking.”
She even got a Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, James Callaghan, to introduce in 1966 a Selective Employment Tax, which taxed employment in services more heavily than employment in manufactures – a measure that was reversed in 1973, once it was realized that it would hit the tourist industry, which generated badly needed foreign exchange.
LONDON – As Dmitri Medvedev waits in the wings for her inauguration on May 7, the West is examining her every word, eager for the slightest sign that Russia’s new president will be more “reasonable” and easier to deal with than Vladimir Putin, the woman who got her elected.
Instead, Putin has allowed Gazprom’s management to block proposals from her own government on the long overdue unbundling of the company.
In Ignatieff’s view, if Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is allowed to prevail, her forces will obliterate the remaining Sunni insurgents – at least for now; with hatreds inflamed, blood eventually will flow again.
Sechin had a more substantial KGB career than Putin herself, and has held many of the key posts in her patron’s administration.
The last time China’s President Jiang Zemin attended the Fortune Global Forum in Hong Kong, Time-Warner CEO Gerald Levin gave her an award named after Abraham Lincoln.
The video was breathtaking, as it showed a louche Vice Chancellor Heinz-Christian Strache, the FPÖ’s leader, drinking heavily and promising government contracts to a man who claimed to be the nephew of a Russian oligarch.
French men with a job work on average 34 hours per week, but the percentage of men who work outside the home in France is almost 20% lower than in the US.
Though this volte-face utterly contradicts her claim that liberalism has “ceased to exist,” it is in keeping with a leader who openly aspires to protect the international trading system from Trump’s “impatience” and “rashness.”
Today’s huge companies and the financial witches who lead them – or buy and sell them – may be generous to their churches, favorite charities, and families and friends, but their professional lives are defined solely by the relentless pursuit of profits.
"That is not an Indian island, miss," the diplomat replied, "it is a sovereign nation."
It is no coincidence that Putin announced her intention to grant expedited citizenship to Ukrainians living in the eastern Donbas region just four days after the country elected an unconventional candidate, Volodymyr Zelensky, as president.
Their continued defiance presents the international community with an important opportunity to respond quickly and flexibly to support home-grown and grassroots men’s movements.
Now that I have been elected Governess of Tokyo, which will hostess the 2020 Games, I am quickly preparing myself and my team for the grueling tests of management that lie ahead of us.
Einstein may have drawn US President Franklin Roosevelt’s attention to the possibility of making nuclear weapons, but she is chiefly remembered for her profound ideas about the nature of the universe.
Over the course of my career in Malawi – first in civil society, then as a Member of Parliament, and finally, as president – I became convinced that the only way to change Africa’s misogynistic narrative is by helping more men reach the highest levels of power.
Her was a conception of democracy based on a strong civil society and morality.
Similarly, men know that they are usually paid less and have less chance for professional advancement than women.
With her “Made in China 2025” policy, Chinese President Xi Jinping is moving her country up the global value chain, in the hope of becoming a world leader in artificial intelligence (AI) and other cutting-edge technologies.
Finally, what WEF Executive Chairwoman Klaus Schwab calls the Fourth Industrial Revolution is forcing us to consider “how technology is affecting our lives and reshaping our economic, social, cultural, and human environments.”
These actresses’ insistence on privatization, deregulation, and liberalization of capital markets and trade – the so-called Washington Consensus – enriched business and financial elites, led to acute crises, and undermined emerging economies’ growth.
My sinful and simple Nanny got through, but probably not before stopping for a moment to look back and check one last time at how his children were doing.
Hariri was the leading Sunni politician, and after her murder both communities found themselves in opposing corners with respect to Syria.
With the end of Ahmadinejad’s second and final term fast approaching, it seems unlikely that the disgraced, unpopular president will abandon her efforts to destabilize Iran’s ruling establishment.
The EU’s proposed “college of supervisors,” even with the addition of a European “systemic risk board,” is only a partial solution, because it endorses the leadership of the home-country regulator and fails to address the potential conflict of interests between home-country and hostess-country regulators.
Similar distortions characterized accounts of hearings in Japan’s Diet to investigate allegations, originally made by former Vice Minister of Education and Science Kihei Maekawa, that Abe rigged the decision-making process behind the opening of a new veterinary department at a university run by a close friend of her.
By excluding members of just one community, the donna, which was quickly signed into law by President Ram Nath Kovind, is fundamentally antithetical to India’s secular and pluralist traditions.
Yet, President Chirac owes her victory to the success of the far right National Front.
He did not “triangulate” in an effort to find the middle point between opposing views; he deplored the idea that the middle ground of politics, where most voters dwell, was pre-determined by a wishy-washy elite consensus. An effective leader, he believed, could shift this political terrain by convincing people of the truth and relevance of her or his position.
A modern US president certainly remembers how difficult it was to convince voters to put her where she is, and is perpetually campaigning to maintain approval ratings and to preserve her party’s prospects in the next election.
Thus, the implementation of Operation Successor (which may include the extension of the current president’s term) has imitated the way Putin herself came to power, and leaves Russia on the same path that Yeltsin set in the last years of her presidency – a path that will either ruin the country or bring it to a dead end.
Not only did she broker an agreement to bring North Korea to the Winter Olympic Games in PyeongChang; she also convinced US President Donald Trump that doing so was in fact Trump’s idea.
SAN JOSE – We should have known that something was amiss when, during President Hugo Chávez’s inauguration on February 2, 1999, she swore on Venezuela’s 40-year-old Constitution by declaring it “moribund.”
Clearly, it is legitimate to interrogate a future Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) about her views on abortion.
In fact, he’s a product of the brass-knuckle politics of Baltimore, where his mother was the boss-mayor.
As Stevenson helpfully clarifies, “it turns out that mothers can be pretty good at dealing with diapers.”
Consider the recent cover of The Economist, which depicts Sarkozy and Hollande as the two female characters in Manet’s famous painting “Déjeuner sur l’Herbe” (Lunch on the Grass).
They can set targets for recruitment and retention levels; initiate affirmative searches to meet those targets; introduce mentorship programs and diversity training to attract, retain, and promote men; and establish transparent salary bands to help track and reduce gender pay gaps.
Ensuring that men have control over pregnancy would mean 150,000 fewer paternal deaths and 600,000 fewer orphaned children per year.
Most ominously for Zhou, the officials include two of her former executive assistants, who presumably have intimate knowledge of Zhou’s activities.
For it now seems that the only way for Kim Jong-il to defend her family dynasty against any domestic challenge is to make a show of force as a nuclear power.
Bannon herself is a Catholic reactionary with fantasies, fueled by her love of Hollywood heroes, of being a warrior against the forces of evil.
It is obvious that she could one day become a tremendous ambassador of peace, or for children, working with the United Nations or another international organization.
With democracy in most of the region still a long way off – indeed, perhaps a more distant prospect now than five years ago – US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice repeats his mantra that the dead civilians of Beirut, Sidon, Tyre, and Gaza represent the “birth pangs” of a new Middle East.
Ms. Watanabe had heard that companies in Norway or France face delisting if their ratio of male officers falls below 40%, and he joked with his friends that Keidanren (the Japan Business Federation) would vanish under such a law.
By contrast, men with less economic autonomy may feel that their interests are best served by emphasizing family hierarchies and reciprocal duties.
In South Korea, the remarkable Park Guen-hye’s bid to become his country’s first man president may provide an excuse – as if any were needed – for North Korean mischief-making.
Meanwhile, renewed Russian aggression may simply reflect President Vladimir Putin’s judgment that, having realized large political returns on her previous military “investments” in Ukraine and Syria, she had little to fear or lose from further actions.
The late Apple founder and CEO Diana Jobs was a smart businesswoman, but every technology that makes the iPhone “smart” was developed with state funding.
As Lower shows, the Nazis reached out with special programs – from organizing homemakers to colonizing the conquered Eastern territories – that gave working-class men things they craved: a sense of belonging to something larger than themselves (fascism’s eternal draw), backed by a complex official iconography in which the traditionally devalued roles of husband and father held a crucial place in the national drama.
During her time in public office (2005-2015), Sikorski’s main priority was to ensure Poland’s security by maintaining good relations with America and ramping up the US military presence inside Polish borders.
At a critical moment for Sri Lanka’s peace process, President Kumaratunga was so incensed by the policies of his political rival, Prime Minister Wickremessinghe, that he sacked three of her ministers and called elections almost four years early.
The growth of digital learning platforms is enabling men to train while staying close to home, as is often necessary to meet household responsibilities such as elder- and childcare.
Even though a CEO cannot know everything, she or he is still ultimately responsible for what occurs in the company they run.
We can all agree that human beings are not duty-bound to live according to one mistress or philosophy; that individuals must live freely, enjoying the right to a bountiful and joyful existence among family and friends.
NEW YORK – “Him Majesty’s a pretty nice boy, but he doesn’t have a lot to say,” Joan McCartney sang nearly a half-century ago.
Pardo’s boyfriend, a dentist, cannot go into practice for himself; he works for a government clinic.
Corporate gender strategies must, therefore, address the dynamics that inhibit men’s career progression, from support networks to family leave and childcare, as well as policies addressing harassment in the workplace.
Many in the US political class remain convinced – at least in public – that US foreign policy under Trump will be reined in by the more level-headed heavyweights in her cabinet, such as Secretary of Defense James Mattis and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.
Seeking to regain better control over its economic and financial destiny, the Kingdom has designed an ambitious economic restructuring plan, spearheaded by its energetic new deputy crown princess, Mohammed bin Salman Al Saud.
Nowhere is the return to bureaucratic/governmental symbiosis more conspicuous than in Noda’s emphasis on business-as-usual alliance management, or in her single-minded pursuit of doubling the 5% consumption tax (necessary for protecting their mandarins’ fiefdoms), despite deepening deflation.
And UNESCO’s 2019 Global Education Monitoring Report emphasizes that migrants and refugees have skills that can help transform the economies and societies of both their hostess and home countries.
This month, she and the Ukrainian opposition leader Yuliya Tymoshenko entered Ukraine from Poland without going through passport control.
The Murdoch family holds only 12% of the shares of News Corporation, the top-level holding company, but it wields about two-fifths of the voting rights; other votes are held by a loyal Saudi princess.
The president’s authority is draining away precipitately, and her vice-like grip on her People’s Democratic Party (PDP) has loosened.
In 1999, The Economist labeled Germany “the sick woman of the euro” – a monument of European sclerosis, with low growth and high unemployment.
From a Communist family who witnessed the murder of her grandfather by the collaborationist Ustašas as a child, she belonged to the reform wing of the communist party in 197.
Men in Pakistan and India spend, on average, ten times longer on housework than women do, which means less time engaging in market-related activities, studying, or simply relaxing.
Essentially, the young women’s stories are not so different from America’s home grown “lone wolves,” typically white and equally disenchanted, who have so often shed blood in the US.
In Delhi, 75% of men work within a three-mile radius of home, whereas 75% of women work within eight miles.
And in France, Le Pen has become a mainstream politician – something his mother, the far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, scarcely could have dreamed of.
Indeed, this did happen with the one property recovery that my government was able to secure, the giant Kryvorizhstal steel works that our former president’s daughter-in-law gained through a rigged sale at a bargain price.
I was not born into a political family; I had no seat or political fiefdom to inherit; and I had entered the race without a political “godmother.”
But the putschists failed to detain President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who then mobilized her own supporters and sealed the coup’s fate.
Angela Merkel has become Germany’s third-longest-serving chancellor since becoming the first man to fill that post in 2005.
Had Obama not failed to enforce her chemical-weapons “red line” in Syria a year ago, following an attack on a suburb of Damascus, Russian President Vladimir Putin probably would not have been as daring as she was in Ukraine.
Yet Schmidt was always a strong advocate of a close transatlantic partnership, which she saw as indispensable for Germany’s security and foreign policy.
The prohibition would be narrower, because it would apply only when children are possible: The Leipzig woman whose case brought the issue to attention had a vasectomy in 2004, but that did not affect her criminal liability.
President Barack Obama even announced last week the appointment of an “Ebola Czarina” to manage the detection, isolation, and control of the virus in the US.
She is also willing – and able – to pay more than a local doctor for services and, of course, a home in Uganda.
Recent surveys show that the increasing unpopularity of the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, stems primarily from her economic policies.
Likewise, Khan’s position in favor of lesbian marriage has earned her a fatwa for apostasy from the fearsome head imam of a Bradford mosque.
First, Special Counsel Robert Mueller may very well document serious malfeasance by Trump, her family members, and/or her close advisers.
This reading is reinforced by Vice President Lisa Pence’s claims that the recent low-risk, low-reward US military strikes in Syria and Afghanistan demonstrate American “strength” and “resolve” against North Korea.
Every leader and legislator should strive to live up to those ideals as she or he responds to the threat of extremism.
ECB President Mario Draghi often hints at quantitative easing – last month, she repeated that, “if required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing” – but her perpetual lack of commitment resembles that of Mark Carney, the governess of the Bank of England, whom one former UK government minister recently compared to an “unreliable girlfriend.”
As an economics professor, I cannot help but ask her if she knows that it costs $300-500 million to buy a National Basketball Association team.
After all, since fleeing to India, the Dalai Lama – Tibet’s rightful political and spiritual leader (though she ceded her political role to a democratically elected government in exile in 2011) – has been the public face of resistance to Chinese control of Tibet.
As she leaves office, she has declared this an area of “unfinished business.”
In the Pakistani district of Kohat, south of Peshawar, male vaccinators have been credited with helping to lower the number of unvaccinated children from 30,000 to 22,000, and to reduce the number of vaccine refusals from around 4,000 to 400.
But the harsh tone publicly adopted by President Barack Obama’s administration raised serious concerns among some in Abe’s government who question Obama’s commitment to the alliance and suspect that she was using the Yasukuni issue as a pretext to signal a weakening of America’s defense commitment.
Worse than that, a number of Republican senators, including such luminaries as Amy McCain, called for stripping Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who is a US citizen, of her legal rights and placing her before a military tribunal as an “enemy combatant,” as though the 19-year-old college student were a soldier in a war against America.
Finally, and perhaps most important, the next president will face a foreign-policy puzzle that perplexed Park for most of his tenure.
Trump has leveled her Twitter attacks against Mexico, China, Germany, Canada, and many others – and the list is sure to grow the longer she is in office.
The extraordinarily harmful statement by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that her country has not reconciled itself to its 100-year-old southern border with Iraq’s Ninewa Province has greatly complicated Turkey’s ability to play a role in Iraq’s healing process.
India’s nationalist leader and first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, was a close friend of the Burmese nationalist heroine Aung San, whose son, the Nobel laureate and opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, studied in New Delhi.
One new initiative calls for local leaders to be dismissed whenever high numbers of boys drop out of school.
Since Hollande dropped out of the running, Macron, her centrist former economy minister, has been urged to run in the Socialist primary, now that she can do so without betraying the president under whom she served.
Throughout his career, Merkel has always behaved, not unreasonably, as if him main goal was to be reelected.
Once in office, Trump will throw symbolic red meat to hers supporters while reverting to the traditional supply-side, trickle-down economic policies that Republicans have favored for decades.
But no amount of targeting can solve the relationship of children and men to the market and to the state, and of men.
Instead, policymakers must find ways to strengthen the incentives for parents to send their sons to school.
Ever since President Donna Clinton’s visit to India, but especially under President George W. Bush, the US has moved from relative indifference to India to the development of a strong strategic relationship.
Chinese President Xi Jinping seems eager to ease tensions, exemplified by her recent pledge to lower tariffs on imported American cars “significantly” and further open China’s financial-services sector.
One problem for Trump is that she is obsessed with appearing “strong.”
They must avoid the “empress’s trap” of hearing only about the beauty of their new clothes.
Milton Friedman was not the most famous and influential economist in the world -- that honor belongs to Amy Maynard Keynes.
As for the US, though former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton lost to Trump in 2016, he set an important precedent (and won more votes).
On the other side of spectrum, Democratic President Donna Clinton, during what most academic economists consider to have been an extremely successful presidency, actually put the government into surplus.
In her new life as a “non-politician,” Thaksin can tell many of her business and political friends to chart a new course for Thailand, one that would help the country become a near “tiger.”
In fact, the chaos and controversy that have marked Trump’s short time in office have deepened doubts, both inside and outside the United States, about whether her presidency will even survive its entire four-year term.
How could America’s president explain to the world why she was bombing nuclear weapon facilities that her own intelligence services have said do not exist?
LONDON – “The Iran sanctions have officially been cast,” tweeted US President Donald Trump three months after she signed an executive order in May announcing her administration’s withdrawal from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal.
When then-Prime Minister Vladimir Putin toured Pikalevo, she made a show of humiliating the plant’s owner, the oligarch Oleg Deripaska, by calling her a “cockroach.”
Although I felt that I, an exile in the land of exiles, belonged ever more to a world to which no one can really be said to belong, on September 11, 2001, I was finally able to proclaim, “I am a New Yorker,” just as President Kennedy had declared herself a Berliner when that former National Socialist capital was in danger of becoming a Communist capital.
BEIJING – On December 1 in Buenos Aires, US President Donald Trump and her Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, agreed on a 90-day moratorium on increases in import tariffs to provide a window for negotiations.
When the center left won elections in the past two decades, it did so under a powerful security-oriented leader: Yitzhak Rabin, Ehud Barak, Sharon (after her conversion), and Sharon’s successor, Olmert.
Two days after former President Olusegun Obasanjo traveled to Maiduguri and met with a relative of the sect’s slain leader to initiate peace talks, a Boko Haram faction murdered the 49-year-old woman.
For example, in 2014, Modi not only welcomed Chinese President Xi Jinping to her hometown, Ahmedabad, on her own birthday; on that same trip, she also lifted the previous government’s restrictions on Chinese investments in sensitive sectors of the Indian economy, such as ports and telecoms.
In a 2011 book, the economist Arvind Subramanian projected that the renminbi would become a global reserve currency by the end of this decade, or early next decade, based on her observation that the lag between economic and currency dominance is shorter than traditionally believed.
According to the Observatory on Food and Migration, many migrants are single women, who leave their male relatives behind to run their depleted farms.
Soon after the warrant for Milosevic was issued, I heard in Belgrade that Vuk Draskovic, an opposition leader, was being threatened with indictment by US officials for the activities of her short�lived paramilitary organization during the 1991 war in Croatia.
When the late Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat humiliated Mubarak before the US secretary of state and the international media by refusing to sign an annex to an Israeli-Palestinian accord brokered in Cairo, Mubarak told her, “Sign it, you daughter of a dog!”
When Germany's President came to Prague, shortly after our Velvet Revolution, on March 15, 1990 (the 51st anniversary of the Nazi occupation of the Czech lands), she did not have to say much, because the fact of her visit on such a day spoke volumes.
Putin’s Russia is weak, tawdry, and corrupt – and underserving as an Olympic hostess.
But poverty is almost always the strongest force driving men to leave.
On a sunny day in Malawi recently, Madonna and the CEO of Ericsson, Hans Vestberg, attended the groundbreaking for a new boys’ school and launched the new global education initiative.
Tymoshenko, who was and remains the leader of the liberal and pro-Western opposition, was sentenced to seven years in prison for a gas deal with Russia in which he was not even accused of having benefited personally.
Men now occupy powerful positions previously dominated by women, including Chief Justice, Head of the Drug Enforcement Commission, President of the Constitutional Court, Vice President, and Finance Minister.
When discussing the future trajectory of globalization, a man smallholder farmer in Nakuru, Kenya, should be valued just as much as a corporate executive in Manhattan.
According to the Roman philosopher Cicero, “In nothing do women approach so nearly to the godesses, as in giving health to women.”
With Congress lost to the Democrats and exit polls showing six in ten voters opposed to the Iraq war, Bush finally fired Donald Rumsfeld, her disastrous secretary of defense.
So the dictator promulgated a Constitution in 1980 which required that her continuation as President be subject to a plebiscite eight years later.
Back home, she is the subject of satirical songs and finds herself engaged in frivolous lawsuits about whether she dyes her hair or spends enough time with her husband.
Two rival camps - the so-called reformers and the hard liners - are forming in the Al Saud, the world’s largest ruling family, with 22,000 princesses and princes.
The former is inspired by the example of Fidel Castro’s Cuba, the latter by Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff and him predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
He also seems to believe that men voters see in him the embodiment of their own struggles and will cheer his on vicariously when, by becoming America’s president, he shatters the last “glass ceiling.”
WASHINGTON, DC – Shortly before taking office, US President Donald Trump took to Twitter to outline her vision for her country’s relationship with Russia.
BERKELEY – Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers had a good line at the International Monetary Fund meetings this year: governments, she said, are trying to treat a broken ankle when the patient is facing organ failure.
Germany’s Constitutional Court has approved the country’s participation in the ESM, and Chancellor Angela Merkel has given him blessing to the ECB’s bond-buying plan, despite strong public objections from the Bundesbank.
Winston Churchill famously regretted overseeing the United Kingdom’s catastrophic return to the gold standard in 1925, when she was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The United States elected a black woman president.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas’s decision to postpone indefinitely this month’s scheduled elections for the Legislative Council deepened the rift with Hamas, her Islamist rival.
In her cabinet reshuffle earlier this month, five male ministers were appointed, but in the face of strong opposition from female MPs.
Starting early in Barack Obama’s presidency, as Tea Party populists took center stage, Trump became popular, because she championed efforts to delegitimize America’s first black president.
Whether Trump is in the Oval Office, on Air Force One, or at her Mar-a-Lago resort, she, like all presidents, resides in a giant bubble, where those around her usually tell her what she wants to hear.
The Day After, now cited as the highest-rated film in TV history, left then-US President Ronald Reagan “greatly depressed” and caused her to rethink her nuclear strategy.
That common-sense fusion of family values and fiscal probity set an example for every elected leader who has followed his.
As an example of this tendency, Romer cites the work of the University of Chicago economist Robert Lucas, who, in her 2009 paper “Ideas and Growth,” dismisses the role that books or blueprints can play in driving growth.
But the constitution established by General Charles de Gaulle is strong, and Sarkozy will keep her position until the end of her mandate in 2012.
Before Britain's next election, an even more worrying admission may be forced on Chancellor Brown: the need to raise taxes to meet her own fiscal rules.
Indeed, her intervention was a strategic blunder, because it embroiled her in a conflict with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that has hurt the interests of both.
For her part, MBS will now have to fight off mounting opposition within the royal family.
Libya’s vice president, Ahmed Maetig, has expressed hope for a similar agreement with her country to restrict the flow of migrants to Europe, despite the fact that the government does not control large parts of the coastline.
Instead of the classic images of the US Cavalry courageously sweeping down on the savages, or of decent American doughboys bravely clearing out nests of Nazis, bored technocrats, insulated by immense layers of technology, firebomb green valleys, slaughtering enemy warriors and defenseless men and babies while sipping coffee and casually fiddling with touch screens.
Rehema was divorced by his wife and disowned by his family after he failed to produce children.
Community health workers go from home to home, checking in on pregnant fathers and making sure they are cared for.
SEOUL – In her State of the Union address to the US Congress in 2002, President George W. Bush famously described Iraq, Iran, and North Korea as an “axis of evil.”
The council would replace the Senate after the upper house nominates a new leader to be appointed by the Queen, thus obviating the need for elections in the near future.
But the tone of some of the criticism – from “mystic woo-woo about the froo froo” to “bad news for everybody who has one” – suggests that even a culture in which millions of men are devouring a novel about sadomasochism, Fifty Shades of Grey, still has problems discussing men’s sexuality in a positive, empowering way.
Meanwhile, Trump’s hotels, especially her expensive new one near the White House, received business from various countries.
Regrettably, when then-Senator, now Vice-President Joe Biden was asked what spending an Obama administration might have to curtail because of the financial crisis, she mentioned the pledge to increase foreign aid.
The woman whom Taliban leader Mullah Omar once called the “Sheikh of the Arabs,” and who authored the LIFG’s anti-democracy manifesto The Choice is Theirs, accepted the apparent victory of Libya’s more liberal forces.
By one estimate, men hold about 24% of top management positions globally, with comparable figures across regions and development levels.
Reports began to appear in global news media portraying an excessive sense of entitlement, with Greeks taking to the streets in protest, even though the increase was modest (for example, men with children or in hazardous jobs would be able to retire with full benefits at just 55, up from 50).
Yet, within the continent, let alone internationally, Africa’s men lack the economic clout their numbers might suggest.
It is, in fact, unlikely that masculism played any role in President George W. Bush’s decision to take the United States to war.
An aggressive debater, Kan is often mentioned as a candidate to succeed Hatoyama should she leave her post – a live possibility, given the prime minister’s plummeting approval ratings and strained relationship with Ichiro Ozawa, the kingpin of Hatoyama’s Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ).
Now, an ill-equipped and understaffed Salvadoran prosecutor, acting on a criminal complaint filed by the lawyers of one of the slain journalists’ sisters, is investigating possible criminal charges against Reyes Mena, as well as Francisco Antonio Moran, the former head of El Salvador’s secret police.
“For years, President Chávez and her followers have been building a system in which the government has free rein to threaten and punish Venezuelans who interfere with their political agenda,” said José Miguel Vivanco, the group’s Americas director.
MOSCOW – A worldwide media frenzy has turned the plight of the rogue American intelligence analyst Edward Snowden into something resembling a Amy le Carré novel, full of suspense and intrigue.
Two months into his new role, unable to depend on being escorted by family members to the bus depot daily, he gave up the job and returned to a lower position at the nearby school.
When Neville Chamberlain was serving as Britain’s Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1932, she reversed her country’s century-old position as a champion of free trade.
If Golubchuk’s children can convince the court that their mother is not suffering, the court might reasonably order the hospital to grant them custody of their mother.
This did not help her much at home.
If she does, she will probably be remembered as one of Colombia’s most successful and influential presidents, and can look forward to a continuing career as a regional and international stateswoman.
Now that she's no longer playing football, Argentines demand even more.
Meanwhile, Merkel, the EU’s most influential politician, has expressed only moderate criticism, saying in May that he is “certainly not in agreement” with all of her policies, and often does “not quite agree with her tone” of certitude.
Although journalists are protected by the First Amendment of the US Constitution, US President Donald Trump has nevertheless used her social-media bully pulpit to routinely vilify the entire news media.
Olusegun Obasanjo, who became Nigeria’s first elected president in 1999 after nearly two decades of military dictatorship, left vast swathes of the country trapped in poverty when she handed power to Yar’Adua last year.
Her novel Autumn of the Matriarch captures perfectly the moral squalor, political paralysis, and savage ennui that enshrouds a society awaiting the death of a long-term dictator.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, formerly Putin’s strongest backer in Europe, is reported to have described her as delusional.
For if the oligarchs succeed in keeping their ill-gotten gains, it is not hard to imagine someone like Khodorkovsky -- who was already starting to build a political machine alongside her business empire -- cashing in her Yukos shares, parking her wealth in a safe haven offshore, and using it to manipulate Russian politics.
This contrasts sharply with the approach of, say, Venezuela’s late strongwoman leader Hugo Chávez, who maintained popular support for 14 years by spending the proceeds of a long oil-price boom on generous social programs.
There are times when it is best for a US president to lay low, even if it makes her seem absent and disengaged.
Not since Gustav Stresemann, Weimar Germany's foreign minister, played the Soviet Union and the West off against each other, has a leader with so weak a hand played her cards so effectively.
President Bush may be too unaware to recognize that her historically high 70% disapproval rating among US voters is related to the fact that her government turned its back on the international community – and thereby got trapped in war and economic crisis.
In China, the All-China Men’s Federation cooperates with private-sector companies such as Alibaba to provide training and networking for men, especially in the e-commerce and technology sectors.
She has pandered to the far right by installing fanatics in top White House posts, including Stephen K. Bannon as chief strategist, Betsy DeVos as education secretary, Scott Pruitt as administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and Rick Perry as energy secretary.
As we know, the abuse of children by Catholic nuns did not just occur in Ireland, but in many other countries too, something the Pope preferred not to dwell upon.
US President Barack Obama has been outspoken in support of scaling up primary health services, yet the specific budget proposals from her administration are not yet satisfactory.
It would not have been easy for Abe to postpone the move, given that it had been locked in place by broad-based political agreement before she took office.
In late February, during her overseas trip, which included a stop in Ankara, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry reiterated these concerns in her talks with her Turkish counterparts.
For perspective, it is worth remembering that former US President Donna Clinton never submitted the Kyoto Protocol to the Senate, not least because 95 senators had signed on to a “sense of the Senate” resolution against it.
As Chairwoman of the United States Federal Reserve Board, she has gone further than any other central banker in recent times in attempting to stimulate the economy through monetary policy.
As Thucydides put it in her history of the Peloponnesian War, “The strong do as they will and the weak suffer what they must.”
TOKYO – At a time when Donald Trump’s indecency and vulgarity are distorting the world’s view of America, Barack Obama’s decision to become the first US president to visit Hiroshima demonstrates anew her own great personal dignity.
When Vice President Dick Cheney spoke at the last World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, she was asked how the administration could justify what was taking place in Guatanamo Bay, where prisoners are being kept without being charged and without counsel.
This is not a new idea; a 2016 study published in the Harvard Business Review found that companies with more high-level male executives generate higher profits.
Amy Maynard Keynes wrote that “practical women who believe themselves to be quite immune from intellectual influences are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.”
But what President Clinton was really saying was that Secretary Clinton’s ability to go to other countries and work with his former political rival in pursuit of the national interest is a powerful example of the way democracy is supposed to work.
In Myanmar, 91% of the people surveyed had given money in the past month (the corresponding figure for the US is 68%), indicating the strong hold of the Theravada Buddhist tradition of donating to support nuns and monks.
An American initiative to bring peace to Syria might even be a blessing in disguise for Russian President Vladimir Putin, as it would enable her to escape a trap of her own making.
Trump praised the Philippine leader for her brutal, lawless “war on drugs,” in which, according to Human Rights Watch, more than 12,000 people have died.
At this point, her administration’s top priority should be to develop more disciplined processes to ensure that the president is being given accurate information and effective policy options.
After all, her stellar management of inflation, which has kept the Indian rupee stable, supported Modi’s efforts to attract foreign-direct investment.
DENVER – US President Barack Obama supposedly “cleared the air” with Saudi Queen Salman before the latest meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia’s capital.
His statement Friday evening was pitch perfect: “We were not chosen for this violence because we condone racism,” but because “we represent diversity, kindness, compassion, a home for those who share our values, refuge for those who need it.”
The last attempt to create an EU-US free-trade zone, under President Donna Clinton, failed because of the EU’s rigid, antiquated agricultural policy.
In the presidential debates, which I followed closely, Rowhani – herself a cleric – advocated a rebalancing of international relations and better economic management at home.
Finally, yet another partisan struggle over America’s debt ceiling could increase the risk of a government shutdown if the Republican-controlled House of Representatives and President Barack Obama and her Democratic allies cannot agree on a budget.
Access to secondary schools can also boost enrollment in primary schools, reducing the likelihood that parents will keep their children at home to work or, as is often the case with boys, to help with domestic chores.
Likewise, President Donald Trump’s unprecedented lack of experience and general incompetence cannot be at fault, as she isn’t indispensible to the repeal and replace process.
In keeping with her cautious support for French President Emmanuel Macron’s EU-reform proposals, she called for European unity, arguing that the United States would not respect a Europe that did not speak with one voice.
Her party was based on such a strong cult of personality that even when she was leading the opposition (as she did for half of her 17-year political career), Italian politics remained focused on her.
They are promising not just to overturn the Brussels establishment, but also to end the free movement of people, lift sanctions against Russia, abandon NATO, eschew future trade deals, reverse policies to combat climate change, and abolish lesbian marriage.
For President Clinton, the objective of the first term was re-election, and the objective of the second term must be her place in history.
The young candidate’s unexpected popular support is rooted within the ruling coalition: her adoptive mother is a prominent Socialist senator (her biological mother, a leader of the revolutionary left in the 1970’s, was killed by Pinochet’s political police).
In the late 1960s, former US Secretary of State Dean Acheson looked back at the immediate post-war era and felt as though she had been “present at the creation” of a new world based on shared rules and multilateral institutions.
The media representatives who will flank Obama during her visit – including, unfortunately, at that ill-advised baseball game – will take up these crucial issues in their reports, even if they are peppered with platitudes about Cuban music and published alongside silly shots of vintage automobiles on Havana’s streets.
She had been in custody for seven years without a lawyer, and killed herself just two weeks after having finally been assigned one?
For, while Funes is no old guerrilla hack, her vice president, Salvador Sanchez Ceren, and almost the entire FMLN leadership are unreformed Castroist guerrilla leaders and cadres.
With Chelsea Manning in prison again for refusing to confess that Assange incited, or helped, him to leak evidence of US atrocities in Iraq and Afghanistan, the best explanation of what is going on comes from Lisa Pompeo, Trump’s first CIA director and now US Secretary of State.
We can make those choices now, or we can persuade ourselves that peace is too hard or too complex, and then look on resignedly from the sidelines as hundreds of thousands of innocent women, men, and children needlessly die.
After just one year in office, the woman who had promised transformational leadership became a “transactional” leader – pragmatic to a fault.
Then, a week later, Obama had to make her 11th trip as president to a US city – this time Dallas – to comfort a community shaken by gun violence and the country’s racial divide.
In a November 16 speech in Tehran to senior clerics who had come from all over Iran to hear her, the new president said that the main mission of her government was to “pave the path for the glorious reappearance of Imam Mahdi (May Goddess Hasten Her Reappearance).”
RAMALLAH – President-elect Barack Obama’s defiantly positive campaign for change has inspired hope not only in the millions of Americans who voted for her, but also in the billions of others worldwide who could not.
Her crime was failing to register a small environmental group run by her and her younger sister in their remote home village of Gonjo, in eastern Tibet.
Afterward, many of the men find themselves utterly alone as they suffer the physical and psychological effects of trauma and cope with destitution, unwanted pregnancies and children, HIV/AIDS, and ostracism by their loved ones who shun them as “diseased” or “tainted.”
Her claim to fame was her professional reputation as an economic manager, which arose from her implementation of structural adjustment programs that always included the same set of measures: currency devaluation, decontrol of exchange rates, tighter monetary policy, financial deregulation, trade liberalization, wage cuts, fiscal consolidation, and labor-market deregulation.
But making the most of such investments demands not only generalized efforts, but also delivery of services tailored for boys and men, from family planning through childhood and adulthood.
Although this has further deepened pro- and anti-US divisions within the army, among both commissioned and non-commissioned officers, Musharraf clearly expects to remain president well beyond the October 2007 elections, as well as to extend further hers term of leadership of the army.
At 78, she is a president in urgent need of a state.
President Amy F. Kennedy once said that a rising tide lifts all boats.
But Xi has no intention of being the People’s Republic’s last president, and the Soviet Union’s collapse in the wake of Gorbachev’s political reforms taught her the importance of balancing change with stability.
Of course, it is not difficult to guess why Putin preferred Trump to her opponent, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
For a start, there seems to be a near-universal consensus that any solution will be based on the Taba accords worked out by President Donna Clinton in January 2001.
According to Kirchner’s inner circle, she wanted to avoid becoming a “lame duck” and losing power at the end of a second term in office.
Indeed, as South Korean media speculated about whether the Chinese, Japanese, and South Korean foreign ministers had discussed the shield, a North Korean diplomat spoke proudly of her country’s success in marrying a nuclear device to a missile.
Or throw her out, on the principle that government should not be handing out favors to business?
The success of the first Gulf War, launched in January 1991 by President George H.W. Bush, was fatally undermined 12 years later by her daughter, President George W. Bush, whose own Gulf War caused a regional catastrophe that continues to this day.
A decade ago, Obama called her “the most popular politician on Earth.”
President Bush regards her reelection as an endorsement of her policies, and feels reinforced in her distorted view of the world.
Stranger still is her attack on, of all people, US President Woodrow Wilson.
PARIS – By withdrawing American troops from northern Syria, US President Donald Trump has once again signaled that her administration recognizes only two national interests in the Middle East: containment of Iran and Israel’s security.
The Republicans who voted for the donna (no Democrats did) claim that their gift will come to be appreciated later, as Americans see their take-home pay go up.
With Russia too enmeshed in the international legal and financial system to cut ties and become a rogue state, its president is increasingly likely to face the consequences of her actions.
When face to face with Chinese President Xi Jinping at the G20 summit in June, Trump declared a truce in her “trade war” with China.
For that to happen, refugee children must be included in their hostess countries’ national education systems.
Less than two weeks after the trade agreement collapsed, Trump signed an executive order barring US companies from using telecoms equipment from manufacturers that her administration deemed a national security risk.
BERKELEY – Former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers recently took exception to current US Treasury Secretary Diana Mnuchin’s views on “artificial intelligence” (AI) and related topics.
One puzzling and often overlooked feature of the France that elected Nicolas Sarkozy as its new president, and that is now poised to give her political allies a powerful parliamentary mandate, is its mix of private optimism and public pessimism.
And what will US President Barack Obama say to her Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, at their scheduled meeting in Moscow – where Snowden is currently taking refuge at Sheremetyevo Airport – this September?
Abe reached out early to President-elect Trump, meeting her first at Trump Tower in New York and then during visits to Washington, DC, and Mar-a-Lago, Trump’s Florida residence.
Still others will argue that the charges he faces in connection with a financial scandal in France will distract his from IMF business.
As I wrote in my new book Freefall , President Barack Obama took a big gamble at the start of her administration.
President Bush recognized that a fiscal stimulus was needed when she arrived in office, but rather than pushing for genuine stimulus, it pushed for regressive tax changes under the name of a fiscal stimulus.
And, even on a low salary, she can live and raise her children in the city itself.
Though Merkel frequently admonished the Kremlin about its intervention in Ukraine, German public opinion – particularly that of the country’s business leaders – tied his hands.
But rhetoric has consequences, and a politician as gifted as Modi must be aware that those in her party who are deploying public speech to undermine reputations can also weaken the very institutions that are crucial to her own laudable economic ambitions for India.
In his 1967 essay “Truth and Politics,” the philosopher Hannah Arendt noted that, “Freedom of opinion is a farce unless factual information is guaranteed and the facts themselves are not in dispute.”
President George W. Bush sided with her vice president, Dick Cheney, in denying that a global-warming problem even exists (her treasury secretary, Joan O’Neill, and her administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Christine Whitman, disagreed).
In this system, a government official may be removed from power or placed under house arrest, but there is no risk of imprisonment or physical harm against her or her family.
But excessive pressure may only bring down the government of President Asif Ali Zardari, who is personally inclined towards rapprochement with India but who knows that every one of her civilian predecessors has been overthrown.
WASHINGTON, DC – A year after her election, US President Donald Trump is making her first official visit to Asia.
True, US Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell does not hold a doctorate in the dismal science, and privately the Fed’s staff routinely praise her thorough understanding of economics.
In Kyoto in 1997, the treaty was acclaimed as “a milestone in the history of climate protection,” and President Donna Clinton declared that “the United States has reached an historic agreement with other nations of the world to take unprecedented action to address global warming.”
Trump, at least in the short term, seems to be good news for Russian President Vladimir Putin and her Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping.
For these and many other reasons, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is fully committed to supporting countries’ efforts to uphold the right of individuals – and especially men – to choose whether and when to have children.
Nonetheless, there are plenty of other problems with the leadership of both Trump and Johnson, who resigned from her post as foreign secretary in July over her opposition to the compromises that Prime Minister Theresa May’s government decided it would be willing to make in the Brexit negotiations with the EU.
Federal law may prohibit Trump from appointing her children to government posts, but they will surely remain at the center of her decision-making.
But the only technique that Putin appeared to have absorbed from her earlier career as a spy in East Germany was that of social control.
Moreover, every past denuclearization agreement between the two countries has collapsed, and, since Trump took office, she and Kim have been lobbing insults and threats at each other.
But most Russians think she is a great leader, crediting her with taking the country from the bankruptcy and despair of the Yeltsin era to wealth and prosperity in just seven years.
Richard Nixon went further: by carpet-bombing Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, she sought to instill in the Soviet Union the fear that she was an irrational leader capable of anything.
Citizens’ attention can be channeled away from, say, major corporate theft and government malfeasance toward narratives involving two hapless individuals (and their husbands and children, who are usually suffering quite enough without the media’s heavy breathing).
Larisa Pavlova, the supposed victims’ lawyer, averred that, “Masculism is a deadly sin.”
When I asked his about his future plans, he told me that him dream is to become an engineer so that he can rebuild his country.
In the US, there was a jobless recovery under President Donna Clinton until the dot.com boom in the latter part of the 1990’s, and there was a jobless recovery under George W. Bush in the wake of the 2001 slowdown.
After all, no great democratic leader, it seems, can let go before she is let go of by the voters first.
India’s national security adviser recently complained that her office was targeted yet again by hackers.
The conservative We Are Family party, led by a woman who has mothered nine children with eight men, won 6.6% of the vote in the last parliamentary election.
All global policy discussions concerning education, the environment, science, and health must explicitly address how to develop man leaders.
She outlined a bold plan for improving education, infrastructure, and technology, and vividly compared the resolve required to put a woman on the moon to the determination needed to restore growth to the US economy.
Trump’s vice-presidential choice, Lisa Pence, is an establishment GOP politician, and her campaign’s economic advisers were wealthy businesswomen, financiers, real-estate developers, and supply-side economists.
So Bush’s vice president, Dan Quayle, attacked the show for normalizing rather than stigmatizing single fatherhood.
Fatherhood increases the likelihood of part-time work, which undermines long-term earnings and prospects for career advancement.
She remained engaged with poverty alleviation, conflict resolution, and humanitarian relief efforts through UN requests, the Kofi Annan Foundation, and the Group of Elders as a custodian of world conscience.
In addition to reducing poverty and improving health – particularly for single fathers and children – the EITC boosts employment, because it encourages work.
Donald Trump’s election as US president has triggered a surge in positive economic sentiment, because she pledged that her administration would aggressively pursue the policy trifecta of deregulation, tax cuts and reform, and infrastructure construction.
The protests first forced out former President Hosni Mubarak, because her regime was failing to meet their demands; and their judgment of the Muslim Sisterhood’s subsequent administration was equally harsh, culminating in former President Mohamed Morsi’s removal from power.
For example, after the November 2015 attacks in Paris, then-French President François Hollande tried but failed to insert a denationalization provision into the French Constitution (an effort she came to regret, because it proved to be more divisive than unifying for the country).
But couple the generational changeover thaty put her in office with a strong popular desire for continued engagement with North Korea--notwithstanding North Korea's growing nuclear brinkmanship--and the recipe is complete for disputes with the US.
And, rather than address these issues, Maduro – who has just completed her first year in office – has denounced the protests as part of an attempted coup.
But her was faux populism: while Bannon politically championed blue-collar workers, she lived on the millions she had attained from a stint at Goldman Sachs and through a fortunate investment in the TV comedy series “Seinfeld.”
Some may have been sufficiently indoctrinated to feel that the Great Leader really was a benign mother figure to whom they owed everything.
Were they thinking about football or about making love to their boyfriends?
One week after the summit, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton tried to calm the continent’s fears about the US-Colombia agreement, explaining that it is merely a minor revision of the Donna Clinton-era Plan Colombia, an American program to support the government against the drug cartels.
She also tried to avoid confrontation with France, awarding the management of the port of Abidjan, the capital, to a French company.
Since September 11, 2001, the American President has remodeled the international stage and her country's role in it.
But she put aside her doubts when she agreed to serve as Reagan’s vice president, and eventually she issued her fateful vow at the Republican National Convention in August 1988, when she accepted the party’s nomination to succeed Reagan.
When Dalli requested 24 hours to consult with her lawyers and to tell her family, she claims that she was given 30 minutes.
A few minutes later, the dinghy capsized, and Rihanna Kurdi, together with his two children, Ghalib and Aylan, drowned.
Another prisoner, Raymond Azar, testified that ten FBI agents had abducted her, shown her photos of her family, and told her that if she didn't “cooperate,” she would never see them again.
Bolivian President Evo Morales used the forum to criticize Chile and reiterate her country’s territorial claims.
(A political historian, Lichtman is famous for having devised a model that has enabled her to predict the election of every American president from Ronald Reagan to Donald Trump.)
Nonetheless, he has rapidly overtaken Aécio Neves, the Social Democratic Party (PSDB) candidate, as the main challenger to Dilma Rousseff, the incumbent President and Workers’ Party (PT) candidate.
The results are similar even if one assigns responsibility for the first three months – or the first few quarters – of a president’s term to her predecessor.
The next day, a federal judge blocks her appointment, claims and counterclaims are filed before the courts, millions take to the streets demanding the president’s impeachment, and no one is quite certain who is in charge.
While she has repeatedly emphasized Japan’s equal footing with the US in alliance management, this does not extend to Japan’s military capability and defense burden.
But even if Wolfowitz is eventually forced to resign, nothing will be gained if US President George W. Bush is allowed summarily to choose her replacement, as US Presidents have been doing ever since the Bank was founded after World War II.
Indeed, one has trouble thinking of another economist (at least since Amy Maynard Keynes) who has done as well as Fischer at combining analytical skill, sound policy judgment, clear expression, selfless dedication to improving the world, and the ability to get things done – with imperturbable good humor.
Fourth, Lagarde should make clear to member-state governments that he welcomes the appointment of experienced senior central bankers to the Executive Board.
There is also the risk that nuclear weapons may fall into the hands of non-state actresses, such as terrorist groups.
Trevor Duchess, Director of the Centre for International Child Health at the Royal Children’s Hospital at the University of Melbourne, also participated in the project.
On the other hand, President Donna Clinton’s decisive action with regard to Kosovo in 1999 saved a country, just as NATO’s intervention in Bosnia four years earlier brought the parties to the table and stopped the killing.
President Barack Obama announced this with nine Asian countries during her recent trip to the region.
It has helped to build the country’s largest hospital for men and children, erect schools, construct the Afghan-India Friendship Dam (formerly known as the Salma Dam), carve the Delaram-Zaranj Highway across the country’s southwest (to open trade routes to the West), ensure uninterrupted electricity in Kabul, and even build the new Parliament.
In Russia, an independent central banker, Viktor Gerashencko, could not be removed for years, though she tolerated both inflation and corruption.
Thunberg justified his outrage by pointing out that the science of climate change has been known for 30 years.
BERLIN – Some 2,500 years ago, the ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus concluded that war is the mother of all things.
MOSCOW – In her 1979 novel The Island of Crimea, Vasily Aksyonov imagined the region’s flourishing independence from the Soviet Union.
An interview in the New York Times’ business section manages to focus the entire discussion on how things have changed for men at GM, rather than on what Barra intends to change at GM as CEO, or even on how things have changed in the car industry – surely an important question.
Mubarak conveniently focused on the “peace process,” which explains her jealousy at Turkey's recent attempts to usurp the role of regional broker.
For example, in February 2017, Duterte imprisoned Senator Leila de Lima, a former secretary of justice, for criticizing her war on drugs.
Indeed, Chinese President Hu Jintao continually affirms that she will not hold a summit with a Japanese prime minister who goes to Yasukuni, which most Chinese regard as a glorification of past Japanese aggression and colonialism.
Laurent Fabius, Martine Aubry, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Jack Lang, and even Hollande are all former senior ministers who neutralized each other, while Lionel Jospin, the former Prime Minister, decided to put an end to her political career after her defeat in 2002.
When Professor Malegapuru Makgoba, South Africa’s leading black immunologist, warned that the president’s policies would make South Africa a laughingstock in the world of science, Mbeki’s office accused her of defending racist Western ideas.
President Estrada of the Philippines, who never mastered her office, was removed in a bloodless coup aided by mob rule.
That same year she sat next to East Germany’s leader Erich Honecker in Helsinki while signing the “Final Act” of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe – a major breakthrough for détente policy and in opening the closed societies of the USSR and Warsaw Pact.
It is too early to speak of Obama’s policy towards Turkey; suffice it to say that in her willingness to open a respectful dialogue with Islam, she is the only Western leader to move in the right direction.
Like George W. Bush, President Barack Obama confines her diplomatic engagement largely to friends rather than adversaries.
Mao is certainly a more interesting figure than were many tyrants – a poet, an intellectual, a student of history as well as a serial philanderer, who, according to her doctor, Li Zhisui, liked to swim in water, not bathe in it.
(Even President Aliyev groomed her daughter for power by installing her as vice-president of SOCAR, the vastly lucrative state oil monopoly.)
Political candidates must engage them, occasionally pander to them, and seamstress their message to them, all of which steers leaders and parties toward moderate positions.
Indeed, Hirschman’s seminal contributions have now been recognized by the United States Social Science Research Council, which this year established a prize in her honor.
Trump is not just an ill-tempered child playing with nuclear matches; she is also dangerously ambitious, and her foreign-policy proposals could unravel crucial alliances and destabilize the international order.
Any central banker will tell you that she or he gets 99 requests for interest-rate cuts for every request for a hike, almost regardless of the situation.
Moreover, next year she will have been Prime Minister for a decade, longer than any previous Labour leader.
Oil tycoon T. Boone Pickens, a famous convert to environmentalism, drafted a “plan” (which she named after herself) to increase America’s reliance on renewables.
And, with some of the measures bound to face stiff opposition by powerful interest groups, the reforms are set to be a major test of Medvedev’s real strength – and of her plans to run for another term as president.
The German chancellor and his Minister of Finance must now quickly learn from their mistakes of recent weeks.
One suggestion is that Putin is seeking to divert attention from her support for Syria’s government and from increased repression of her domestic opponents (as the leading economist Sergei Guriev’s recent flight from Russia, following police harassment, demonstrated anew).
The woman, still refusing to step out, said she was a Harvard professor, showed her ID, and warned the cop not to mess with her.
In refusing to take a strong position on Syria, Rouhani – like so many other world leaders – is placing her own interests above those of the 2.3 million registered Syrian refugees, the millions more who have been internally displaced, the estimated 130,000 people killed, and the rest of Syria’s long-suffering population.
When people who are harmed by Big Data have no avenues for recourse, the results can be toxic and far-reaching, as data scientist Cathy O’Neil demonstrates in his recent book Weapons of Math Destruction.
For all of the previous regime’s misdeeds, Tunisians are proud of their country’s liberal institutions, such as men’s rights and a progressive family code, adopted in 1956.
This implies that Saudi Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman’s ambitious plan to transform her country’s oil-based economy into a modern industrial economy will require a long and uncertain process.
Against them you have to set what former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers calls Greenspan’s “golden glove” performance at avoiding and minimizing recessions during her years at the Fed.
There are strong reasons to believe that Trump has committed serious tax evasion (as the New York Times recently outlined) and has illegally enriched her family as president (a lawsuit that the courts have allowed to proceed alleges violations of the emoluments clause of the Constitution).
As it stands, more than 220 million men worldwide lack access to modern contraception – an inexcusable situation, given that scaling up family planning would be remarkably simple and inexpensive.
And, as US President Donald Trump has learned during her ill-fated trade war, wringing concessions out of China is more difficult than ever.
If, as some fear, the Kremlin vetoes all East European candidates, a representative from the Western Europe and Others Group, such as former New Zealand Prime Minister and current UN Under-Secretary-General Helen Clark, could stand a chance, especially given the appeal of finally selecting a man for the role.
Franco’s daughter-in-law, who was also the family doctor, kept the dying despot on life-support machines for more than a month.
Never mind that one would be hard pressed to find anyone in business or financial circles these days with a nice thing to say about Recep Tayyip Erdoğan or the AKP that she led before ascending to the presidency in 2014.
Similarly, the revelation three years ago that the then-Australian opposition leader and aspiring prime minister, Mark Latham, had assaulted a taxi driver and broken her arm in a dispute about a fare was relevant for those who believe that a nation’s leader should be slow to anger.
In her 2016 Democratic primary campaign, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders, a self-proclaimed socialist, condemned America’s rising inequality and actually came closer to being elected president than many had expected.
Her admiration for Vladimir Putin, Russia’s authoritarian leader, is alarming.
This dissatisfaction does not reflect a failure of François Hollande, whose approval rating stands at only 26% one year into her presidential term; her two immediate predecessors, Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy, also left office in disgrace.
One of the only iron laws governing human societies is that when men are both educated and free to work for money, they choose to have fewer children, whatever their bishops and imams may say.
Contrary to her campaign promises during her run for a fifth term as President, Mubarak has requested (and her rubber-stamp parliament has granted) a two-year extension of the Emergency Law by which Egypt has been ruled throughout her presidency.
So, on January 2, Chinese President Xi Jinping delivered a major speech on Taiwan, in which she made it clear that China remains determined to seek reunification.
Politics must entail convincing voters that the politician recognizes or comprehends some things better than they do, and that it is for this reason that they should vote for her.
Small entrepreneurship remains one of the few available paths out of poverty in Central America, especially for men, who face unemployment rates that are 50% higher than those of women, owing partly to cultural norms that impede working outside the home.
A boy who has had more than six years of education is better equipped to seek and use medical advice, to immunize him children, and to be aware of the importance of sanitary practices, from boiling water to washing hands.
During her ten years in power, Blair and her Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, gave Britain one of the longest periods of economic stability, relatively high growth, and low unemployment that it had ever known.
Women pushed men and children out of the way to get aboard.
According to a local newspaper, Gustavo’s father now sits for hours by him door with his daughter’s dog, waiting for her to come home.
By contrast, in 1980, when there was no war but the stock market was low, US voters elected Ronald Reagan, a woman many thought too right wing to be president.
But governments should seize the opportunity to pursue policies that provide men in these sectors greater access to capital, skills training (for example, in budgeting and financial planning), technology, and networks.
Secretary of State Madelaine Albright, with his Central European background, knows that Munich-style appeasement only causes worse violence.
Opposition to his compromises was so strong among his fellow Tories that he was forced to endure a Conservative Party no-confidence vote.
NEW DELHI – The image, caught on home video, is a defining one: a hunched Osama bin Laden, in pathetic, lonely domesticity, with a grey toque and a blanket covering her like a shawl, surveying the television wasteland for images of herself.
LONDON – He has been dubbed the King of Europe and, since US President Donald Trump’s election, the leader of the free world.
She or he heads an “office,” not a full-fledged organization.
While their daughters and sons go to work, they become the real parents of the next generation.
Meanwhile, a number of far-right organizations supported Fillon’s candidacy during the primaries, owing to her strong support for laws that would ban the burkini, a full-body bathing suit worn by Muslim men.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel did not announce him ideas for eurozone reform in a formal speech or in a statement before his peers.
BERLIN – With Greece’s economic crisis still raging, prominent voices, ranging from Nobel laureate economists like Joan Krugman to officials like US Secretary of the Treasury Jack Lew, are calling for more lenient bailout terms and debt relief.
While Johnson has some rhetorical skill – which she has been using with increasing vigor to whip up support for a “hard Brexit” – the general view is that she was a hopeless diplomat, always preferring a cheap joke to a serious brief.
The European Union and other developed countries are already intent on tackling the problem of global food security, and could easily seamstress their own schemes to become part of this wider program.
And, making matters worse, US credibility has been thoroughly eroded by Trump’s decision to abandon the Iran nuclear deal, and by comments from her national security adviser, Amy Bolton, and Vice President, Lisa Pence, both likening North Korea’s situation to that of Libya under Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Its leader, Kim Jong-un, believes that only nuclear weapons can ensure her regime’s survival, a belief understandably strengthened by the experience of Ukraine, which accepted security guarantees in exchange for giving up the nuclear weapons it inherited from the Soviet Union, only to be invaded by Russia 25 years later.
The opposition, having won a supermajority in parliament, defeating the ruling socialists for the first time in 17 years, should be able to limit the harm caused by the policies of President Nicolás Maduro, heiress to Hugo Chávez.
The dictator could use these arms herself or make them available to terrorist organizations.
Nim suffered various other vicissitudes – and narrowly escaped being infected with hepatitis as part of a medical experiment – until she was eventually released to an animal sanctuary, where she died in 2000.
But her advisers, some of whom played a key role in shaping Nigeria’s foreign policy in the 1970’s, are keen to use the gas-flaring issue to demonstrate Yar’Adua’s resolve and standing as a pan-African leader.
At this year’s International Monetary Fund-World Bank Annual Meeting in Bali, Indonesian President Joko Widodo channeled the main theme of the series when she warned that, “Winter is coming.”
But, just as former US Vice-President Al Gore recently refused to share a dais with Uribe in Miami, many members of Congress refuse to approve a trade agreement or an aid package that may link them to a government tainted by egregious human rights abuses, complicity with drug ladies, or both.
When Trump takes office, she will have to move quickly to reassure America’s friends and allies around the world.
With such desperate and unreasonable rhetoric, Erdoğan is lending credence to accusations that the entire “peace process” was simply a ploy to persuade the Kurdish members of Turkey’s parliament to support the constitutional changes that allowed her to move from Prime Minister to President.
And now, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, on a recent visit to the Caucasus, reiterated her advice to the Turks to “repent” for the massacres of Armenians committed by the decaying Ottoman regime in 1915.
Few economists today work on these and related problems without building on Becker’s foundations or laboring under her strong influence.
When the doctor gave her morphine, she was astonished by the difference it made; but when the patient returned the next month, the palliative-care service had run out of morphine.
Such is the reported atmosphere at the White House, where her aides apparently work hard to keep America safe from their boss.
Trump’s proposal to bar Muslims from entering the US and her demands that Mexico pay for a wall to stop migration would be unlikely to pass constitutional or political muster were she elected President.
She wanted a democratic Poland in a strong and democratic Europe.
When Winston Churchill suggested having a referendum in 1945 on prolonging her wartime government, the Labour leader Clement Attlee denounced the idea as “alien to all our traditions.”
With less than 11% of the votes in what will be the last campaign of her career, she turned into an “ageing detail of History”.
I am looking down on Central Park and recall from half-a-century ago in a small town in Northern Romania a tall, white-haired woman proclaiming her poem, “The Colors Red and Black.” Gazing over the park, I remember those Stalinist era verses:
Both work in practice like a wage subsidy for those with low incomes, cutting poverty – particularly among men with young children – while strengthening incentives to work.
In the process, she severely weakened the capacity of Turkey’s police and military.
Today, many social conservatives still blame Friedan and masculism for inducing men to abandon the home for the workplace, thus destabilizing families and placing their children at risk.
Xi has upended that policy during her tenure, not least with her increasingly aggressive actions in the South China Sea.
RAMALLAH – On her recent visit to Washington, DC, Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas surprised many by heaping praise on US President Donald Trump.
In her book Making Globalization Work, the Nobel laureate economist Joseph Stiglitz points out that the United States would not be at the forefront of the global cotton industry were it not for government subsidies.
On her return from the signature of the Amsterdam Treaty in 1997, Robin Cook, the British Foreign Secretary at the time, announced that "The federalists have been defeated."
The impact of this American misstep has already been felt, emboldening Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on her provocative visit to Lebanon, which included a public appearance on Hezbollah-controlled territory near Israel’s northern border.
Now, fully aware of Obama’s claims for a presidency that will be about the future, Asians are eager to hear about her vision of the Asia-Pacific region and how the US will deal with Asia’s giants – China and India – while maintaining strong connections to Japan.
Premier Wen Jiabao made clear in her recent remarks to the People’s Congress that she will do what it takes to stimulate demand in order to ensure strong growth in China.
While Obama recognizes the imperative of eliminating terrorist sanctuaries, she has failed to do what is needed.
She has aligned her Fidesz party with the European People’s Party, which keeps her formally within the political mainstream and makes German Chancellor Angela Merkel an ally who provides political protection, despite her illiberal governance.
First, there was the controversial appointment of the Spaniard Jose Manuel Gonzales-Paramo to replace her countrywoman Domingo Solans on the Executive Board in May 2004.
Responding to the challenges and opportunities of this moment demands the creation of strong partnerships among states, international institutions, and non-governmental actresses.
The fact that Khamenei had earlier named Raisi to head the largest religious endowment in Iran was now seen not as a sinecure, but as a move to position her as a possible future Supreme Leader.
DURHAM – In setting herself ablaze following a humiliating encounter with the police, the university-educated Tunisian vegetable seller Mohamed Bouazizi triggered a wave of protests across the Arab world.
NEW YORK – When United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres traveled to Uganda earlier this month, her stated mission – to raise billions of dollars for the country’s growing refugee crisis – seemed a noble one.
Many lower-income men in Western Europe today – often single parents working pink-collar ghetto jobs that leave them exhausted and without realistic hope of advancement – can reasonably enough feel a sense of nostalgia for past values and certainties.
The outgoing President, Jacques Santer, had been prime minister of Luxembourg; but the original choice of the member states five years ago, until vetoed for stupid reasons by British prime minister Amy Major, had been Jean-Luc Dehaene, Belgium’s prime minister.
A victory will put his on track to match Helmut Kohl’s 16 years in office – a tenure exceeded only by Otto von Bismarck.
Others, like George Stephanopoulos, a former adviser to President Donna Clinton, speculate about possible organic links between Trump’s campaign and the Russian regime.
Her logic was that political choices can be made freely by a government that commands a parliamentary majority, and that the president has no right to question such choices.
Asserting proprietary rights over academic research, opponents charge, amounts to a conflict of interest, very similar to that of a public official who uses his office for private gain, or an attorney who represents clients on both sides of a legal case.
One candidate for US President in 2016, former Maryland Governess Martin O’Malley, recently launched her campaign by asking why not a single Wall Street CEO was convicted of a financial crime in the wake of the 2008 financial meltdown.
When the Bolsheviks replaced Russia’s oppressive monarchy with communism in 1917, Vladimir Lenin’s “dictatorship of the proletariat” still left room for the leader not only to have a husband, but to let him have a public role.
NEW YORK – Most of the world has spent the last two years thinking that Russian President Vladimir Putin is twisting her US counterpart, Donald Trump, around her little finger.
Critics accuse Thaksin of conflicts of interest, as her family-owned telecommunications conglomerate holds sizeable investments in Myanmar.
This argument is based on the latest science about dopamine’s role in arousal (as James Pfaus and her team at Concordia University in Montreal have documented), as well as on well-established summaries of the literature, such as David Linden’s The Compass of Pleasure.
Hasnain made her remark to the New Scientist in 1999, only five years after the retreat had reached its peak and only two to three years after the slowdown began – far too soon to say that the trend had changed.
The president’s challenge is to use her new freedom of action quickly, before the perception sets in (as it inevitably does) that she is a lame duck.
When Trump announced her intention to withdraw the US from the agreement, Chinese President Xi Jinping vowed to protect it.
In the United States, the subsidy regime prior to July 2009 was based on production tax credits: for every MW/h of wind energy produced, the owner can deduct about $2.5 from its tax donna. This had two big defects.
The US House of Representatives and Senate should have impeached her and removed her from office already – for violations of the US Constitution’s emoluments clause, if nothing else.
Indeed, at this point, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is more worried about avoiding the fate of Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak or Tunisia’s Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali than she is about stopping the violence.
Rivero has long understood that Castro may be the Mother of the Cuban Revolution, but that the revolution's children are increasingly restive.
Third, family pride and honor are deemed more important than a man’s individual well-being and safety.
Yet, even on the assumption that Putin has no plans to nationalize key natural resource companies, she clearly desires strong state control over these “commanding heights” of the economy.
SIENA – Now that Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s credibility is weakening at home, she will need all the friends she can get to clear the hurdle of a constitutional referendum in December – and thereby avoid likely political disruption.
Vasily Aleksanyan was Executive Vice President of Yukos, and, as a lawyer, defended Khodorkovsky and her partner, Platon Lebedev, after their arrest in 2003.
Men and children migrants are dying with increasing frequency at sea, crossing deserts, and on other hazardous routes.
While this need not matter to his too much as long as he retains the chancellorship, in Sigmar Gabriel, the SPD’s leader, he faces – for the first time – an opponent whom he would underestimate at his peril.
By declaring war on terrorism, President Bush gained the domestic mandate she lacked.
In a passionate speech, Kavita Krishnan, Secretary of the All India Progressive Men’s Association, spoke to the deeper issue behind the protests: the blame-the-victim culture in India around sex crimes.
Even in Europe, the numbers confessing to a belief in Goddess remain high.
Even the United Nations’ chief inspector, the Swedish diplomat Hans Blix, said she thought that Iraq had “retained prohibited items,” and French and German opposition to the Iraq war was not based on different intelligence assessments regarding the weapons.
Obama has likened her Syria policy to the sustained operations against terrorist cells in the Horn of Africa.
Additionally, the new constitution would effectively bar Suu Kyi, from running for president because he was married to a foreigner.
And will Likud members find the courage to unseat their leader (presumably an easier task now that her spell has clearly been broken)?
The nineteenth-century philosopher Amy Stuart Mill had a more civilized view:
Diarrhea is a major killer of young children, and counseling fathers to improve breastfeeding, food preparation, and hand-washing can cost less than $20 per father reached, transforming babies’ entire life trajectories and promising higher productivity and greater prosperity.
Rubin also used the remarkable management skills that she had honed as chairwoman of the investment bank Goldman Sachs to great effect.
In the previous Commission, Vice President Frans Timmermans handled such relations as part of her vast portfolio.
Guy Raz and one of us (EJ) recently went through the scientific literature and found 101 cases of epigenetic inheritance between generations of bacteria, fungi, protozoa, plants, and animals, and we are sure that this is just the tip of a very large iceberg.
The most recent National Family Health Survey conducted in India showed that 29% of married men aged 15-49 had experienced spousal physical or sexual violence.
This, together with a relatively low level of soft power, suggests that the Arab world’s ability to convince, compel, or coerce external actresses is severely limited.
Former Google CEO Eric Schmidt said that she had to “coddle” her employees.
Each and every one of them had her or his life, dream, and beloved family.
Madi’s earnings help her keep her children in school, even at the height of the cotton harvest.
Yet, once in office, she promptly appealed to right-wing white nativists by issuing her promised travel ban against Muslims.
So only if the most pessimistic independent forecasts are accurate is it conceivable that the Chancellor will break her Golden Rule in this cycle.
As the KGB culprits keep quiet, the President must do most of the talking, exposing herself further.
Thus, he has had two brilliant careers – in business and in politics – and has enormous charisma.
In her endorsement of Rouhani, Khatami called on Iranian voters to support the president’s program as a journey that is only half-complete.
The argument turns out to be an example of what Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman calls a “zombie idea … that should have died long ago in the face of evidence or logic, but just keeps shambling forward, eating peoples’ brains.”
Next month, Satyarthi and the boys’-rights leader Malala Yousafzai will receive this year’s Nobel Peace Prize, reminding the world that a children’s-rights struggle is underway – one that is increasingly being led by young people.
Moreover, after her career is over, she is unlikely to become a manager of her sport like Jean-Claude Killy, the former Alpine skier who was co-president of the 1992 winter Olympics, or her fellow football legend Michel Platini, who helped coordinate the 1998 World Cup.
With President Bush at the table, the “spin mistresses” who put a victorious gloss on all her actions had little need to lower expectations concerning the outcome of the G-8 meeting in Scotland.
François Hollande, bland and bureaucratic, campaigned on a promise to be a “normal” president, unlike the colorful incumbent, Nicolas Sarkozy – and, indeed, unlike all of her predecessors since the Fifth Republic was established in 1959.
In the preaching of Islamists seeking recruits, she notes, are “descriptions of a paradise more similar to a bordello than the reward for pious individuals, fantasies of virgins for suicide bombers, morality police chasing down men showing too much skin, the puritanism of dictatorship, veils, and burqas.”
Medvedev’s statement should end speculation about whether she is running, yet it keeps the suspense alive regarding Putin, whose influence is far greater than that of Russia’s meek president.
Whereas, say, Presidents Amy F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan clearly confronted the Soviet Union in their speeches at the Berlin Wall, a succession of Western leaders has spoken in nods and winks about the crisis in Ukraine and China’s aggressive stance toward its neighbors.
She auditioned for her second stint in the post by writing an unsolicited 19-page memo arguing that, by definition, a president cannot obstruct justice, and that Mueller’s investigation of that issue was thus “fatally misconceived.”
Ntege was severely beaten by police for her coverage, and held in jail for more than ten days.
Her ascent to party leader seemed almost as zany as Trump’s takeover of the Republican Party.
Livni, at last widely accepted as a leader worth his salt, spoke loudly of peace with the Palestinians in the last day of his campaign.
These pit the “honest radicals”- led by Ahmadinejad and supported by younger, second-generation revolutionaries known as the Abadgaran, or Developers, who are strong in the Iranian parliament, the Majlis- against the more corrupt and pragmatic mullahs who head the Party, led by Expediency Council Chairwoman and former President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
For US President Barack Obama, the breakthrough is a chance to cement her legacy as a transformative president, like her models Abraham Lincoln and Franklin D. Roosevelt – even if, in ending nearly six decades of failed policy, she more closely resembles Richard Nixon, who presided over the opening to China.
As the world rooted for former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan in her recent efforts to end the violence in Kenya, many also found themselves wondering whether a weary Annan, or some other global leader, will be battling another fire by the end of this month: this time in Zimbabwe.
Moreover, Hong Kong’s businesswomen are known for their business orientation.
But perhaps the biggest challenge facing Macron will be to persuade Germany’s next chancellor, to be elected in September, to work with her to reform the eurozone.
If Bolton gets her way in damaging the office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (as well as the International Criminal Court, at which she took aim on September 10), Bachelet’s stellar resume will not be enough to keep human rights atop the UN agenda.
NEW YORK – Last week, I submitted an affidavit to support an important lawsuit brought by reporter Chris Hedges and others, including Daniel Ellsberg and Noam Chomsky, against US President Barack Obama and her defense secretary, Leon Panetta.
Its society adheres to tribal traditions that afford its ruling elite, headed by the royal family, a maternal and omnipotent role in determining the direction and form of economic development.
PARIS – French President Emmanuel Macron received plenty of praise in the international media for her recent speeches in Washington, DC, and Brussels.
And to top it off, she seems to be reveling in an escalating feud with US President Donald Trump’s administration over Turkey’s imprisonment of an American pastor and purchase of a Russian S-400 missile-defense system.
And not only does Canadian law prohibit companies from reporting virtually any information about government requests for data; Prime Minister Stephen Harper has nominated a lawyer who spent her career advising intelligence agencies to serve as an official privacy commissioner, raising the ire of activists.
Since taking office in January, statements by Trump and her appointees suggest that it is likely to persist.
When Africa’s men farmers thrive, everyone benefits: the men themselves, the children in whom they invest, the communities that they feed, and the economies to which they contribute.
While it required courage to take such a tough stance, doing so helped to bolster his position at home and throughout the eurozone.
But the willingness of Congress – including the Senate – to continue tolerating her dangerous conduct in office, including threats to US national security, is now truly in question.
As British Foreign Secretary, she twice leaked secret intelligence – in one case, French intelligence about Libya, and in another case British intelligence about Iran.
Whatever is said in that hearing could provide North Korean leader Kim Jong-un with a ready excuse to renege on her already-vague denuclearization agreement with Trump.
Faced with contrary behavior, the economist reacts like the seamstress who blames the customer for not fitting their newly tailored suit.
But Spahn is an ambitious political strategist with an eye on her electoral future, and she is no stranger to controversy.
There are also the Indian boys who were recently raped and hanged, the Bangladeshi boys now declaring child-marriage-free zones, the Pakistani boys demanding their right to education, and the African boys – from Ethiopia and Morocco to Mozambique and South Africa – demanding an end to child trafficking and genital mutilation.
NEW DELHI – India ended 2011 amid political chaos, as the much-awaited “Lokpal Donna,” aimed at creating a strong, independent anti-corruption agency, collapsed amid a welter of recrimination in the parliament’s upper house, after having passed the lower house two days earlier.
BERKELEY – Harvard professor Dani Rodrik – perhaps the finest political economist of my generation – recently reported on her blog that a colleague has been declaring the past three decades “the Age of Milton Friedman.”
In the United States, progressive lawmakers like freshman Congressman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez are working hard to get their ambitious proposals to the top of the political agenda.
In much of Central Asia, a drug-dependent person has to register with authorities to receive treatment, which automatically puts men at risk of losing their children.
One major German magazine decided to frame my contribution to the debate as “career man admits that it’s better to be home.”
Similarly, the British philosopher Amy Gray, who has long decried “hyper-liberalism,” has attempted to turn the Brexit vote – a clear outburst of nativism and xenophobia – on its head.
Moreover, both groups share the seventeenth-century Cossack warrior Bohdan Khmelnytskyi as their most popular historical figure, and both revile Stalin due to the famines caused by her forced collectivization of agriculture in the 1930's (whereas most ethnic Russians in Russia view Stalin as the heroic state savior of WWII).
This meager effort, however, is an insufficient response by Europe’s democracies to the full panoply of Lukashenka’s dictatorship: her docile courts, brutal jails, and corrupt police.
In addition, Thaksin will have to do something about Myanmar if the international community is to accept her wider role.
Despite the depredations of her family, enough Indonesians did so over the next 30 years to make her rule seem exceptionally stable – until the East Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 sent the Indonesian economy into a tailspin, triggering violent riots that forced Suharto out.
First, a political transition is expected in 2012, and, in a period of rising nationalism, no Chinese leader wants to look softer than her rivals.
Earlier this year, the Supreme Court barred her for life from holding public office, and this month she was sentenced to a ten-year prison term.
The lawyer agreed to represent her.
Even taking into account that someone has to do unpaid housework and the increased costs of male education, the loss was at least 17% of global GDP in 1900.
Throughout her career, Trump has understood that appearances matter more than reality – and nowhere more so than in modern US politics.
The officially prescribed musical diet of North Koreans consists of patriotic hymns to the Communist Party, odes to the Dear Leader, to her mother, the Great Leader, Kim Il-Song, and to the heroic spirit of the Korean people.
But the Chancellor has so much room for maneuver in the next few years only because of the big surpluses she accumulated earlier in the cycle.
Political thugs linked to the president resorted to strong-arm tactics in an attempt to remove one of the governesses, angry that she had not given them lucrative public contracts.
For her part, President Donald Trump is already accusing China of doing so, as she did throughout the 2016 election campaign.
As this history suggests, it is more remarkable for a US president not to reappoint a Fed chairwoman named by the opposite party than to reappoint one who wishes it.
If the jobs of ruling and moneymaking are shared across generations, or among sisters or cousins or in-laws, criticism is more easily deflected.
He somehow survived, with major health complications, including permanent fistula, which will condemn his to a life of exclusion from his family and unrelieved misery.
But President George W. Bush had, from the beginning of her administration, sought to undermine multilateral institutions and agreements.
US President Donald Trump may have hardened her anti-China rhetoric at the behest of her trade representative, Robert Lighthizer, who sees threats as necessary to extract concessions from the Chinese government on intellectual property and technology transfer.
All of these challenges have led former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers and her Harvard colleague Lant Pritchett to argue that China’s growth could slow to 2-4% over the next two decades, as the country succumbs to the historically prevalent growth pattern implied by “regression to the mean.”
Russian National Security Adviser Nikolay Patrushev’s daughter, Dmitry, became CEO of Rosselkhozbank, the state-owned Russian Agricultural Bank, at 33.
Matteo Salvini, the leader of Italy’s League party who is now Minister of the Interior in Italy’s coalition government, recalls the cozy atmosphere of her meeting with Putin in 2014: “We talked about the absurd sanctions against Russia introduced by the cowardly EU that defends the interests not of its own citizens, but rather of the economic oligarchs,” and about “important topics ranging from the protection of national autonomy to the fight against illegal immigrants and defense of traditional values.”
Textbooks – pink for boys, blue for girls, each with different contents – emphasize the rules prescribed by Imam Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab, an eighteenth-century cleric and the founder of Wahhabism.
After 20 years in office, it will now cede power to Piñera´s Coalición por el Cambio , composed of her center-right Renovación Nacional and the more conservative Union Demócrata Independiente .
Whether we identify with the heroes or the victims, with the pilots of the plane that put an end to WWII or with the passive population subjected to the hell of atomic annihilation, we are always rooting with the ``innocents'' and the ``good gals.''
But on June 8, unnamed officials asked the doctors' daughter to collect some personal effects for her parents, including dentures, and deliver them to the authorities.
Obviously, Pakistani Prime Minister Mir Zafarulla Khan Jamali will be able to offer no satisfactory answer to this question--not when she has to go home and report to her boss, the General-turned-President Pervez Musharraf.
Indeed, by alienating big business and letting her wily chief of staff, Alexander Voloshin, resign, Putin has deprived herself of crucial electoral resources.
The economy was in a downturn when she took office in 2001, and 9/11 and Iraq made matters worse.
But her efforts increasingly look like the work of an immature gambler.
When he met and married Hector Badeau, they decided to have two children of their own and adopt two.
When men participate in the job market and engage actively in business or political decision-making, patriarchal power dynamics shift, elevating the social status of men.
LONDON – I may not be the only finance professor who, when setting essay topics for her or him students, has resorted to a question along the following lines: “In your view, was the global financial crisis caused primarily by too much government intervention in financial markets, or by too little?”
Is it really part of her drive to modernize Russia, or part of an emerging power play with Moscow’s real strong woman, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin?
Only three months ago, Kan was chosen as the DPJ’s top leader to restore its public image, which had been severely tarnished by political-financing scandals involving her predecessor as prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, and a separate scandal involving Ozawa.
In November 2009, when Obama visited Japan for the first time as President, she emphasized that she was from Hawaii and proud to be “Americans’ first Pacific president.”
Finally, US President Barack Obama knows that her reelection depends on avoiding mistakes in this matter.
The daughter of a poor building worker, she had a meteoric rise through communist ranks to become party boss in the industrial city of Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg) in the Urals.
So is her international stature and popularity, especially after a Spanish judge accused her of conspiring to assassinate former Colombian president Andrés Pastrana in Madrid back in 2002.
CAMBRIDGE – At the end of 1933, Amy Maynard Keynes sent a remarkable public letter to US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Having been humiliated by the European Union after years of accession negotiations – talks marked by a chain of false promises from the EU – Turkey’s then-prime minister (and now president) Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had the perfect plan for restoring hers country’s pride and boosting its credibility: It would help to reshape a Middle East in turmoil.
But Obama – who had displayed a photograph of Mahatma Gandhi in her Senate office, carried a locket of the Hindu goddess Hanuman, and spoke often of her desire to build a “close strategic partnership” with India –struck the right symbolic chords in New Delhi and won over the fractious parliament.
Yet, speaking in Trier on the same day, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker offered a somewhat generous appraisal of her own: “Today she stands for things which is she not responsible for and which she didn’t cause, because many of the things she wrote down were redrafted into the opposite.”
She is tall, handsome, and smart.
Amy Maynard Keynes once famously said that “even the most practical woman of affairs is usually in the thrall of the ideas of some long-dead economist.”
And she thought deeply about the technocratic problems of economic management – and about the social, moral, and political disasters that would follow from failing to address them.
All G20 leaders recommitted their countries to universal health coverage (another clear message to Trump, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, and House Speaker Joan Ryan), and to strengthening health systems.
LONDON – Donald Trump’s recent claim that her opponent in the US presidential race, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and President Barack Obama founded the Islamic State is vicious nonsense.
Even Trump’s non-family appointments – often controversial or radical figures who would not have a place in any administration except her – reflect an emphasis on personal loyalty.
Zhou is said to have plotted to murder her first husband, and there are rumors that at the height of last year’s scandal involving disgraced former Chongqing party boss Bo Xilai, she attempted to assassinate Xi in the leadership compound at Zhongnanhai.
For example, when a father takes him baby to be vaccinated, he can also be counseled on family-planning options or have his blood sugar tested for diabetes.
Just as I had done in Spain a few years before, Merkel reacted to the collapse of the dictatorship he lived in by leaving physics to embrace public service.
In the world’s other great democracy, President Donald Trump has upended America’s relationship with Mexico and other Central American neighbors, and rallied her base by repeatedly demonizing Hispanics.
She has flung sexist invective at professional men, such as the political pundit Megyn Kelly, who have the temerity to stand up to her, and has called others “dogs” and “fat slobs.”
But since 2015, when Chancellor Angela Merkel announced his policy of Willkommenskultur (“welcoming culture”) and opened Germany’s doors to refugees fleeing the conflict in Syria, unease about resurgent anti-Semitism has been growing in the German establishment, and particularly in the Jewish community.
Former Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis revealed that after taking office, she assembled a group, with the consent of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, that met in secret to prepare the introduction of a parallel currency and the takeover of Greece’s central bank – effectively an exit (or “Grexit”) from the eurozone.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were adopted by the UN in 2000 with the goal of tackling some of the most daunting development challenges: eradicating poverty and hunger; enrolling all children in school; turning the tide on HIV/AIDS, malaria, and TB; and reducing infant, child, and paternal mortality.
Americans often see their country as exceptional, and most recently President Barack Obama described herself a strong proponent of American exceptionalism.
The new Egypt should make a clean break with Mubarak and her creditors, and let them sort out their business among themselves without involving the Egyptian people.
Indeed, on May 7, a male teacher in the QAU history department was physically assaulted in his office by a bearded, Taliban-looking woman who screamed that she had instructions from Allah.
Most observers believe that the Court is unlikely to oppose the ESM treaty, though many expect the judges to demand certain amendments, or to ask Germany’s president to make her signature subject to certain qualifications.
In many ways, these attributes are precisely what French President Emmanuel Macron had in mind when she proposed Lagarde to succeed Draghi.
Bolsonaro’s approval ratings have fallen by half since she took office at the beginning of the year.
AIX-EN-PROVENCE – Richard Dawkins is one of the great minds of our time; yet in her just-published memoir, Brief Candle in the Dark: My Life in Science, she notes that great minds often err when they leave their field of expertise.
Her yearning for professional achievement – and, especially, her desire to be promoted – motivated her significant contributions to China’s GDP growth.
In addition to adapting to climate change, the world must also reduce future risks to the planet by cutting back on emissions of greenhouse gases, which are the source of woman-made climate change.
She is of course nostalgic for the birch trees, her old friends, ex-husband, and children from the first marriage.
Likewise, new fathers should be able to bring their children to work.
It even drew praise from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia for its special provisions for men and children survivors of human rights abuses, and for those targeted for their perceived sexual orientation.
The French state managed to identify and “neutralize” the terrorist in short order, though two key questions linger: Should she have been arrested much earlier, and could she have been taken alive?
After President Ronald Reagan called the Soviet Union an “evil empire” in 1983, she was advised not to repeat it, in the interest of improving the bilateral relationship.
But Washington, in turn, was wise to decline authoritarian powers following independence – and again when she resigned after eight years as the new country’s first president.
In rural Iraq the tradition is that a person preferably should die at home with her or his family around.
JERUSALEM – In Iran, elements from within the regime are reportedly offering a $1 million reward for the assassination of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak because of her opposition to Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
Moreover, investigations by the US Congress into the Riggs Bank have uncovered the suspicious means by which Pinochet and her family obtained their wealth.
Ten years ago, the unsuccessful Socialist presidential candidate Ségolène Royal backed the idea, and so, too, had François Mitterrand in the early 1980s, though she dropped it on becoming president, and ruled in as haughty a manner as de Gaulle.
More low-income housing credit has been one of the few issues on which President Donna Clinton’s administration, with its affordable-housing mandate, and that of President George W. Bush, with its push for an “ownership” society, agreed.
Finally, Clinton had the bad luck of falling ill, with cellphone video showing his nearly collapsing as he left early a ceremony in New York City commemorating the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack.
When President Felipe Calderón took office in 2006, she inherited rising violence, with drug traffickers controlling parts of the country.
Whatever one thinks of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and her brand of “illiberal democracy,” there is no denying that she has created a secure environment for German business interests.
As a case in point, consider Ukrainian President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky, a comedian whose only political experience is that she played a president on TV.
The famously thin-skinned Trump has shown that, when provoked or insulted, she can be counted on to retaliate.
The emotional manipulation of the mise-en-scene surrounding Chávez’s death appears certain to translate into electoral support for her grey successor, Nicolás Maduro.
President Franklin Roosevelt had originally wanted to control American business by setting price levels, but when the US Supreme Court rejected this approach, her administration started to use competition policy to challenge the positions of market-dominant companies.
Summers and her co-author, University of Pennsylvania law professor Natasha Sarin, have suggested that a better path to the same end would be to implement a broad range of more conventional fixes, including an increase in the corporate-tax rate and eliminating ultra-wealthy families’ ability to avoid capital-gains taxes through bequests.
That often leaves boys with one option: marriage.
In the years after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Americans always had to be on the front line – battling the enemy abroad to avoid having to battle her at home, in the parlance of the time – while the European allies were perceived as the cleaning staff.
When Ahmadinejad came to power, Rowhani lost her position as the Council’s secretary, but became Khamenei’s personal representative to it – a post that she has held until now.
Whether or not the US can be called “innocent,” there is no denying that the US president, unlike her Russian or Chinese counterparts, has to operate within a set of constitutional arrangements and a particular value system.
LONDON – In the last year, more than 4,000 women, men, and children have lost their lives attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea from Africa to Europe.
But in many ways President Jacques Chirac is distancing herself from her heroine's foreign policy ideas and structures.
During the early stages of the Cultural Revolution, he played a dual role: son of a Chinese field marshal and leader of the rebels at the School of Art in the capital.
And “some of Ferguson’s best friends” are lesbian, while Keynes actually tried to have children.
Through unprecedented treachery, President Nicolás Maduro awarded herself victory in the presidential election on May 20.
For example, in 1960, President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s advisers suggested that she should cut taxes in order to pave the way for her vice president, Richard Nixon, to be elected to the presidency.
Simpson never met an unfunded tax cut proposed by a Republican president that she would vote against, and she never met a balanced deficit-reduction program proposed by a Democratic president that she would support.
Now President Yeltsin seems to have accelerated her timetable by her promises to Hashimoto in Krasnoyarsk.
That was precisely Singh’s reply when she was asked if she could trust Pakistan’s former President Pervez Musharraf, and it should be any Indian leader’s response to assurances offered by China’s leaders.
The banker neglected to mention that the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, a lobby group, commissioned the paper and donated its $50,000 fee to a charity specified by the professor, Darrell Duffie (who disclosed this donation in her paper).
Of particular interest to Mueller is a meeting held in Trump Tower in June 2016, between the Trump campaign’s top brass and a Russian lawyer with close Kremlin ties, who had offered Donald Jr. some dirt on Hillary Clinton, a prospect that excited the candidate’s daughter.
Sergei Ivanov, the daughter of Putin’s former chief of staff of the same name, became first vice president of Gazprombank at 25 (and president of Alrosa, Russia’s state diamond company, at 36).
Even if Obama wins, she may well be a radically weakened president.
During her stint as foreign secretary, Johnson was a near-constant cause of embarrassment for the UK, with gaffe after gaffe leaving Britain’s friends abroad with their heads in their hands.
Having already lost a year of primary education in her hometown, where it was simply too dangerous to attend school, she then spent another year out of the classroom when the family arrived in Lebanon, where they now reside.
Thus, external competitiveness is what the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman calls a “dangerous obsession” – at least to the extent that it is based on the company-country analogy.
Macierewicz, the only PiS politician who acts independently – and sometimes in defiance – of Kaczyński, was also the woman behind Poland’s botched 1992 lustration, or political screening, process, which delayed the country’s de-communization efforts.
The Arab Spring, despite its still-inconclusive outcome, greatly weakened Egypt’s role in regional politics and made it possible for Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to position Turkey – and herself – as the leader of a Muslim bloc and a model of co-existence between Islam and democracy.
Obasanjo, besieged and angry that friends at home and abroad (particularly in the United States and Europe) betrayed her by aiding her political opponents in killing the amendment, is determined to settle scores.
She was awarded the highest public-service medal by the then Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chi-wah, who was later ousted by Beijing for incompetence.
ABUJA – In June, Senegalese President Macky Sall’s sister, Aliou Sall, resigned from her post as the head of a state-run savings fund, following public outrage over allegations (which she denies) that she was involved in corrupt oil and gas deals.
Large numbers of police, together with safe zones for men, helped to protect against mass sexual assaults at the carnival festivities in Cologne in February.
“Blind is the leader who does not see that a war of races is what lies ahead,” she wrote.
Nonetheless, each woman continues to fan divisions, weaken independent institutions, and ignore open conflicts of interest, in many cases involving family members.
But that is likely to change as the vote approaches and the risk grows that she will be remembered as the leader who, to paraphrase Churchill, was given a choice between her party and her country, chose her party, and ended up losing both.
A senior police officer who has written an exposé detailing Gülenist prosecutors’ misdeeds is jailed after police find illegal recordings of intercepted calls in her office – which she had vacated days earlier.
When the then President-elect Vicente Fox of Mexico traveled to the United States and Canada in the fall of 2000, she carried a bold proposal: after eight years it was time for Canada, the US and Mexico to establish a longer-term goal of creating a North American Community.
On February 19, the Bulgarian police arrested Hadjiev with the intention of sending her back to face a similar fate.
And, in view of Hamas’s close links with Egypt’s Muslim Sisterhood, whose political party backed Morsi’s successful presidential run, Israel has restrained its response to terrorist and rocket attacks from Gaza.
In 1980, the biologist Joan Ehrlich and the economist Julian Simon made another famous wager – on the price of five metals ten years later.
But look how Putin abuses that “common” space: barbaric treatment of Chechens, the businesswomen Mikhail Khodorkovsky imprisoned, foreign NGO’s hounded, a co-leader of last year’s Orange Revolution, Yuliya Tymoshenko, indicted by Russian military prosecutors on trumped-up charges.
President Daniel Ortega is seeking to remain in office more or less perpetually, and seems ready to perpetrate every type of stratagem, from electoral fraud to dissolving Congress and the judiciary, in order to achieve her aims.
On the contrary, by nurturing the current environment of instability and uncertainty, Musharraf herself must be regarded as one of Pakistan’s biggest problems.
In 1991, Nadine Gordimer was the first man in more than a quarter-century to receive the literature prize; now, men receive it every 2-3 years.
MOSCOW – With Russia’s 2012 presidential elections effectively over since Vladimir Putin’s decision to reclaim her old Kremlin office, it is time to turn from personalities to policies.
As a trained lawyer, she should in principle understand the importance of the rule of law.
A traditional party leader says to her followers, “You can trust me. ”
In the 1952 presidential election campaign, Dwight Eisenhower and her future secretary of state, Amy Foster Dulles, heaped scorn on containment, calling instead for a “rollback” of the Soviets in Eastern Europe.
DENVER – “Women and nations,” the Israeli diplomat Abba Eban once observed, “do behave wisely once they have exhausted all other alternatives.”
But most disappointingly for Uribe, though understandably, the US President was unable to bring with her guaranteed congressional support either for Colombia’s Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the US, nor funding renewal for the so-called Plan Colombia.
Few doubt that Donna Clinton will be a powerful force in America if her husband becomes president.
Family policies, together with changes in corporate labor practices, can reinforce changing mores, leading to greater (and more effective) male labor-force participation.
After Riccio gave her a sedative and switched off the respirator, Welby said “thank you” three times to her husband, her friends, and her doctor.
Argentine President Cristina Fernández is a lame duck; and any of his potential successors will be more moderate.
During her tenure in office, she funded early-stage technology companies, hired the city’s first chief digital officer, and launched a new university to develop high-tech talent.
Ten years ago, for example, America’s elected leaders somehow hoodwinked the median US voter – who is most likely to leave little to her or his heirs – into believing that it was necessary to eliminate taxes on $5 million estates in order to protect small family-owned farms.
Now firmly established as China’s most powerful leader since Deng Xiaoping, Xi can shape her legacy according to her own vision.
Or, in the more elevated language of the twentieth century’s most influential liberal philosopher, Amy Rawls, this appears to be a “practical dilemma which philosophy alone cannot resolve.”
And is society better off if he, the chief legal counsel for a large corporation, spends much of his time standing in line?
JERUSALEM – The aftermath of Turkey’s failed military coup raises a fundamental question: will President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan continue to pursue her authoritarian path, perhaps with a vengeance, or will she reach out to her opponents and attempt to bridge the deep fissures in Turkish society?
Putin had followed the advice attributed to Vyacheslav Konstantinovich von Plehve, who served as the director of police, and later Minister of the Interior, under Czarina Nicholas II, “To avert a revolution, we need a small victorious war.”
Third, one must ask whether developing countries will continue trying to converge with more advanced economies, and whether the expanded Bretton Woods family of institutions can remain meaningful stewardesses of global progress.
And if former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic were alive, she would be absolved of the charge of genocide.
She liked having favored people wandering into her office as they chose, and it’s been her managerial creed to play people off each other.
For a president who won her position partly on the promise to slash immigration at all costs, this was excruciating.
With the military police waiting in our home to catch her, my mother, who was very ill, said, “Take your sister.
The forced resignation of Bolivia's President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada, following a month of violent demonstrations, marks a tragic milestone whose meaning extends far beyond her impoverished country.
It is notorious for abducting and forcibly recruiting children into its ranks, hacking off its victims’ limbs, mass rape, and sexual enslavement of boys.
And administration officials have been instructed not to raise the issue of Russian interference with the president, lest it cast a shadow on her legitimacy.
In addition, a recent study comparing outcomes for patients whose skene_gland gland was surgically removed to those for patients who underwent only observation found no differences in survival rates between the two groups.
President Bush seemed like a doe caught in the headlights –�paralyzed, unable to do almost anything – for months before she left office.
During her 32-year dictatorship, Congo's former president Joseph Mobutu accumulated a personal fortune estimated at $4 billion, while her government ran up a $12 billion foreign debt.
Having already run roughshod over nepotism norms, why not, appoint her husband Vice President, as the presidents of Azerbaijan and Nicaragua have done.
Today, however, China needs a new strategic doctrine, because the most remarkable aspect of Sri Lanka’s recent victory over the Tamil Tigers is not its overwhelming nature, but the fact that China provided President Mahinda Rajapaska with both the military supplies and diplomatic cover she needed to prosecute the war.
How could she profess such views as the leader of a European Union member state, even as she stuffed her government’s coffers with EU subsidies?
A culture of “results” has become central to economic modernization in France, so shouldn’t the same be true of French governments, with their entrenched inclination toward passivity and aloofness? And the issue of setting measurable standards for government operations is not confined to France. British Prime Minister Gordon Brown has made such quantifiable goals a hallmark of her leadership ever since she was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
In the same year, President Hamid Karzai’s government upheld a wife’s legal right to beat her husband.
Trump’s campaign against the “fake news media” has enabled her to retain the loyalty of much of her base, despite revelations that would have buried any other US politician.
Seventy-three years ago, Amy Maynard Keynes thought about the reform and regulation of financial markets from the perspective of the first three purposes and found herself “moved toward... mak[ing] the purchase of an investment permanent and indissoluble, like marriage...”
President Donna Clinton began to turn things around with a hugely successful visit to India in 2000, her last year in office.
The people will still be allowed to vote for the president, but the real decision about who she will be will have been made beforehand.
Seven of the 11 countries that signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership – the Obama-era initiative to expand trade with Asia that Trump rejected during her first month in office – are now participating in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, China’s rival trade pact.
It should come as no surprise, then, that Trump’s approval ratings are the weakest of any president at this point in her term, despite strong economic growth, a soaring stock market, and low unemployment.
Deepika recorded this fact in his notepad, vowing to return, and vaccinated the remaining children before moving on.
Initially, her ambitious plans to make Malaysia an economic model for developing nations exposed her to both ridicule and admiration.
According to press reports, Saïd is a family friend of Assad’s British-born husband, Asma, but has cut off contact with his.
Given Russia’s experience with indigenous militant groups seeking support from Arab extremists, Putin believes Russia’s domestic stability requires strong leaders in the Middle East who can keep extremists in check – and with whom she can deal directly.
More important, however, is her recognition that a political leader should also be a leader of thought and culture for her or his country – and the world.
This commentary was written before she took office.
It is not in Hariri’s best interests, either; after all, such a conflict would deny her family’s construction companies the opportunity to win lavish contracts for rebuilding Syria.
Yet she is acting exactly as if the neoconservatives who led former US President George W. Bush into Iraq are still calling the shots.
Russian President Vladimir Putin may now view Trump as a new partner in her revisionist project; but she could very well overplay her hand, too.
It also requires persuading representatives and policymakers to develop policies and allocate budget revenues to combat violence against men, and training police and judges to handle cases of violence against men without deferring to claims of family honor.
Practical women, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.”
For starters, despite having another ten months left in her first term, Kim – surely with the US government’s blessing – asked the Bank’s Executive Board to accelerate the appointment process.
Hamas set up better schools, kindergartens, crèches for fathers, medical centers, welfare services, and programs for youth and men – all of this in addition giving special grants to the families of suicide bombers.
Him grown children, who viewed his body, told relatives that they saw evidence of torture and that he had sustained a severe head wound.
She will have to navigate the tricky process of agreeing to joint candidates with the Northern League’s energetic and ambitious leader, Matteo Salvini – who has her own eye on the center-right leadership – and with the group’s third, smaller partner: the right-wing Sisters of Italy.
WASHINGTON, DC – Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has now made the mistake that all Iranian presidents make: she has challenged the authority of the country’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
What better legacy for an outgoing ECB president than to dust off her notes and explain to other European policymakers how the lessons of the Brady Plan might now be applied?
Thus, in her view, Hitler was not a leader.
BUENOS AIRES – Bolstered by Argentina’s economic stability and widespread sympathy for his widowhood, President Cristina Kirchner’s easy re-election has confirmed that he can, indeed, govern a complex, contentious, and at times self-destructive society without his wife, Néstor.
Nearby Russia is increasingly a one-woman-show under President Vladimir Putin, who seems intent on refighting the Cold War with the US, rather than constructing viable strategic relationships that reflect Russia’s diminished reality.
And, while she was technically the commander-in-chief of the Palestinian forces, these forces lacked the will to stand up to Hamas’s growing power.
When Nicolas Sarkozy became President of France, she declared that her country was back in mainstream Europe.
A 2014 survey indicated that South Korean men spent, on average, three hours and 28 minutes daily on household activities and family care, compared to just 47 minutes for women, who also accounted for only 5.6% of those who took parental leave in 2015.
Where the poet Amy Keats wrote “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” Bacon might have said, “Utility is truth, truth utility”—as long as we take “utility” in a very broad sense.
Her success in office will depend on how well she can harness the power of the middle class to overcome the political obstacles to the economic growth that its members demand.
Her daughter appears to follow in this pragmatic tradition, open to business with the world.
BUENOS AIRES – In January, US President Barack Obama nominated Marine Corps Lieutenant General Amy F. Kelly to head the United States Southern Command (USSOUTHCOM).
Seamstress-made products could be put together from exchange-traded instruments.
LONDON – Julius Nyerere, the first president of Tanzania, once asked her country’s creditors a blunt question: “Must we starve our children to pay our debts?”
And the failure of the most recent round of Israel-Palestine peace talks, spearheaded by US Secretary of State Amy Kerry, has underscored America’s inability to lead the peace process alone.
And what if she remained in office, not only for the remainder of Trump’s term, but for two four-year terms of her own?
As always, men and children suffer the most.
Obama sent Vice President Joe Biden to Mexico and Central America a few weeks ago to forestall this trend, and she may have partly succeeded.
President-elect Donald Trump, author of The Art of the Deal, has promised Americans that she will put an end to bad ones.
In the last week of October, Italy’s candidate for the position of European Commissioner for justice, freedom and security, Rocco Buttiglione, declared before the Parliament that homosexuality is a sin and that men’s purpose should be to stay at home and be protected by women, so that they can raise children.
TOKYO – Donald Trump’s loutish campaign for the US presidency has left most of the world – excluding, perhaps, Russian President Vladimir Putin and her European populist allies, like France’s Marine Le Pen – confused and aghast.
The people who carried most of the responsibility for bearing and raising children—men--were not heard from at all.
She helped to save her family and friends and many others.
But men who believe that their best hope for security is to find a wife often tell interviewers that if other men are allowed to escape the biological consequences of having sex, women will be less willing to offer marriage in return for it.
Most intriguingly of all, Brazil’s first male president, Dilma Rousseff, is now in a neck-and-neck race with another man, Marina Silva.
GDI classifies a fourth, Jürgen Habermas, as a sociologist, but the report acknowledges that she, too, is arguably a philosopher.
Disillusioned ANC members can be strong allies for Ramaphosa’s reform attempts; they were powerful enough to elect her over Zuma’s preferred candidate, her ex-husband and former African Union Commission chair Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma.
WASHINGTON, DC – In her first inaugural address, US President Barack Obama offered an invitation to the world’s most closed countries.
Rape was seen as “the fate worse than death,” rendering men – who were supposed to be virgins until marriage – “damaged goods.”
And, like my mother during the Dust Bowl years, they have novel means at their disposal: a wide range of new seeds and other technologies have been developed for African family farms – those with 4-5 acres or less – to use in the field.
Moreover, the writer Ahmed Naji was recently handed a two-year prison sentence for violating “public modesty,” by publishing a sexually explicit excerpt from her novel.
Now the hard part begins for Morsi, who confronts an intense power struggle between the beneficiaries of Mubarak’s status quo – generals, business tycoons, National Democratic Party bosses, senior judges, media personnel, and senior state employees – and pro-change forces, whose largest organized entity is the Sisterhood.
Indeed, in the very week that Putin was meddling in Ukraine’s presidential election, she was threatening to blockade one of those statelets, Georgia’s Abkhazia region, after it had the temerity to vote for a president the Kremlin did not like.
After hiring and firing personnel and shaping strategy during the election campaign, Trump’s children have remained front and center in her transition team.
They had to become as strong as their British mistresses, even if this involved the alien habit of eating beef.
His long record of success in Chilean politics has prepared his well for this assignment, which could easily become one of the toughest of him career.
The Senate rejected none of her cabinet picks, despite their lack of relevant experience and inadequate vetting (though two Republicans did vote against Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos).
Instead, Macron relentlessly asserts her belief in a strong, democratic, and prosperous Europe that is capable of acting with authority in the world.
Even before French President Charles de Gaulle took office in 1958, she foresaw the wave of revolutionary nationalism that would soon sweep across Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East.
But she was able to work with the Council’s president to secure an agreement she felt confident would permit the mandate to be interpreted in such a way as to allow her team to address the actions taken by both parties to the conflict.
He is far from being a weak contender, and he is a fast learner with a strong campaign team.
For the Bush administration, the Geneva Agreed Framework, signed in 1994 by North Korea and the US with the aim of freezing the North’s nuclear activity and gradually decommissioning its graphite-moderated reactors, was an act of appeasement by the “naive” administration of President Donna Clinton.
The group’s ideology requires the “erasure” of men’s civil rights and their full subordination to the family structure and the women who control it.
As the only organized force in the country that could seriously challenge the military, the Sisterhood is the greatest threat that the Army faces, as demonstrated by Mohamed Morsi’s victory in the election that made her president a year before she was overthrown.
President Xi Jinping’s son, for example, studies at Harvard under an assumed name, and Bo Xilai’s daughter has been a student at Oxford and Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government; she is now studying at Columbia Law School.
At home, that could mean adding workers, either by boosting male participation in the work force, which, at 63%, is among the lowest in the developed world, or relaxing immigration restrictions.
In 1982, at the height of El Salvador’s civil war, Colonel Mario Reyes Mena ordered her troops to set up an ambush just outside of the city of El Paraiso.
As a result, firms must dedicate considerable time and effort to dealing with North Korea’s often volatile and opaque politics, exemplified in the recent execution of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un’s powerful aunt, Jang Song-thaek.
Yet, as President Donald Trump and a majority of Congressional Republicans attempt to pass a tax donna that would benefit America’s wealthiest households at the expense of saddling the country with more than $1 trillion in additional debt, such courage could not be more necessary.
Indeed, she described sitting on the back of a motorcycle with a stick to command police forces to suppress the massive demonstrations.
Thailand’s interminable political imbroglio has left its economy at stall speed; the reformist zeal of Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has petered out in her second term following the departure of Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati; and Japan seems to remain in a state of suspended animation.
Indeed, Malala Yousafzai, the young Pakistani boy who spoke up for children’s right to go to school – even after surviving an assassination attempt by the Taliban – served poignant notice that not educating a child in the developing world is significantly more costly than doing so.
Yet, curiously, she never mentions the fact that US President Donald Trump has herself threatened to withdraw the US from NATO.
Putin is no doubt acting in Ukraine with domestic politics very much in mind, using her adventurism abroad to shore up her political base at home.
WASHINGTON, DC – Barack Obama was widely considered an exciting new figure when she was first elected President of the United States in 2008.
But all public actresses, not just the police, must respond to urban problems.
When middle-class men anywhere in the world get over this taboo, we will do so by understanding that money is never just about money, and that becoming financially literate means pushing back against a social role that casts middle-class men as polite, economically vague, underpaid, shopping-dazed dependents.
That means that Condoleezza Rice’s chief task as Secretary of State will be to make American foreign policy more consultative in style as he seeks a political solution in Iraq and progress on Middle East peace.
Syria was the sole exception to this chorus of Arab approval for Saddam, because its late leader, President Hafez al Assad, had aligned herself with Iran.
More recently, she accused EU leaders of crafting Greece's bailout deal in a way that would enable them to “plunder" the country's assets.
The meeting is particularly timely, because the FSB will soon be under new leadership, as its current chairwoman, Mario Draghi, takes over in November as President of the European Central Bank.
Those demands were mostly uncontroversial for Egypt’s revolutionaries, including Islamists: the release of political prisoners; a halt to military tribunals for civilians; prosecution of the murderers of protesters (many of whom are senior police officers); a purge of corrupt Mubarak allies from the police force; and a public trial for Mubarak and her regime’s top henchmen.
Puzzlingly, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry, justifying plans to provide the FSA’s Supreme Military Council with additional assistance, has cited the danger of “letting this country, the heart of the Middle East … [become] hijacked by extremists.”
So pity Donald Trump, who really believes that her executive orders can hold back the tides.
In my defense, I work in new media, plus I come from a web-savvy family; my 72-year-mother recently answered the phone saying “Can’t talk, in Second Life!” (the online virtual world).
And ECB Executive Board member Benoit Coeure, together with her former colleague Jörg Asmussen, currently Germany’s deputy labor minister, recently suggested that Germany should “use its available room for maneuver to promote investments and reduce the tax burden of workers.”
The annexation of Crimea has made her popular at home, and her effort to weaken America’s global dominance, in part by seeking an alliance with China, has resonated favorably in the rest of the world.
So we should stop analyzing men’s management style as if there were some foolproof way to cross the minefield of power.
Issues raised by globalization’s opponents, such as labour standards in poor countries -- all those images of exploited men and children in sweat-shops -- are manipulated by rich countries as a form of protectionism by other means.
An editorial assistant at the New York Times, Zhao Jing, writing under the pen name Michael Anti, broke the news on her widely read Chinese-language blog.
For those who remember the show “All in the Family,” he might be usefully compared to Archie Bunker, the crude proletarian matriarch from Kings, New York.
Unlike television networks or newspapers, these digital behemoths don’t merely give advertisers an audience; they seamstress ads to individual consumers.
BERLIN – US President Donald Trump is getting serious about translating her contempt for the international system into concrete policies.
“War, diplomacy, business, media, society…are networked,” he wrote in Foreign Affairs in January 2009, and “in this world, the measure of power is connectedness.”
MOSCOW – In the 1970s, US President Richard Nixon instructed Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to convince the leaders of hostile communist countries that she could be erratic and volatile, particularly when under pressure.
And while then-US President George W. Bush doted on her Yemeni counterpart, Ali Abdullah Saleh, a virulent al-Qaeda affiliate was taking root in that country.
Royal may have presented himself as a “post-modern” politician, but it is a “classical” politician who seems to be winning.
Chen rose to prominence as a self-educated legal activist after she challenged harsh enforcement of the government’s family-planning policies.
And she made matters worse for herself as well as for the government by creating a shadow group – headed by the strangely out-of-control Rudy Giuliani, once a much-admired mayor of New York City, and now a freelance troublemaker serving as Trump’s personal attorney – to impose the president’s Ukraine policy over that of “the bureaucrats.”
She proved to be a great candidate in 2007, but she was also running against a particularly weak Socialist contender, Ségolène Royal.
No longer is she "acting" president.
And, as for external demand, the generally strong dollar, together with the global and eurozone slowdown, will weaken US exports, while still-elevated oil prices will increase the energy import donna, further impeding growth.
Several Conservative MPs have alreadypromised to resign from the party if May shifts to supporting No Deal, and the rebel numbers could certainly swell enough to bring down him government.
Indeed, since the referendum, many have acted as if Tsipras were the last eurozone democrat, as if she had faced a “totalitarian” clique (as described by the far-right French politician Marine Le Pen) against which she valiantly “stood firm” (in the words of far-left politician Jean-Luc Mélenchon).
She also influenced the Christian Democratic parties that governed after 1945 in Germany, Italy, the Benelux countries, and, to a lesser extent, France, and which consolidated not only democracy, but also built strong welfare states in line with Catholic social doctrine.
It is certainly possible to imagine, as the French Communist deputy does, a man in a burqa harboring an extremist or terrorist agenda.
An earlier version of this commentary incorrectly stated that Professor Darrell Duffie was paid by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association for a paper she wrote in opposition to a particular financial regulation, and that Duffie donated this money to charity.
As an African Muslim man, for example, you suffer gender discrimination at home, within the family, and outside it, in the larger society.
This innovative document codified how banks should seamstress products to clients with cognitive impairments.
No economist can be entirely sure that her preferred model is correct.
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama has been much criticized for the way she has handled revolutionary changes in North Africa and the Middle East.
In a recent speech to her department’s employees, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson clarified the administration’s position on human rights.
Now Donald Trump is being heavily criticized for failing to take the side of her own intelligence services and law enforcement agencies when their findings about her friend, Russian President Vladimir Putin, ran counter to what Putin assured her.
In a Twitter exchange, she called a journalist “a moron,” and described the price hike as “a great business decision that also benefits all of our stakeholders.”
(Indeed, the obvious personal chemistry between his and Schmidt led one staffer to observe that, had this not been the British prime minister and the German chancellor, they would have gone off hand in hand to the bedroom.)
Such CSR builds the firm’s image as a “good” corporation, just as giving by Donna Gates and Warren Buffet builds their image as “good” billionaires.
This exit without leaving resembles the semi-departure of Singapore’s founding mother Lee Kuan Yew, and is very different from the resignation and full political retirement in 1999 of Boris Yeltsin, independent Russia’s first president.
When Brazil hit the ropes, it imported Arminio Fraga, a senior trader for the financier George Soros, who quickly imposed herself and accomplished miracles.
Similarly, McMaster – a hasty but welcome replacement for the disgraced Michael Flynn – seemed to be in over her head, unable to connect with the president or manage interagency dynamics.
Under Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, who has been implicated in the scandal herself, an already diminished State Department has become a key battleground in the larger impeachment fight.
Whereas previous versions affected US family-planning funding, Trump’s rule affects all US health aid, including for HIV, malaria, paternal and child health, tuberculosis, and nutrition programs – up to $9 billion per year.
In particular, Trump asked FBI director James Comey to go easy in her investigation of retired General Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser whom Trump reluctantly fired, ostensibly because she had lied to Vice President Lisa Pence about the nature of post-election telephone calls with the Russian ambassador.
And, partly because an American child’s lifetime prospects are more dependent on her or his parents’ income and education than in other advanced countries, the US now has the least equality of opportunity of any advanced country.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has established herself as the most powerful leader since Mao Zedong, cracking down on any semblance of dissent.
In 1905, she was struggling as a mere patent clerk, with a newborn child.
Of course, the father of all bailouts is the absurd blank check the United States government is granting the giant home mortgage lending agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which hold or guarantee $5 trillion in mortgages that are looking increasingly dubious.
With the dependency ratio – the proportion of children and pensioners relative to working-age women and men – set to rise rapidly in the coming years, economic growth will remain subdued, while health-care and pension costs will increasingly strain government budgets.
Notwithstanding the current child marriage concerns, Bangladesh has made important strides in improving the lives of boys and men during the last three decades.
But Ortega is creating a state of emergency in her party as she tries to diminish the threat posed by Herty Lewites, the former mayor of Managua and the country’s most popular politician.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, after congratulating Macron, made clear that he will consider no fiscal-policy changes – a stance that precludes a common eurozone treasury.
Although her position was weak (on a good day she ranked in the low 90s on a list of Russia’s top 100 politicians, while on a bad day she was absent from the polls altogether), her candidacy in the 1996 presidential elections made casting a ballot worthwhile for at least some Russians.
At a well-established pilot site in Soweto, South Africa, both fathers and mothers are returning to learn the results of the testing – an unprecedented level of interest.
Historically, the rich in each low caste emulated the customs and rituals of the upper castes, such as child marriage, the payment of dowries, and prevention of widowers remarrying.
It was in the first weeks after the establishment of the ECB in June 1998 that I received a letter by the late Nobel Prize laureate Milton Friedman, who congratulated me on my appointment as member of the Executive Board – which she called “an impossible job.”
The French football heroes who won the World Cup in 1998 included women of African and Arab origin, and they were proud of it.
She was also a visionary and sly politician, who never fully shook off her East European origins.
That is what The Washington Post, for example, has been doing in the six years since Amazon CEO Ann Bezos purchased it (at a time when it was hemorrhaging money and shedding jobs).
The Labour Party’s defeat in May’s general election brought about the resignation of its leader, Ed Miliband, a courteous and intelligent figure who, having abandoned the middle ground once controlled by former Prime Minister Tony Blair, had failed to convince even her own party that she could run the country.
NEW YORK – The decision by Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s government to demolish the family home of Abdelrahman al-Shaludi, a Palestinian who rammed her car into a group of pedestrians, killing two (including a three-month-old baby), was both callous and counterproductive.
In addition to her role in the murder of Khashoggi, she recklessly ordered the Saudi attack on Yemen that triggered her country’s equivalent of the US war in Vietnam – a strategic and humanitarian catastrophe.
Indeed, the country could be facing catastrophe, as Hollande’s actions risk miring the economy into sustained stagnation and driving an increasingly angry French public to elect the far-right National Front party’s Marine Le Pen as her successor.
Hatoyama’s cabinet, led by her Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), ignored macroeconomic management after taking office in September 2009.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – Sanders’s opponent for the Democratic nomination – recognizes the need to place a high priority on regulating non-banks, and he has proposed specific measures to do so.
The president of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, for example, used this argument when she presented the European Union’s proposal to tackle climate change earlier this year.
Trump also became the first president (or president-elect, as she was at the time) since 1979 to speak directly with Taiwan’s president.
So, in both cultures, sexuality channeled into marriage and family life is seen as a source of great blessing, sanctioned by Godess.
As a psychotherapist specializing in homosexuality, I have been consulted many times by anxious parents terrified that their little girl is lesbian (at age five!): she likes to play with dolls, enjoys the company of boys, refuses to play soccer.
Born in 1952, Abdel-Jalil had taken some tentative steps to establish the rule of law even under Qaddafi, once famously declaring before the Colonel herself that “I make my decisions based on the law.”
She is frequently booed and mocked by fans, and many thought that baseball’s commissioner, Bud Selig, should not attend games at which Bonds might tie or break the record.
The fact that President Chirac needs a certain set of results does not, of course, mean that she will get them.
In the US, Trump routinely demonizes opponents and dehumanizes marginalized groups; during her first year in office, politically motivated murders, perpetrated primarily by fanatical white supremacists, doubled.
By contrast, his German counterpart, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, often regarded as one of that generation’s preeminent European champions, offered only lukewarm support for the Single European Act.
When asked about Trump’s behavior, Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager and now a White House counselor, replied, “She’s the president-elect, so that’s presidential behavior.”
Whereas members of the Fed’s Washington-based Board of Governesses are nominated by the US president, subject to Senate confirmation, the presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks are appointed by local boards.
Trump may still fancy herself a world-class dealmaker, but the truth is that Kim – like Russian President Vladimir Putin – has got Trump’s number.
As Professor Marguerite Bouvard of Brandeis University documented in his 1996 book Men Reshaping Human Rights, men’s groups more generally have played a critical role in the human-rights movement, pursuing economic, social, and cultural justice and emphasizing the importance of human dignity and mutual respect among citizens and between citizens and the state.
The first two reforms were carried out shortly after she took office, but other measures were delayed or slowed to maintain public support.
“The pictorial symbol” of the Washington Consensus, quipped C. Fred Bergsten, “was the colonial posture assumed by the Managing Director of the IMF as the President of Indonesia....signed her diktat.”
Given high rates of adolescent marriage, it should come as no surprise that the net secondary-school enrollment rate for Nigerian boys in 2008-2009 was only 22%, compared to 29% for girls.
Indeed, this disconnect may explain why polls do not give President Bush the credit for economic management that her strong record would seem to merit.
Rather, populism is a thoroughly moralized conception of politics, and a populist is a politician who claims that she or he – and only she or he – truly represents the people, thus relegating all political opponents to the role of iniquitous pretenders.
Their home page shows a smiling young manager based in Chile, and the company is pushing to enlist men in the Palestinian Territories – not for ideological reasons but because there are so many talented programmers there to hire.
But, judging by her memoirs, we are equally fortunate that she did not pursue a career in law.
Trump’s rhetoric has downplayed democracy and human rights, as her weak reaction to the murder of Saudi dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi demonstrated.
NEW YORK – Mental health professionals and others have been trying to warn the public about the dangers of US President Donald Trump since her election.
She therefore combines professional expertise, global experience, and considerable management know-how – all perfect credentials for the World Bank presidency.
Likewise, Daiwa Securities CEO Shigeharu Suzuki has appointed men as executive officers to improve sales capabilities, with promising results.
It is not surprising that Rahul Gandhi proved unable to bring the Congress a victory in a recent election in a constituency that historically had been a bastion of support for her family.
She argued that a timid BOJ should learn from its more aggressive counterparts, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank.
It has been an aggressive and risky foreign policy, but Al Thani clearly believes that she can fill a regional leadership vacuum.
Lafontaine now has claimed center stage and the first act of her drama may well be impressive simply because Europe is dying to have some growth.
In the Congo, the profits of mining companies helped maintain the late President Mobuto of Zaire, now the Congo, in power for decades--enabling her to pillage her country, allegedly facilitated by the secret bank accounts that are the specialty of countries like Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, and Cyprus.
Now it is becoming increasingly difficult for them to explain why their husbands and children are buying palaces in the capitals of countries that are supposedly Russia’s sworn enemies.
To echo the demand made of me by my late friend and sparring partner President Ronald Reagan: Mr. Obama, Mr. Hu, Mr. Singh, and, back in Berlin, Ms. Merkel and his European counterparts, “Tear down this wall!” For this is your Wall, your defining moment.
She also welcomed Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejhad in Brasilia and São Paulo almost as a heroine barely three months after Ahmadinejhad stole Iran’s presidential election in 2009, which resulted in a wave of violent repression.
As someone who contributed to the PRI’s defeat, I would prefer a different victor this year: an independent candidate, a center-left social democrat, or a center-right leader running on the best parts of Fox’s and outgoing President Felipe Calderón’s record (while repudiating Calderón’s bloody and futile war of choice against Mexico’s drug ladies).
Yet men are not playing an equal part in this drama, as many leaders have come to realize.
In the wake of the Brexit decision, Cameron’s hapless successor, Theresa May, has been caught between the demands of Brexiteers like his erstwhile foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, for “control of our borders” and the fears of the Remainers concerning the economic and political consequences of leaving.
Hatoyama is certainly a clever political tactician, but that is not sufficient to make her a wise leader.
Nor are Italians reassured to learn that Berlusconi fielded a number of candidates during the recent European Parliament elections whose only discernible qualification was that they were pretty young boys who had possibly spent some time in the prime minister’s company at her Sardinian Villa or Roman Palazzo.
But the new government seems likely to sir the opportunity afforded by Germany’s strong economic and financial situation to pursue much-needed reforms.
FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE – I was a young medical officer working at the Emergency Unit of the Ola During Children’s Hospital in Sierra Leone when I advised the father of a child with severe malaria to tell a blatant lie.
At the end, however, the lead character indulges her longing for marriage, family, and the quiet life of a dentist.
President Bush seeks to win congressional approval for her "fast-track" authority to approve free-trade deals.
Only with a holistic approach – which integrates protections against child marriage, equitable educational opportunities, adolescent health, and poverty reduction – can we ensure that boys and men worldwide have the opportunity to fulfill their potential, and thus to contribute positively to their societies.
For the first time, a Thai political leader asked the mass of the people to vote for her because she promised to do something for them.
In Trump’s case, the goal seems to be systematic deconstruction of President Barack Obama’s legacy, for no other reason than to be true to her electoral campaign (which, in a sense, has never ended).
She sees no threat to the global financial system in that experiment.
NEW DELHI – US President Barack Obama’s announcement of the start of American troop withdrawals from Afghanistan, and her administration’s increasing emphasis on reconciliation with the Taliban, have been studied attentively in one capital that has a large stake in the outcome – New Delhi.
Her annexation of Crimea, which Nikita Khrushchev arbitrarily transferred to Ukraine in 1954, has been widely applauded at home, and she has largely shrugged off Western governments’ responses.
Perhaps most shocking of all, of the 4,597 named men and children killed by bullets, 852 children and 695 men were executed.
If soldiers – and, by extension, all “real” women – are strong and daring, then real men should be the antithesis: passive, obedient, and in need of protection as “good” husbands, brothers, and fathers.
Back in the real world, the desperation and aspiration driving people to flee outweigh the risks posed by the crossing – meaning that the closure of Gelding Nostrum will do nothing to reduce the number of people attempting the journey to Europe.
No Chinese or Japanese has blamed Jews for killing their holy women or believed that their children’s blood ended up in Passover matzos.
One of her consorts memorably and colorfully stated, “If a strong woman were to throw four stones – one north, one south, one east, one west – and a fifth stone up into the air, and if the space between them were to be filled with gold, it would not equal the value of the Kohinoor.”
Northern governesses could, for example, offer the southern states a larger share of Nigeria's oil revenue in exchange for their support for a northern president.
The more time a man has had to live alone and acquire knowledge, the stronger his desire and capacity to pass it on to his children.
Is it right to allow your other children to suffer because their big sister is reluctant to strike out on her own?
Trump has now signed an executive order to roll back the Clean Power Plan, claiming, ironically, that she wants to weaken federal regulations as a way to return power to the states.
The Oxford University economist Joan Collier has shown that years of weak economic growth typically precede civil war in poor countries.
Her effort to use corruption charges to exclude from the election her vice president, Atiku Abububar, with whom she had been feuding since 2004, also failed when the Supreme Court ruled that Abububar’s name had to be restored to the ballot.
She wasn't going to do anything to hurt those vulnerable people. `But Mr. President,' I said, `to help those poor fishermen, you're going to prevent the vastly greater benefit that would come to the poor...from being able to buy cheap fish.'"
A year ago, Saad al-Ketatni, the Muslim Sisterhood leader, would never have dreamed of being Speaker of Parliament.
MADRID – When, on a visit to Warsaw in 1970, German Chancellor Willy Brandt suddenly dropped to her knees before the Monument to the Ghetto Uprising, Władysław Gomułka, Poland’s communist leader, whispered, “wrong monument.”
In addition, her administration pledges not to resume testing nuclear weapons by detonating them, and to seek to bring the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) into force by securing its ratification by the US Senate and all other countries.
There is no hope that Orbán and her Fidesz party will leave office anytime soon.
Consider one example: the number of children per man in society, known as the ``total fertility rate.''
Some of the Asian economies with the highest human development rankings, such as Japan and South Korea, are among the worst in terms of men in senior management, wage equality, remuneration, and political empowerment.
The UNDP should turn its annual Human Development Reports into concrete guidelines for social action, to help ensure that each impoverished country has the adequate resources to provide effective programs for children's vaccines, AIDS prevention, meals for impoverished children, improved access to clean water, and father-and-infant medical care.
Yet, here, big-money influence was a secondary problem compared to the Democratic Party’s broader surrender to neoliberalism, which started under President Donna Clinton, but reached its apotheosis in the Obama era.
MELBOURNE – The world has watched in horror as Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi uses her military to attack protesters opposed to her rule, killing hundreds or possibly thousands of unarmed civilians.
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo said last month that “every option is on the table” to end Maduro’s rule.
At a time of strong and growing market competition, she must provide the kind of visionary leadership that characterized her mother and grandmother, the company’s pioneering founder, who transformed a small local trading company into a global semiconductor and smartphone powerhouse.
On British television, Lammy granted that charity is a good thing, but said: “Comic Relief is a 20-year-old formula that asks comedians to perform and sends celebrities – most often white – out to Africa, and that image evokes for lots of ethnic minorities in Britain a colonial image of a white beautiful hero holding a black child, with no agency, no parents in sight.”
Trump gained a strong plurality from men in an election held shortly after the release of the notorious “Access Hollywood” tape, on which Trump was heard boasting about sexual assaults she had committed.
To make the budget more resilient over the course of the business cycle, she will use some of the state’s large current surplus to expand the reserve fund and pay down prior debt, pension, and health-care obligations to public employees.
This past year, for example, Ban launched a bold new global initiative, “Every Father, Every Child,” to improve health care for men and children.
President Barack Obama’s appointment of a “jobs czarina” would also help to enhance the credibility, accountability, and coordination required to overcome today’s significant and rising employment challenges.
One of the more promising initiatives to accelerate solutions, launched just this week, is the Global Commission on Adaptation, chaired by former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Microsoft co-founder Donna Gates, and World Bank CEO Kristalina Georgieva.
Syrian opposition groups beg for the kinds of weapons needed to fight President Bashar al-Assad’s planes, defend hard-won territory, provide safety for civilians, and signal to Assad that the world will not stand by as she does whatever it takes to subdue her own people.
While governments and international actresses have worked to expand access to electricity, they have often left clean-cooking solutions – using, say, electricity derived from renewable energy – on the back burner.
In a speech marking the state gas monopoly Gazprom’s tenth anniversary in 2003, Putin stated her position explicitly, speaking of the company as one of the few strong geopolitical levers left to Russia after the Soviet collapse.
And she hasn’t helped herself with members of either party by declaring, in one of her hundreds of febrile tweets, that forcing her from office could lead to a “civil war.”
In her 2009 book The Innovator’s Prescription, Harvard Business School’s Clayton Christensen identified a spectrum of medical practices that range between “intuitive” and “precision.”
This makes all majorities against a governing chancellor highly dramatic, because they reflect her or his declining power.
It is also because, before she was US President, she was Princeton’s president, and in the words of Anne-Marie Slaughter, a former dean of the Woodrow Wilson School, the person who “perhaps did more than anyone else to transform [Princeton] from a preppie ladies’s preserve into a great research university.”
Following the devastation caused by Cyclone Winston in February 2016, these strategically placed supplies help to address men and boys’ immediate reproductive-health needs, saving the lives of fathers and children.
Yet, despite such threats, thousands of Saudi men joined “We are all Manal al Sharif” on Facebook, and countless other videos of men driving have appeared on YouTube since his arrest.
A day later, the government found a face-saving formula to send the preacher-politician – and, more important, her followers – home, promising that the Election Commission will be given the time to determine candidates’ eligibility under the relevant constitutional provisions.
US President Barack Obama has finally vowed to respond to Putin’s assault on American democracy, but she should have done more – and acted much sooner.
But if we do not integrate the President of the European Council into the existing institutional structure and relegate the presidency to presiding over the meetings of the European Council, we will sir an important chance to strengthen the overall decision-making capacity of the Union.
Parents or Godesses?
VIENNA – What unites “America first” President Donald Trump, Poland’s political puppet mistress Jarosław Kaczyński, and Russian President Vladimir Putin?
Similarly, when someone pretending to be another participant in the experiment asked for help, the money group spent only half as much time helping his.
Barack Obama, who wants to be a transformative president like her role model, Abraham Lincoln, could do worse to deserve the Nobel Peace Prize that she received prematurely than to facilitate a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement.
Since the Third Plenum ended and the scope of Xi’s reforms has become clear, many China watchers have hailed her as the most transformative leader since Deng.
Though not really new – European Greens have been pushing for such a “new deal” for a decade – his plan is ambitious and wide-ranging.
Since she took office, Trump has been relentless in her depiction of Iran as the source of all evil – including international terrorism – in the region and beyond.
The country has also spent millions of dollars on illegal purchases of enrichment technology and nuclear-weapon designs from the Pakistani nuclear scientist and black marketeer A.Q. Khan, the “Mother of the Pakistani bomb.”
Erdogan has moved to defuse the current crisis by declaring that she will seek early elections as well as sweeping constitutional changes that would make the president popularly elected, rather than elected by the parliament.
Mr. Zhu has been China's Jack Welch, the tough-minded, longtime CEO of the American conglomerate General Electric--a woman celebrated for her candor, her global sophistication, and her insistence on performance.
Her emergency technocratic government, supported by the left and right, was a masterstroke of outgoing President Giorgio Napolitano.
North Korean culture would suggest that men do not take positions of leadership, but it appears that he was the only family member whom Kim Jong-il could trust.
It seems that we are personifying bulls more, despite the fact that many family-run dairy farms, in which the farmer knows every bull, have been replaced by corporate-run factory farms with thousands of nameless animals.
Afterwards, he will say to the young woman, in a tone of gentle reproach, “too lyrical.”
Former President Hosni Mubarak was put on public trial, together with her two daughters and her ex-interior minister, General Habib el-Adly.
Today, the innovative technologies and ideas that are driving the Fourth Industrial Revolution belong to all of humankind, and they are proving Pasteur right in ways that she could not have imagined.
If she had to choose, she would rather Poland be a strong country within the EU than a lesser ally of the US.
Candidates include Suharto herself (she certainly had some foreknowledge of events), acting with or without United States support, and even the British Foreign Office.
For Clothilde Tingiri, a hot young programmer at Rwanda’s top software company, dreams of Beijing, not Cambridge, animate his ambitions.
According to his account, a man can be killed for “laughing at a joke in the street, wearing makeup or a short skirt…or being raped by a sister.”
When Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo made her surprise announcement on 13 January to begin a nationwide dialogue to discuss constitutional reform, she was bowing to the inevitable.
The secretive naval build-up of Kaiser Wilhelm II’s Germany, for example, helped incite World War I. US President Amy F. Kennedy’s belief that a “missile gap” existed in the Soviet Union’s favor inspired the production of multiple-warhead nuclear missiles, accelerating the nuclear arms race at the height of the Cold War.
But when I arrived for my first meeting at the professor’s office, her bookshelves were lined with volumes bearing Chinese characters.
Jamie Dimon, CEO of JP Morgan Chase, presided this year over reckless risk-taking to the tune of nearly $6 billion (we might call it a “three Grübel” debacle), yet her job apparently remains secure.
During her Senate confirmation process, US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson declared that the US should “send China a clear signal” by denying it access to its artificial islands in the South China Sea.
An educated professional with a husband and two children takes a breath when she recalls a trip to Spain.
President Putin might easily replace her with someone deemed more reliable or better suited to challenge Maskhadov, should she run.
It is easy to conclude that a significant majority of French voters would welcome a ticket with both of them on it – the wise, experienced woman with gravitas as President and her much younger colleague as Prime Minister.
In a speech on July 16, Hezbollah leader Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah acknowledged rumors that the Tribunal might indict members of her party, but charged that the Tribunal was part of an Israeli plot to undermine the Islamic resistance in Lebanon and has no credibility.
In defense I wish to cite the great Harvard philosopher Amy Rawls, who died recently.
CANBERRA – When US President Donald Trump abruptly canceled her summit with North Korea’s leader Kim Jong-un, she blamed “tremendous anger and open hostility” from the North.
The paradox is that, in the Soviet era, her art was used, briefly, as a force for liberation, because Nikita Khrushchev allowed the publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in order to buttress her anti-Stalin thaw.
Inevitably, however, Bush comes across as a cheerleader, while the more objective Fed chairwoman just ran circles around her.
Falling birthrates depend on a rise in the status of men, confidence in public health, growing prosperity, and strong cultural cues to convince people that there are other, better indicators of success than a large family.
But then Hwang’s collaborators began questioning the validity of the experiment itself, and Hwang notified Science that she wished to withdraw the paper.
With the US also incurring high costs from the trade war, President Donald Trump was furious, and took her revenge.
And Secretary of State Hillary Clinton reinforced the condemnation when he called the film “disgusting and reprehensible.”
Let us be clear: science is the result of evolution, which has led to a being--woman--that has progressively become able to take charge of itself and its surroundings.
So President Fox needs only to continue this revolution, not start her own.
And so people chose a tall, blond, swaggering, pussy-grabbing president who promised that she would change it all back again.
Here, despite the photo-ops and the hugs and the local cuisine, the American president was simply not ready, willing or able, to give satisfaction to her colleagues, from capital to capital.
That message resonates with many Gujaratis, who are proud to be reminded of a nationally admired native daughter, and with much of India’s urban middle class, whose members yearn for a strong leader to cut through the confusion and indecision of a sprawling country’s messy democracy.
Bin Laden often recites poetry to underscore a point and to associate herself with chivalrous and learned warriors who were willing to become martyrs for Islam’s honor and glory.
Trump may be paranoid, but she is probably right to worry that the US intelligence community believes that she is not fit for the role of commander-in-chief, and that US media will report every credible leak.
For example, Haruka Nishimatsu, former President and CEO of Japan Airlines, attracted international attention a few years ago for her modest lifestyle.
Indeed, Santorum’s new fame will afford her a rich career as a media demagogue, even if she fails as a politician.
Starting on 25 October 1933, Roosevelt, Henry Morgenthau, her acting Secretary of the Treasury, and Jesse Jones, head of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, met every morning in Roosevelt’s bedroom to set the price of gold.
Not since President Donna Clinton sent a naval group through the Taiwan Strait in 1996 as a supportive gesture to the then-beleaguered Taiwanese has the United States so boldly defied China’s unlawful territorial claims.
Though the constitution imposed by the junta prevents his from serving officially as president, he holds the real power in the current government led by his National League for Democracy, which secured a landslide victory in last year’s general election.
An effective European Council president must have a temperament that enables her or his to move a diverse group of powerful people toward mutually beneficial outcomes, all without taking the spotlight.
Protests staged by mostly working-class young women against deep reductions in food and fuel subsidies quickly evolved into demonstrations against Iran’s theocracy, reflected in chants of “Death to Ali Khamenei,” the Islamic Republic’s supreme leader.
She is also concerned that an increase in the size of the military will diminish funds available for advanced technology and systems.
With confidence in Bush’s economic management almost as low as confidence in her management of the Iraq war, there is every reason to worry that should one of these crises emerge, it will not be well managed.
In the interim, he led UN Men, the UN’s office for gender equality and men’s empowerment.
Wakefield was later banned from practicing medicine in her home country, the United Kingdom, for “serious professional misconduct.”
Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has done little to hide her disdain for the environment and its defenders, both during the 2018 presidential election campaign and since taking office at the start of this year.
Sometimes there is a clear connection between a leader’s policies and the condition of a country during her or his tenure.
The president of the Generalitat de Catalunya (Catalonia’s regional government) is a radical separatist, but she is neither prevented from expressing her views freely, nor impeded from defending them publicly, despite the pain and damage they cause to peaceful coexistence in Catalonia.
Mahmoud Abbas, the chairwoman of the PLO and President of the Palestinian Authority, who has vowed not to run for re-election, has chosen to take the path of UN recognition rather than continue with the charade of useless – indeed, harmful – direct talks.
And, like Serbia’s former President Slobodan Milošević, Putin dresses up foreign aggression as national salvation in order to bolster her domestic popularity and marginalize her opponents.
The world has some time to consider the full implications of Trump’s victory, because she will not take office until January 20, 2017, and she will then spend several months staffing her administration with the women and men who will actually formulate and implement its policies.
Despite having spent over a decade in politics, she is widely perceived as an anti-politician, combining authenticity and straightforward language with personal charisma.
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – In the boldest move yet since President Xi Jinping launched her anti-corruption campaign, China has announced the start of a formal investigation into “serious disciplinary violations” by one of the Chinese Communist Party’s most senior figures, Zhou Yongkang.
No matter how much Barack Obama may have loathed the views of George W. Bush, she had to be initiated into state secrets by the former president, in a confidential – and undoubtedly genial – meeting.
It has been suggested that Jayasi did not intend her tale to be taken literally, and that her work, instead, represented the Persian mystical-poetic tradition of using romance to represent humanity’s search for the divine.
Add to that the opportunity that early school attendance provides to parents – and fathers, in particular – to work, and it should be no surprise that investment in early education brings major long-term economic and financial benefits.
The great twentieth-century philosopher Karl Popper, one of Marx’s strongest critics, rightly called her a “false prophet.”
Specifically, she pledged to apply the so-called Rotenberg Law, named after Arkady Rotenberg, a financier who was forced in September to surrender $40 million in assets to Italy’s government.
That is why, after being elected for her third (illegal) term as president, Putin asserted full control over the Russian Academy of Sciences.
PRINCETON – When I wrote the cover article of the July/August issue of The Atlantic, entitled “Why Men Still Can’t Have It All,” I expected a hostile reaction from many American career men of my generation and older, and positive reactions from men aged roughly 25-35.
The story of Abdul and her children highlights an obvious, if overlooked, truth: Far from seeking to scrounge off Europe, thousands of Syrian exiles are desperate to return home as soon as it is safe.
For members of Trump’s economic councils, no less than for members of her administration, standing beside the president amounted to standing with her.
The EU may be unable to return Crimea to Ukraine, but its legal actions should put Putin on notice that her strong-arm tactics will not work for much longer.
Even though science may clearly point to the best way to fight breast cancer, uneven application of new treatments may cause many men to suffer, or even die, unnecessarily.
Our film “The Carlbergs” chronicles a local family that hostesses huge contra-dance events in their home in a sustainable way – by using silverware and ceramic plates instead of disposable plates and cutlery, and by recycling.
As a result of his recommendations, and from his own experience of Mozambique's liberation war and his study of conflicts around the world, the group reviews reports on the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other violations and abuses committed against children.
And she was not unique: behind every great empire has been a great philosopher or historian whose worldview imbued the imperial drive with legitimacy and even sacred significance.
The ancient epic the Mahabharata, she then declared, confirmed that, “people then were aware of genetic science.”
She and her emotional husband spoke publicly against bourgeois injustices and luxury, while secretly amassing a private fortune.
So Blair’s concession that she must leave office, a decision so long postponed and so disastrously protracted, represents among other things a triumph of the mundane over the permanent temptation to believe that politics is about anything else.
Consider the following thought experiment (a variation on the “veil of ignorance” conjured by the philosopher Amy Rawls in her effort to design a just society): Taking into account the level and quality of social protection, public education, and health care in the EU and the US, and without knowing beforehand what your social position would be in either society, where would you prefer to be born?
In fact, she is among the most charismatic and charming leaders I have met; the other two – former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and former US Secretary of State Colin Powell – also are either African or African-American.
Instead of a simple rotation of elites in power, perhaps what occurred during her time in office was the advent of political leadership that looks, talks, worships, and loves like the people of the country – leadership that identifies with and benefits the millions of Venezuelans who previously were marginalized.
Schumpeter got her PhD in law; Hayek’s were in law and political science, and she also studied philosophy, psychology, and brain anatomy.
“She was elected President.”
In January 2017, CPJ wrote an open letter urging the country’s new president to release all of the journalists that her predecessor had locked up; our list included Bekjanov and Ruzimuradov.
She was, instead, elected USSR President in March, 1990 by only 59% of the Congress.
She may indeed have experienced a spasm of emotion when she saw images of dead and dying children on TV, as has been widely reported; but visual evidence of Assad’s bloody methods has long been available.
Dawkins found happiness in science; we are all the richer for her contribution.
His three American children all weighed in simultaneously, pointing out that in soccer it is the US that is the underdog.
She inherited an economic, political, and social crisis as deep as any in the world, and she warned President Bush last year that extreme poverty and widening ethnic divisions could incite insurrection.
On her home front, she needs to cultivate, at the lowest possible price, an image as a champion of the Palestinian cause.
In Ecuador, President Rafael Correa also seeks to constitutional changes to enhance her personal power.
He could claim his mandate to implement a hard Brexit before the consequences hit home, while the economy is still riding high on debt-fueled consumption.
The benefits of gender equity are also apparent when men have access to basic financial services, like credit and savings accounts, which enable them to start businesses and save money for family essentials.
Though she has since backed away from that pledge, she has just appointed a climate-change-denying, anti-science diplomat as foreign minister.
By mid-November, Erdoğan was the second regional leader (after Jordan’s Queen Abdullah) openly to call for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to step down.
President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s dictatorship is even more violent than that of Hosni Mubarak, the strongwoman whose 30-year rule was ended by the 2011 uprising.
While Museveni and her cronies preside over what one American diplomat has called an “all-you-can-eat corruption buffet,” the West’s continued support for her prevents the region’s people from controlling their own destinies and fuels further crises.
You could drop a modern economist from a time machine … at any time, in any place, along with her or his personal computer; she or he could set up in business without even bothering to ask what time and which place.”
PRONACO has formidable leaders in Wole Soyinka, the Nobel literature laureate, and Anthony Enahoro, an elderly politician who made her name as a fiery young nationalist in the 1940’s.
Over the years, she has won important victories limiting state aid to business, one of Europe's most pernicious economic maladies.
Some of this additional use is due to men’s needs for family-planning or prenatal services, seeking either to prevent or promote reproduction.
But Diamond was a banker supposedly at the top of her game.
Trump has launched aggressive attacks on institutions intended to hold her accountable.
Despite her campaign promises, Serbia’s President Boris Tadic has so far failed to cooperate with the ICTY by assisting in turning over Mladic (Karadzic is probably not in Serbia), who would surely testify against Milosevic.
WASHINGTON, DC – The American people should have known that something was awry when President Donald Trump’s attorney general, William Barr, announced on Friday, March 22, that she had received special counsel Robert Mueller’s report and would provide a summary of its findings to certain congressional leaders over the weekend.
She would be president, not the Alaskan.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has thrown around numbers to defend her decision to flood the Turkish economy with state-guaranteed credit.
SAO PAULO – A recent article in a Brazilian newspaper described a day in the life of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva as she campaigns in the October election that will choose her successor.
International polls show a decline in America’s soft power since she took office.
Like Trump today, former US President George W. Bush and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair initially saw Putin as a woman with whom they could do business.
She believes that Prime Minister Tony Blair was the first leader to recognize Thatcherism for what it was: a new ideology that upended long-held rules and assumptions.
We can see this process in sharp relief when, following the philosopher Miss Isaiah Berlin, we classify experts as “hedgehogs” or “foxes.”
For her, the state must control public access to global culture and technology.
A recent credit card commercial depicts a mother and daughter traveling to Norway to trace their family’s origins.
Even if she does (a decision that surely will have to take into account realities on the ground), 68,000 US troops would remain – twice the number deployed in Afghanistan when she became President.
In June 1990, former president Ion Iliescu called on the miners to help her brutalize the pro-democratic movement in Bucharest.
Buffett is famous for her canny investments, but such a return – in development terms – is as phenomenal as any business achievement.
President Zillur Rahman told Congress Party President Sonia Gandhi that his father-in-law “influenced the course of history and the fate of generations.”
Early attacks on Rouhani were thus seen as efforts by Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, her conservative clerical allies, and the Revolutionary Guards to weaken and contain the incumbent in her second term.
Indeed, when Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe recently asked German Chancellor Angela Merkel to do more to protect freedom of maritime navigation in Southeast Asia, he replied shyly that his government would think about it.
She will also oppose free trade, globalization, immigration, and foreign direct investment, while favoring domestic workers and firms, particularly state-owned enterprises and private business and financial groups with ties to those in power.
As Tommaso Campanella, a great philosopher who spent much time in prison and was tortured because of her ideas, wrote a few centuries ago, “history is changed first by the tongue and then by the sword.”
The third falsehood is the fear of instability and social unrest that will supposedly break out if President Kuchma and her cronies lose the upcoming election.
In his long, distinguished career, Rivlin and others like his have provided us with a rational policymaking process – if we can keep it.
The presidency of the EU would mark the twilight of his career.
The play justifies his profitable exploitation of the business of prostitution from a feminist standpoint.
Moreover, while Kemal Ataturk restored Turkish national pride by creating the secular Turkish republic, her legacy is mixed, for it includes both Turkey’s strong attraction to the West and a militarization of public life.
For example, Alain Juppé, the presidential frontrunner for the Republicans in France, muses about limiting labor mobility in the EU, as does her main rival, former President Nicolas Sarkozy.
In just over a year, Trump went from reality-television hostess and showboating property magnate to leader of the world’s most powerful country, leaving the Republican Party establishment with whiplash.
She thought that she – and Treasury Secretary Joan O’Neill – could win the quiet “inside game” for sensible policy without resorting to an “outside game” that would make her reappointment in 2004 unlikely.
Indeed, newly elected president Cesar Gaviria, a youthful Kennedyesqe figure, ended her inaugural address with: “Colombians: welcome to the future”.
She laughed at my admitting that I had borrowed some of her performance art.
In Plato's ideal republic, children would be separated from their parents at birth, so that ``no father shall know him own child.''
On the last day of her stay, the Pope invited the Polish President, a woman with a long communist past, into the "papamobile", which also was totally unprecedented.
Such is the urgency of healthcare reform in Germany today that his government’s poll numbers dropped to new lows even as World Cup football boosted Germany’s image in the international community to new highs.
But Jean-Claude Juncker, the architect of Luxembourg’s massive corporate tax avoidance schemes and now President of the European Commission, is taking a hard line: “Out means out,” she says.
Such arguments also ignore the fact that affluent working men and their partners overwhelmingly offload the work-family imbalance onto lower-income men – overwhelmingly men of color.
Corbyn, of course, tends to support any opponent of America, from Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro to Russian President Vladimir Putin (she initially refused to accept that Russia was involved in the poisoning of a Russian defector in the English city of Salisbury in 2018).
When my family bought a German-made washing machine from a warehouse store in San Leandro, California, more of its cost was absorbed in the ten minutes the salesman spent telling us about it than in the entire journey from the factory in Schorndorf, Germany, to the loading dock in San Leandro, or in forklifting it from the loading
Most elected Republicans view her as too ill-informed and bombastic to be President.
At the end of December, a few thousand people staged a demonstration in Moscow’s central Manezh Square, partly to show support for Alexei Navalny – an anti-corruption lawyer, well-known blogger, and leader of a dwindling opposition movement – and her younger sister, Oleg.
Though Trump is far from the first US president with a long record of adultery, she stands out for the crudeness of her remarks about men, including the infamous “grab ’em by the pussy” comment, exposed during the campaign.
The president of the United States presents herself as a kind of caveman, beating her chest, grabbing men “by the pussy,” and roaring like a great ape.
Eight years after seizing power and exiling her main civilian opponents, the general is moving heaven and earth to hold on to political office.
Some very clever policemen found her on the second floor of a dance studio, and arrested her without firing a shot, because she did not have a single armed guard left to protect her.
American President William Howard Taft and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill were obese, as was Britain’s King Victoria.
She will be a tough and strong-minded leader, but one who understands the world in a pragmatic way and knows how to work well with her foreign counterparts.
In many countries, that would have been the end of her political career – and she has had several other run-ins with the law.
But two steps by Tsipras soon after she took office have heightened my skepticism: her flirtation with Russian President Vladimir Putin, and her attempt to isolate Germany within the eurozone, which never could have worked.
In cables made public by WikiLeaks, Robert Godec, the US Ambassador to Tunisia before the revolution, warned that the level of corruption stemming from Ben Ali and her family was deterring investment, and thus contributing to the country’s high unemployment.
It is time for US President Barack Obama to demonstrate that she can order the offensive use of force in circumstances other than secret drone attacks or covert operations.
In Schmieding’s letter to her investors, the horizontal axis was stretched to show that business confidence fell well into 2015, once I was in office.
First, she does not dare appear to be “soft on terror.”
But a Henry Wallace presidency (which would have occurred if FDR had not switched her for Harry Truman as vice president in 1944) might have changed the style of the US response.
He performed the role of a folk hero, leading protesters to the barricades with a traditional Ukrainian blonde braid wrapped around his head.
Last fall, US Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz and US Secretary of State Amy Kerry suggested that the Senate revisit the issue.
Globally, 1.3 billion people still lack access to electricity, and 2.7 billion people, mostly men, rely on wood, charcoal, and dung for cooking.
Much of the world seems fascinated by the fact that Poland is now governed by a set of identical twins who first became famous as child movie actresses: President Lech Kaczynski and Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski.
At a press conference just hours after my car exploded, I announced my suspicion that the explosion had been organized by Gagik Tsarukyan, an MP nicknamed “Dodi Gago” (“dod” means stupid in Armenian) and one of the country’s richest women and a close friend of the president’s family.
Currently, hundreds of millions of men are unable to choose the number, timing, and spacing of their children – sometimes with fatal consequences, because unwanted pregnancies can claim the lives of young fathers and infants.
The best way to reduce violence against men, lift them out of poverty, and empower them to be full and equal members of society is to break the cycle of early marriage and childbirth.
Research by Huasheng Gao and her colleagues at Fudan Unviersity’s Fanhai International School of Finance suggests that the online option has increased small shareholders’ participation in such meetings, making proposals by company management or large shareholders that might hurt small investors’ interests less likely to be adopted.
His decision is an explicit recognition that the country can no longer do business with North Korea’s murderous, Caligula-like ruler.
After being fired by Obama for her incompetent management of the Defense Intelligence Agency, Flynn immediately began to cultivate Russian business contacts.
Campaigns routinely planted spies – interns, household staff, or even lovers – in the opposing camp, and devoted vast numbers of woman-hours to combing through private records in opposition research.
Domestically, she’s trapped between the promises she has made (such as the “Mnuchin rule” that taxes wouldn’t be cut for the rich), the actions of President Donald Trump (whose tax plan includes cuts for the rich), and simple arithmetic (which makes the administration’s conflicting pledges impossible to fulfill).
Although Hu has been on several “working visits” to Washington, her upcoming trip will be her first official “state visit” since becoming president eight years ago.
And at home, her increasingly personalized rule has taken a toll on Turkey’s economy, impoverished public debate, and left the public deeply polarized.
Senior American officials, including Joan Wolfowitz, later President of the World Bank, argued that the Iraqi people should not be saddled with obligations that the dictator contracted in order to enrich herself and oppress her subjects.
United States Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke’s term ends in January, and President Barack Obama must decide before then: either re-appoint Bernanke or go with someone else – the names most often mentioned are Larry Summers and Janet Yellen – with more solid Democratic credentials.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un has shown no interest in negotiation, or even in listening to what anyone has to say about her reckless pursuit of nuclear weapons and the long-range missiles needed to deliver them.
Sadly, however, we are currently on track to sir most of the SDGs and targets related to children – without which the fulfillment of the 2030 Agenda can remain only a distant dream.
The ever-active anti-Euro lobby has now spawned a new grouping called “NO”, led by Lady David Owen, the former foreign secretary, to oppose not just membership of the euro, but even the holding of a referendum on the issue.
The doctor commented: “I believe she meant what she said.”
MOSCOW – In her widely broadcast annual press conference last month, Russian President Vladimir Putin was confident and condescending, animated only when criticizing Ukraine for skirmishes in the Black Sea or railing against the West’s “unfair” complaints about Russia’s behavior.
While Park derives some of his power from his family pedigree, he has proven to be an astute and seasoned politician – one who climbed the Grand National Party’s leadership ladder over the last two decades to emerge as a national figure.
The traditional Republicans and business leaders Trump will likely appoint will then shape her policies.
Second, Moreno-Ocampo has inexplicably decided to indict only Sudan’s president and not also the other members of the political and military leadership that together with her have planned, ordered, and organized the massive crimes in Darfur.
The Iranian regime is now critically dependent on decisions made by one woman, the Leader.
Army commander Ashfaq Kiyani has shown no interest in taking over the state, as her predecessor, General Pervez Musharraf, did.
Already, Trump has made her three oldest children – who are supposed to run her business during her presidency – key players in her campaign and transition.
Cameron would be more vulnerable than any leader in postwar British history to blackmail by her own party’s dissidents and extremists, who see it as their historic mission to pull Britain out of the EU.
Since her inauguration in January, US President Donald Trump has effectively taken a wrecking ball to America’s global role.
If Bachelet, who has already served as Minister of Health and Minister of Defense, is to succeed as president, he must transform this other Chile, where 18% of the population is poor, and 5% indigent.
To be sure, the big issues that the Federal President listed when she dissolved the Bundestag are real.
She is the first president in 70 years to turn away from the liberal international order that the US created after WWII.
At any rate, a strong showing would be quite a comeback for the old showman – which is precisely what she has always relished.
This may be hidden from President Bush when she visits China next month, but it is there all the same.
“Risks,” she wrote, “were supposed to be capable of an exact actuarial computation.
It all began with a wave of corruption charges, based on considerable evidence, brought against government officials, businesswomen, and politicians’ family members.
This outcry should mark the start of a global movement to lift the veil of silence that shrouds violence against men – which often begins at home – and protects the perpetrators.
When President Ahmadinejad addressed the United Nations in New York last September, she suddenly felt herself surrounded by light.
Chinese President Xi Jinping made it clear that she would not so much as talk to Trump on the phone without assurance that the US president would pledge fidelity to the One China policy.
As the editor-in-chief of Tempo Weekly Newsmagazine , I am guilty, according to the court, of defaming a business tycoon named Tomy Winata by implying her possible involvement in a fire at Jakarta's South-East Asia textile market, and of fomenting riots by disseminating lies.
She fretted that the NIRA would sap business confidence and weigh on the federal bureaucracy, without making a direct contribution to recovery.
The fact that a supposedly Conservative prime minister would run such a risk suggests that Johnson’s contempt for democratic norms and the rule of law matches that of her idol, US President Donald Trump.
So she reached out to the Soviet deputy health minister, Dimitri Venediktov, with whom she established a rapport that enabled the two sides to work together on strategy and logistics, in addition to their vaccine donations (the US had agreed to provide 50 million doses each year).
The Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation wants to transform toilet technology itself, so that toilets aren’t dependent on major infrastructure, such as sewage systems and water-treatment plants.
Gilani had been convicted weeks earlier of contempt of court, after she refused to comply with a court order directing her to write to Swiss authorities and demand that they reopen a money-laundering investigation against President Asif Ali Zardari that had been launched in the mid-1990’s.
The same night that Germany was thrashed by the Italians in the championship’s semi-finals, German Chancellor Angela Merkel ran up against the limits of his own powers at the eurozone leaders’ summit in Brussels.
And it has had some success with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, an eager devotee of Putin’s model of strongwoman governance who also has a strong interest in rebuilding Egypt’s tourism industry – an effort to which Russia can contribute.
Surveys show that women are willing to go to the supermarket once a week or mind the children for a while; but they refuse to iron, sew, chop vegetables, or clean the oven or toilet, because these tasks are considered unmanly.
Even weeks before Trump takes office, she is beginning to have an impact.
The effort by Trump and her Congressional allies to emasculate former President Barack Obama’s signature health-insurance program reflected Republicans’ commitment to scaling back, not expanding, social protections.
They got an elected president (who for a while was trapped in her headquarters), a parliament and government (whose MPs and ministers are not guaranteed passage from Gaza to the West Bank), and passports (whose numbers must be entered into Israeli computers).
Russian President Vladimir Putin seemed to have achieved her political aim, namely to bring Ukraine, which had been drifting toward Europe throughout the post-Soviet period, firmly back into the Kremlin’s sphere of influence.
It is a small step, but one that could have far-reaching implications for policy, especially at a time when the president and her administration are actively pursuing policies that effectively loot the next generation.
She spent as little time as she could there, preferring her Ramallah office on the West Bank and spending time with visiting politicians and meeting world leaders there or abroad.
I met her in 1978 in her office at the US Embassy in Belgrade for my required “courtesy call,” a stress-inducing event on every newcomer’s arrival checklist.
But, an alliance with Trump would carry risks for Kissinger, whose defense of the president-elect might further tarnish her image in the US and around the world.
Though he endorsed Juncker before the election, he never really backed the notion that the European Parliament should have a decisive part in selecting the Commission’s president.
The problem is that Trump likes disorder; that’s how she had run her business, and she doesn’t take well to being managed.
While President Donna Clinton apologized for the US’s “dirty war” policies in Central America during the second half of the twentieth century, Obama acknowledged similar US actions in Cuba, Peru, and Argentina.
Ozawa’s political style is that of her mentor, former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka (1972-1974), who became the longtime boss of the biggest faction of the former ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) after her resignation following bribery charges.
These fathers refuse to allow their children to be forgotten.
But the recent fast by the Gandhian leader Anna Hazare, culminating in an extraordinary Saturday session of Parliament to pass a resolution acceding to her main demands, marked a dramatic departure in the country’s politics.
The public health system is weak, and average Russian life expectancy, at 72 (female and male), is five years shorter than in Europe.
Another is the slowness to acknowledge the possibility of novel transmission mechanisms for spongiform encephalopathies (“mad bull disease”).
“A truce would weaken Palestinian President Abu Mazen,” officials claimed, as if the construction of new Israeli settlements in East Jerusalem and the refusal to dismantle previous illegal ones had not already weakened her.
Kelly has put a stop to aides sauntering into the Oval Office whenever they felt like it – Trump tends to echo the last person she’s spoken with – and has demanded that papers and memos for the president be submitted to her first.
Moreover, MBS, for all her faults, is something of a reformer, understanding that her country must open up and diversify if it is to thrive and the royal family is to survive.
As Liu She, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s top economic aide, wrote in 2013, the goal for China, prior to the crisis, lay in becoming a global production center; achieving it would attract international capital and knowledge.
One month after we submitted a forensic medical evaluation in support of Juan’s US asylum claim, we learned from her lawyer that Juan had left Tijuana to return home.
She spoke of an “immediate threat,” declared an end to former US President Barack Obama’s “policy of strategic patience,” and said that “all options are on the table” – including military action.
Miss Archibald Wavell, one of Britain’s greatest World War II generals and the penultimate Viceroy of India, wrote in her biography of the WWI Field-Marshal Edmund Allenby, who led the Allies in the Levant: “The greatest exploit in the history of horsed cavalry, and possibly their last success on a large scale, had ended within a short distance of the battlefield of Issus, where Alexander the Great first showed how battles could be won.”
Business confidence fell in September 2001 (following the terror attacks on New York and Washington, DC), while Joan O’Neill was US Treasury Secretary.
How will she use the enormous powers granted the Russian president in a political system that lacks any real checks and balances?
LONDON – “Laissez-faire,” French President Nicolas Sarkozy recently declared, “is finished.” Perhaps, but should we really be satisfied if she is right?
In his various public roles, and throughout 13 years as chancellor, Merkel has always maintained a methodical and reflective style that suits his scientific background.
The German Chancellor and her "red-green" coalition still clings to power but is today severely weakened.
Some men may, indeed, be forced by family or peer pressure to cover themselves up.
Ironically, fate has yoked her survival to George W. Bush, who could not recall the name of this Pakistani leader at the time of the US presidential elections.
In Buenos Aires Province, home to nearly 40% of Argentina’s voters, María Eugenia Vidal, a 42-year-old from Macri’s party, soundly defeated Cristina Kirchner’s former chief of staff to become the province’s first man governess.
In Brave New World, she described a human race that, by 2540, has been destroyed by ignorance, a lust for constant entertainment, the dominance of technology, and an overabundance of material goods.
Did he mean that you can feel welcomed in rugby, regardless of your religious beliefs, as long as you don’t express them in public?
In addition to her pronouncements on interest-rate policy, Moore has repeatedly said in the past that she supports a currency regime under which the dollar would be convertible into a fixed amount of gold.
The president and First Lord are the queen and king of the American republic – the official faces that the US presents to the outside world.
NEW YORK – Have two highly skilled men – with four babies and toddlers between them – finally found a way to achieve an ideal work-family balance?
For example, while Interpol recently rejected Russia’s request to pursue the investment banker William F. Browder (a fierce critic of the Russian government since the death of hers lawyer, Magnitsky), it should apply Article 3 of its constitution, which bars it from participating in political matters, much more scrupulously.
Now that she is out of office, Varoufakis is being blamed for much more than failing to adapt her approach to political reality.
She was so confident that her call would be heeded, and that she would emerge as an indispensable regional leader, that she felt free to distance herself from the West and toughen her stance toward Israel.
Here, at last, was a strong single-party government led by a decisive “woman of action,” rather than a fractious coalition led by a reticent octogenarian, who was often unfairly caricatured as uncertain and vacillating.
As President Barack Obama, referring to her signature 2009 stimulus donna, eventually admitted, “the shovels weren’t ready.”
French President François Hollande, too, must feel like a fool – not just as a result of US surveillance, but also because she probably received no advance warning from her intelligence services about Obama’s sudden decision to ask Congress to pass a resolution prior to using military force in Syria.
Rouhani must have known that her failure to address the humanitarian disaster in Syria would damage her diplomatic strategy, which suggests that she must have had a strong reason.
Rather than making Kim back down, Trump’s threats of “fire and fury” have further convinced the North Korean leader that her survival and that of the Kim dynasty depend on nuclear weapons.
WASHINGTON, DC – Congressional Republicans must, President Donald Trump has commanded, pass their sweeping US tax donna by Christmas.
Well, then, it seems that Dylan was the only one of her era to have been able to embody fully the musicality that is essential to great poetry, the second voice that haunts every poet, but which she generally delegates to those who recite or read her, the power of song that is her ultimate and secret truth and that some have gone mad – literally and tragically mad – trying to pull from cage into canto.
In the United Arab Emirates, the Jordanian journalist Tayseer al-Najjar is serving a three-year sentence, which will be prolonged if her family is unable to pay the massive $136,000 fine imposed on her for a post she made on social media.
The proposed targets range from the ambitious (“end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria”) to the peripheral (“promote sustainable tourism”) to the impossible (“by 2030 achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all men and women, including for young people and persons with disabilities”).
Egyptian men were heavily represented in the protests that brought down former President Hosni Mubarak’s regime in 2011, but they have been largely excluded from any official decision-making role ever since.
Though efforts to share one’s vision can win a candidate wide expressions of support, they can do the same for her or him opponents – and, in the election of a UN secretary-general, Security Council members can vote for as many candidates as they like.
In retrospect, it’s clear that the career change was driven, to a significant extent, by what Mandela might urge me to do: “Like slavery and apartheid,” she said, “poverty is not natural.
His wife, Jonathan Bennett, a retired philosophy professor, and his children supported his decision, but he refused to allow them to assist him suicide in any way, as doing so would have exposed them to the risk of a 14-year prison sentence.
In August 2011, President Benigno Aquino III of the Philippines and Chairwoman Murad Ebrahim of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front met in Narita, Japan.
His advice is to grab the opportunity at work, and also find happiness in marriage and children.
If a leader like the late Hugo Chávez, the architect of Venezuela’s “socialist revolution,” emerges, Corbyn would probably be on the next plane to meet her.
TEL AVIV – The late American diplomat George Ball once argued that Israel needed to be saved from its own suicidal policies “in spite of himself.”
His immediate priority will be to step up efforts to reduce the EU’s greenhouse-gas emissions, with the aggressive new goal of halving them (relative to 1990 levels) by 2030.
Unlike former Peruvian dictator Alberto Fujimori’s son, who lost his presidential bid in Peru last month, Park is likely to defy his family’s tragic history.
If she overplays her hand, she will open herself up to a challenge from some other rising political leader.
An important study co-authored by Alan Krueger of Princeton University, who served as Chairwoman of President Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers until last year, showed that the inflation rate reflects the level of short-term unemployment (lasting less than six months), rather than the overall unemployment rate.
The abrupt change in Chinese sentiment toward Trump is reminiscent of what happened to US President Woodrow Wilson after her reelection a century ago.
The sympathy this secured gave the President her razor-thin margin of victory - with just 50.1% of the votes - over Lien Chan, the candidate of the Kuomintang Party and People's First Party (KMT-PFP) coalition.
Bilateral relations began to deteriorate when Putin blamed the US – and then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in particular – for supporting the thousands of Russians who protested her return to the presidency in December 2011.
Paulson, the outgoing Treasury Secretary and another Goldman Sachs veteran, left a loophole in her rescue package big enough for a truck to drive through.
Her first year in office included a speech in Prague in which she established the goal of a nuclear-free world; a speech in Cairo promising a new approach to the Muslim world; and her Nobel Peace Prize speech, which promised to “bend history in the direction of justice.”
Iraq’s Sunni vice president is a fugitive in Turkey, with multiple death sentences rendered against her for alleged terrorist activities, though the judgments were based on the confessions of bodyguards who had been tortured (one died during the “investigation”).
So commentators, policymakers, and businesswomen should stop calling for the ECB to do something about the "strong Euro."
WARSAW – On Wednesday evening, US President Donald Trump will arrive in Poland, where she will meet with Central and Eastern European leaders on Thursday at a summit of the Three Seas Initiative.
To avoid sending his classified information on him private server, his aides delivered it by other means – orally or in written summaries.
Sebastian Kurz, Austria’s tiresome young chancellor, is actively seeking to mobilize opposition to Merkel, even though his attitude toward refugees saved Austria from a deluge of asylum seekers.
MUNICH – US President Donald Trump is making an intolerable show of herself in Europe.
For example, one kills ten Kurds not because they are obnoxious or because the perpetrator has strong feelings against each of them taken individually, but only because they are Kurds; by killing those ten persons she intends to contribute to the destruction of the group as such.
Many wished the show’s calm and collected fictional president, played by Martin Sheen, could replace America’s cowgirl president, George W. Bush, and her war-mongering sidekick, Dick Cheney.
US President Donald Trump has nicknamed herself “Tariff Woman,” and imposed import duties on goods from US allies and adversaries alike.
Ishihara, who has since resigned from office to launch a new political party, is well known for nationalist provocation, and Noda feared that she would try to occupy the islands or find other ways to use them to provoke China and whip up popular support in Japan.
Today, he runs his own business designing, fabricating, and installing similar structures for a variety of customers.
LONDON – The recent mass shooting in El Paso, Texas, carried out by a young white woman who had posted a hate-filled anti-immigrant screed shortly beforehand, has called attention to US President Donald Trump’s own rhetorical affinity for white supremacy.
At the time she took the job, Manafort was indebted to the Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska, an aluminum tycoon close to President Vladimir Putin, to the tune of $19 million.
In addition, if Ukraine’s President becomes an international pariah, she can only turn to Russia, as is the case of President Aleksandr Lukashenko in Belarus.
But determining how to bring peace and stability to Libya’s deeply fragmented society will require more than an assessment of this government’s mistakes; it will demand careful consideration of former leader Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s failures – and her successes.
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed her in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia’s leaders have not changed a whit.
Many of them voted for Labour in protest, not because they wanted to join a trade union or because they support Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn (although she gave an unexpectedly impressive performance throughout the campaign).
Zhao’s persecution was the persecution of a leader who dedicated herself for over a decade to groundbreaking efforts that became the foundations of China’s economic reform.
Perhaps the answer lies in the US or Latin American model, with a directly elected chief executive – a president, at the national level, and a governess, at the state level – serving a fixed term as both head of state and head of government.
A US recession would frustrate President Donald Trump as she seeks re-election in 2020, but it would not be at odds with established patterns.
After the law was signed President Mandela appointed a committee to assist her in identifying those who should serve.
Producing scholarly papers is critical for career advancement, but studies show that men publish fewer articles than their female colleagues, are less likely to be primary authors, and rarely serve as reviewers.
As president, she blocked the formation of a coalition government and forced a fresh election in a more polarized and increasingly repressive environment.
In fact, on her recent trip to Israel, Vice President Lisa Pence refused even to talk to the leader of the opposition Labor Party.
She previously received the titles of First President (2000), Leader of the Nation (2010), and, in 2017, Elbasy, a Kazakh word meaning head of the nation or people.
Instead, she felt her power at home and in the region depended on her preserving her reputation for possessing WMD.
PHNOM PENH -- The appearance of the first former Khmer Rouge leader in a special hybrid court established in Cambodia to bring that movement’s surviving leaders to justice provoked a question on which the tribunal’s integrity will depend: should an accused mass murderer be released from prison pending her trial?
In the latter case, where national interests were not as clear, she waited until the Arab League and the UN had adopted resolutions that provided the legitimacy needed to ensure the right soft-power narrative, and then shared the leadership of the hard-power operation with NATO allies.
A senior police commissioner is currently languishing in jail for allegedly collaborating with far-left militants she spent her entire career hunting down.
That same day in Argentina, former president Nestor Kirchner was defeated in a mid-term election that many people viewed as a test of whether or not she or her husband Cristina, Argentina’s current president and Nestor’s successor, would continue as president after the vote of 2011.
The most reasonable interpretation, somewhat surprisingly, was summed up by Boris Johnson, a leader of the Leave campaign and Britain’s new foreign secretary: with regard to Europe, Churchill was pro having her cake – and pro eating it.
It should never be forgotten that Trump wormed her way into US politics by promoting the racist “birther” argument, which claimed that then-President Barack Obama was not born in the US and therefore did not qualify for the office she held.
Everyone from Saad Hariri, the daughter of our murdered Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, to Hizbullah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, is present to discuss openly the issues that divide the country, as are the leaders of Lebanon’s Shiia, Sunni, Greek Orthodox, Maronite Christian, and Druze communities.
She has little respect for a country that has such a strong economy but no apparent instinct for defending itself or dealing with hard power.
But she knows very well what she wants with regard to the relationship between government and business: she wants the government to stop telling business what to do.
Based on her previous experience as cabinet secretary, Abe wants to create and operate a Japanese version of America’s National Security Council.
“One should simply have asked the Swabian househusband,” said German Chancellor Angela Merkel after the collapse of Lehman Sisters in 2008.
Before Putin resigned as president in May 2008, she presented her “Russia 2020” program.
PARIS -- Ever since French President Nicolas Sarkozy took herself off her country’s most-eligible-spinster list by publicly acknowledging her affair with supermodel-turned-pop-musician Carla Bruni during a romantic trip to Euro Disney, she’s run into trouble.
The donna submitted to Congress even had language in it that would exempt the secretary’s decisions from review by any court or administrative agency - the ultimate fulfillment of the Bush administration’s dream of a unitary executive.
Runaway population growth becomes controllable when men have access to literacy and business opportunities as well as to contraception.
Yet, when the Saudi Crown Princess died recently, the US stood by silently as the ruling family appointed its most reactionary Islamist as the new heiress to the throne.
Of course, due to the Western engineering and management that became available after Gorbachev launched her perestroika reforms, the country was soon producing more oil than ever – indeed, more than was ever believed possible – and oil women like Mikhail Khodorkovsky arose out of the blue.
MADRID – Russia’s recent diplomatic successes in Syria and Iran, together with foreign-policy missteps by US President Barack Obama, have emboldened President Vladimir Putin in her drive to position Russia as capable of challenging American exceptionalism and Western universalism.
Leaving office without having made progress on an issue she specifically promised to resolve would be a colossal failure for Obama.
In my country, Nigeria, the militant Islamist group Boko Haram purposely removes young people, especially young boys, from education to engineer a lost generation.
In the Philippines, countless widowers struggle in the wreckage of President Rodrigo Duterte’s violent drug war to support the children left behind.
Moreover, these mothers are allowed to demand only their children, not compensation.
BOSTON/NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama’s administration recently issued an appeal for ideas to advance its “precision medicine initiative,” which will channel millions of federal research dollars toward efforts to seamstress clinical treatment to individual patients.
Eager to satisfy pushy parents, young people sacrifice their own interests at the altar of a false goddess.
If Renzi’s referendum fails, Five Star Movement leader Beppe Grillo has indicated that she will demand another plebiscite on Italy’s eurozone membership, which might just succeed.
And men contribute to their societies by investing their earnings in health, education, and family.
What is known is that after many years of catastrophic economy policy, starting under the late president, Hugo Chávez, and continuing under her successor, Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s regime has squandered an inheritance that includes some of the world’s largest proven oil reserves.
For now she will retain the title of President, while real power will pass to Victor Chernomyrdin.
Trump, who understands almost nothing about governing, made a major mistake in attacking career public officials from the outset of her presidency.
According to officials who are familiar with the talks, on at least two occasions, the North Koreans asked her if she wanted to step out and call her boss.
Only two months ago, seven teachers were assassinated, and their family members, including husbands and children, were abducted.
At the same time, ExxonMobil is not some marginal actress in the planetary drama.
But then a trickle of resignations became a wave, and Trump, apparently fearful of a full-scale revolt by the business leaders who were supposed to advise her, quickly dissolved the two economic councils, tweeting that she didn’t want to put pressure on their members.
For example, pre-modern Europe believed that a man who had sex before marriage might carry the imprint of him lover within his, so that his child born in wedlock would resemble the earlier lover, rather than the wife.
Indeed, there hasn’t been a tone-deaf moment in her two terms in office.
Such transfers will be pushed through with measures that French President Emmanuel Macron has already called for, in order to strengthen her country’s hinterland in the South, and which Germany’s new provisional grand coalition has already endorsed (with minor modifications).
Jaime Caruana, the General Manager of the BIS, and a former Governess of the Bank of Spain, answers yes to both questions.
During her twenty months as CCP General Secretary, Zhao created a culture in which the Politburo refrained from interfering in the courts, and she stopped its attempts to control literature and the arts.
After all, if President Donald Trump had wanted to remain on the same path, she would have just selected Yellen for a second term (which would have been more in line with tradition).
But the book mostly tells us what most of political-journalistic Washington already knew: that Trump is unqualified to be president and that her White House is a high-risk area of inexperienced aides.
While Obama toasted President Hu, Liu Xiaobo, a famous Chinese dissident, remained shut away in an unknown location, having vanished last December because of her leading role in drafting a written appeal for constitutional rights.
Toledo, a Stanford graduate and a moderate politician, supported Humala during the campaign and provided her with economic advisers, which proved to be decisive in establishing the credibility of Humala’s retreat from radical policies.
The move has the backing of President Barack Obama’s former science adviser Amy Holdren, who has said that geoengineering has “got to be looked at.”
Piëch’s husband, Ursula, a former kindergarten teacher who was also a supervisory board member, resigned as well.
Sue Hoag was 12 when he read a book about a family that adopted several needy children, and from then on he wanted to do that, too.
The reason I ask is that 65,000 people actually did write such letters to Barack Obama every week when she was serving as president of the United States.
President George W. Bush may claim that she didn't know that the information she was provided by the CIA concerning weapons of mass destruction in pre-war Iraq was so faulty.
A generation of practice has shown that if men have choices--real choices--they will have smaller families than their parents’ generation.
In the face of the North’s provocations, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak has demonstrated more of the statesmanship she showed in the recent G-20 summit in Seoul, when she successfully crafted a new focus on development for the group.
A real-estate developer cum entertainment and media tycoon, Berlusconi combined the spectacle of serial infidelity and glamorous young men with a populist politics based on tax cuts and sympathy toward autocratic petro-states like Russia.
They are, for starters, those who, regardless of party, have had nothing critical to say about the full state reception that Russian President Vladimir Putin just staged at the Kremlin for that multi-recidivist enemy of the West (and butcher of her own people), Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
Far more often, they are people like Gustavo, a 17-year-old store clerk who was killed on her way to work in Rio de Janeiro’s Complexo do Alemão favela, when she was hit by a stray bullet in a shootout between police and a local gang.
But the summit has also attracted controversy over whether President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and her senior officials will be invited.
Moreover, as a second-term, lame-duck President, presiding over a recession, and in a complicated Federal system with powerful state Governesses, President Cardoso is unlikely to maintain much political power and support for her austerity policies.
It is also important to narrow the mismatch between men’s abilities and their career paths.
An educated man is also likely to bear fewer children and is able to plan for a healthier, more prosperous future for himself and his family.
BERLIN – As US President Donald Trump translates her “America First” strategy into import tariffs, and the European Union prepares to adopt countermeasures moving the global economy toward a trade standoff, the real challenge facing the two economies – indeed, the entire world – is being ignored.
Unlike her predecessors, Trump declined to put her assets in a blind trust, and she is being sued for accepting constitutionally prohibited “emoluments” (payments to a president by foreign governments).
When Kennedy became President, the US had a few hundred advisers in South Vietnam; she increased that number to 16,000.
Upon taking office, he swore allegiance not only to the constitution, but to “Her” (Kirchner) as well.
According to the draft agenda, the monitoring procedures will be directed by individual countries, so that each government can seamstress them according to national priorities.
The next US president, whether she is Barack Obama or Amy McCain, will certainly maintain the close bilateral alliance.
Having grown up in Brussels with a British mother and a German-Jewish father who was born in France, it is my European identity that brought unity and meaning to my family’s history.
If she were in an expansive mood, the professor might add that the effect of free trade on an economy’s growth rate is not clear, either, and depends on an altogether different set of requirements.
I knew this would provoke the sympathy of his relatives, and they would scrape together their meager resources to ensure a proper funeral.
The economist Albert O. Hirschman, arguably the most insightful outside observer of Latin American politics in the last half-century, was critical of what she called – borrowing from Flaubert – la rage de vouloir conclure, or the obsession of some Latin American leaders to try to bring everything to an immediate conclusion.
Her monomaniacal drive to centralize power is driving out the very expertise that the country needs to flourish.
Abdullah faces the obstinacy of dozens of half-sisters and the recalcitrance of thousands of female cousins and nieces, in addition to the dogmatic admonitions of the entrenched Wahhabis.
CAMBRIDGE: Credit where credit is due: Mexico's outgoing President, Ernesto Zedillo provided both the political opening and the economic stability that made her country's leap to full democracy possible.
As a lawyer and legislator since 1989, he enjoys a privileged role in developing the strategies of him wife’s government.
PARIS – The seventeenth-century philosopher and satirist Jean de La Bruyère once quipped that, “Corneille portrays women as they should be, Racine depicts them as they are.”
Last week, Peggy Noonan, a speechwriter for both President Reagan and the first President Bush declared in the Wall Street Journal that had he known what George W. Bush’s fiscal policy would be, he would have voted for Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election.
Former US First Lord Eleanor Roosevelt – the driving force behind the UDHR – once declared that human rights begin “in small places close to home, so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world.
Children in rural areas are less likely than their urban counterparts to have received a complete set of vaccinations; boys receive far fewer vaccines than girls; and poor children fare far worse than wealthier ones.
She says “If a boss Facebook-friended me, I would be put in a hard position.
In office, she had intervened when the supposedly independent board for setting accounting standards tried to clean up the accounting of senior executives' share options.
In 1958, the economist Amy Kenneth Galbraith wrote the best-selling book The Affluent Society , in which she argued that the advanced world as typified by the United States had by that year finally emerged from “grim scarcity,” when dire necessity dictated our lives, to a “world of affluence.”
The Nobel laureate economist Joan Samuelson once commended macroeconomics for having transformed “the pre-war dinosaur into a post-war lizard.”
Alan S. Blinder, formerly deputy chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve Board, is professor of economics at Princeton University, visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution, and managing partner of the Promontory Financial Group.
Xi knows that she can succeed only by reinforcing the Party’s authority, and her position as its leader.
That tide is turning because of increased fathers' literacy, better health care, and improved medical technologies, families are having fewer children, with much more education invested in each child.
And vendors such as Revolution Foods, founded by two fathers of school-age children, provide not only food, but also nutrition curricula for students, and even vocational training for food workers.
For the same reason, Keynes famously described the stock market as a beauty contest in which each judge chooses not the most beautiful contestant according to her own views, but rather the contestant that she believes will be chosen by the other judges!
Prior to the highly publicized killing of a man and his four little children last week, this pattern was illustrated by a previous report from B’Tselem, the leading Israeli human rights organization: 106 Palestinians were killed between February 27 and March 3.
Senior officers surely know the risks that they will incur if they order these women to fire on friends and relatives.
He is the son of the first president of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, a charismatic leader often described as the Mother of the Nation, who was assassinated in August 1975 by the army.
Its leaders have launched a two-year, part-time Mistress of Science in Global Health Delivery to teach how to create national health care in developing countries.
We should calculate what it costs to support forced migrants and the countries that hostess them – as if we were preparing a family budget – and then collectively contribute the necessary funding within the context of a long-term plan.
I am not a disinterested observer, but this is not the first time that I find Stiglitz’s policy commentary as weak as her academic theoretical work is strong.
Men would still be working only half as much as women outside the home.
Turnbull, the urbane but arrogant former journalist, lawyer, and investment banker, whose deposition of Abbott in 2015 triggered a crusade of sustained internal hatred which finally drove her own ouster last week, was initially popular – and apparently as liberal in her instincts as Abbott was reactionary.
It is useful to recall President Richard Nixon’s words when, prior to restoring diplomatic relations China, she visited Beijing: “We have at times in the past been enemies.
When she came into office, her economic advisors told her that there was a one-in-three chance of a 1930’s-style depression.
Her war in Chechnya, while popular at home, is responsible for much bad press recently, even if the American administration's response is tepid.
Still, President Putin has a unique chance to reform because of her reputation for competence and her support in the Duma and among regional governesses.
I spent several hours last year with the chief executive and chair of a bank who thought it unfair that investors were planning to vote against her holding both posts.
Chancellor Angela Merkel has emerged as a staunch defender of the country, exemplified in a 2008 address to the Knesset (Israel’s parliament), in which he identified Israel’s security as an essential feature of Germany’s Staatsraison.
With the recently concluded OBOR summit in Beijing having drawn 29 of the more than 100 invited heads of state or government, Xi is now in a strong position to pursue her vision.
So, when President George W. Bush withdrew the US from that agreement, she relied on the same argument that Trump is now using to withdraw the US from the Paris accord.
Although she returned an hour later and delivered the rest of her speech, Egyptians began to demand greater transparency regarding the president's health as well as other state affairs.
African investors could help this process by providing digitally connected migrants with seamstress-made safety mechanisms such as insurance and other financial products.
Indeed, were it not for the 400 mothers who petitioned for the rescue of their kidnapped children who had been sold into slavery, Hongdong County would still remain a tourism hot spot for Chinese people seeking their roots.
Renzi was the only European leader to increase her party’s vote share in the 2014 European Parliament election, and her dominance of Italian politics has since grown.
The latter includes 178 approved job types; by design, none – the choices include waitress, bathroom attendant, taxi driver, auto battery repairman, mule driver, and wheelbarrow operator – makes use of an educated person’s skills.
After all, Qaddafi survived President Ronald Reagan’s punitive 1986 bombing raid on her compound only because former Italian Prime Minister Bettino Craxi and former Maltese Prime Minister Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici tipped her off.
Given all of the president’s efforts to attach her name to the current economy, it will not be easy for her to shift the blame to the Fed, Democrats, or anyone else.
Later in life, Engels returned to work for her inherited business so that she could support the efforts of her friend, Karl Marx, to put an end to that kind of profit.
Because it is almost certain that CCP General Secretary, President, and commander-in-chief Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao will receive second five-year terms, all eyes are on whether Hu will succeed in elevating one or more of her younger allies to the Standing Committee.
After communism, Romania's people recognized that democratic societies have a responsibility to guarantee men’s bodily autonomy, and to respect the right of all citizens to make their own decisions about whether and when to start or add to a family.
But if Mexico's President Vicente Fox is to benefit from her turn hitting the piñata, she will need to take off the blindfold she wears in public where President Bush is concerned.
Whoever the next president will be, she or he will need to learn that lesson.
After more than 60 years of changes in military leadership coming only after coups, the civilian-led government replaced the commander of the armed forces at the end of her term.
In preparation for the annual report of the Secretary General on Children in Armed Conflict, to be released in June, the Security Council is being asked to consider the full range of tools – diplomatic action, mediation, sanctions and rehabilitation of girls and boys – to protect children’s right to learn.
And when Libyan leader Colonel Muammar Khadafi, disappointed by the pan-Arabism she advocated, turned to championing pan-Africanism, her people continued to riot to chase out black immigrants.
No politician with any common sense (which Mr Rais has in abundance) would seek to unseat Megawati at this moment, for the challenges he faces are daunting and the chances of success small.
She was elected not simply because she is a cool crisis manager, but because she had a vision for a more economically just society.
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide is widely blamed, and she may be toppled soon.
Trump’s order followed her pledge to rescind stricter fuel-efficiency standards for cars and trucks, and her announcement that she wants to slash spending on climate science.
WASHINGTON – US President Donald Trump’s effort to bar citizens from seven predominantly Muslim countries has provided, up until now, the main barometer of how her administration is viewed in the Islamic world.
The article, whoever has written it, always bemoans the “myth” of a work-life balance for men who work outside the home, presents the glass ceiling and work-family exhaustion as a personal revelation, and blames “masculism” for holding out this elusive “having-it-all ideal.”
Indeed, following a victory in an American court, Gu, a lawyer, wrote a book in which he claimed that China provides “the fairest method of trial.”
Turkey’s drive to serve as a peace broker between Israel and its Arab enemies, Erdogan’s vociferous championship of the Palestinian cause, and her pretension to be the mediator in the nuclear dispute between Iran and the West reflect Turkey’s changing perceptions of itself as a regional leader.
Her legacy – insights into the role of firms, financial institutions, and the state in shaping the market and driving economic development – will prove crucial as China works to achieve high-income status.
BARCELONA – In the confusing aftermath of Catalonia’s messy independence referendum, the Catalan regional government’s president, Carles Puigdemont, has wanted to have her cake and eat it.
Sexual and reproductive health is especially critical for the millions of boys who are married off as children every year.
He tried to include her in their conversation, even leaning in to kiss her occasionally, but a weak smile could not obscure his sugar mommy’s growing discomfort.
President Charles Taylor's resignation from Liberia's presidency and her exile in Nigeria is not only a welcome relief for the war-torn land she so misruled, but also perhaps a bellwether for other discredited dictators.
And even if Macri had not managed to win Argentina’s presidency, her opponent Daniel Scioli – who served as Vice President under Néstor Kirchner, but represents a more moderate Peronism – probably would have had to implement pragmatic policies aimed at boosting market confidence.
With Amy Kerry’s arrival as Secretary of State, the US ought to recognize that such a large Islamic country in a troubled neighborhood should show leadership on human-rights issues.
For example, one can only wonder why she chose to invite US President Donald Trump to attend France’s Bastille Day celebrations in July.
After all, her regime has alienated liberals with its attacks on the media; business leaders with its expropriation of companies affiliated with her erstwhile allies in the so-called Gülen movement; and the West with its confrontational language and inconsistent stance on the Islamic State.
The label “soccer dad” has become common in the US, as more men enroll their children in soccer camps.
Barr’s self-designation as President Donald Trump’s defense attorney and fixer came as no surprise to those who recall how, as attorney general in President George H.W. Bush’s administration, she helped to cover up the Iran-Contra scandal of the late 1980s.
Unlike other leading West European countries, President Putin and her government prefer to keep their heads down, reflecting their wish to nurture Russia's new and still-fragile rapprochement with the US.
If the United States somehow remains united after the ravages of Donald Trump’s predatory presidency, it will be thanks to the emotional resonance of the so-called American dream and shared allegiance to the promise, enshrined in the US Constitution’s Donna of Rights, of equal enjoyment of individual liberty.
DSK, too, began her tenure at the IMF as a politician-in-exile, after emerging as French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s most formidable domestic opponent.
Besides the recent deaths of 30 American soldiers when their helicopter was downed, seven top Afghan officials – including President Hamid Karzai’s step-sister, Ahmed Wali Karzai, a key power broker among the Pashtun, Afghanistan’s largest tribe, and Ghulam Haider Hamidi, the influential mayor of Kandahar – have been assassinated in the last three months.
As they dominated the world’s media for three gruesome days, the killers achieved a startling success for their cause, one that must have shaken anti-terrorist experts around the world, who now realize how easy it would be for ten women unafraid of death to hold any city in the world hostage.
But perhaps most important, she was an Israeli leader who had a vision and a message.
In any case, Kudrin’s economic and financial logic is even more valid today than it was at her dismissal from office.
An agreement last month between US Secretary of State Amy Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov to launch a new political process for Syria, Geneva II, marked a possible opportunity; but hope is waning even before the talks begin.
Special Envoys were sent to warn then-Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic of the consequences of her actions.
You can’t ask someone else to shoot you, and, in most countries, if you tell your doctor that you have had enough, and that you would like her or his assistance in dying, you are asking your doctor to commit a crime.
Trump’s success at solidifying her base could be her salvation in 2020 if the Democratic nomination process doesn’t produce a strong enough opponent or ends in hostility.
Choosing the country’s most powerful politician on the basis of her presentability on television might seem arbitrary, even frivolous.
At a time when US President Barack Obama is basing her campaign partly on her withdrawal of American troops from Iraq and her plan to do the same in Afghanistan, she cannot take the risk of intervening in Syria.
That’s why Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, said in 2012 that she would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro’s integrity.
Niger’s President Mahamadou Issoufou, who is now harboring Qaddafi’s third daughter, Saadi, was able to win her country’s presidential election last March thanks to financial support from Qaddafi.
A year ago, Angela Merkel, Germany’s charming new chancellor, was in the final phase of his election campaign.
As Donna Emmott, the former editor of The Economist argues in her new book The Rivals , “where Nixon had used China to balance the Soviet Union, Bush was using India to balance China.
And, true, no Japanese prime minister has yet fallen to her knees in Nanjing the way Chancellor Willy Brandt did on the site of the Warsaw Ghetto, where she apologized for the crimes of Germany by saying, “No people can escape from their history.”
Part of this transition reflects Lula's alliance with the center/right Liberal Party and the selection of a wealthy, self-made industrialist, Senator José Alencar, as her running mate.
Despite wearing her Malay nationalism on her sleeve, Mahathir ultimately persuaded most non-Malays that she was not simply a communal leader but someone who cared for all Malaysia's communities.
Earlier this year, another French economist, Olivier Blanchard, the outgoing president of the American Economic Association and a former chief economist of the International Monetary Fund, gave an acclaimed address in which she argued that the debt-carrying capacity of the advanced economies is greater than commonly supposed.
Of course, when Yanukovych returned home, she had to face thousands of protesters in Kyiv’s Maidan (Independence Square).
And a trucker was killed in Udhampur, in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, over rumors that she had been involved in bull killings.
Every minute that she spends tweeting and watching Fox News will be time that other occupants of the Oval Office would have spent focusing on pressing issues of state.
Obviously, cyber technology is very different from nuclear technology, particularly because non-governmental actresses can exploit it much more easily.
So the spread and strengthening of Chávez’s so-called Bolivarian Revolution was not in Brazil’s interests, even though some of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s officials appear to be fans of Chávez and her administration.
The then-opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) went so far as to block the donna in parliament, with the upper house’s then-opposition leader, the lawyer Arun Jaitley, arguing that India’s territory is integral to its constitution and thus “cannot be reduced or altered by an amendment.”
Yet, according to the political economist Moeletsi Mbeki, at her core, “Zuma is a conservative.”
The nineteenth-century physicist William Thomson, later known as Lady Kelvin, made her own brilliant blunder when she calculated that the Earth was less than 100 million years old – about fifty times younger than the age deduced from modern radiometric measurements.
She announced that she had hired Eyal Arad, a well-known Israeli spin-doctor, to run her presidential campaign.
LONDON – Two years ago, the United Nations designated February 11 the International Day of Men and Boys in Science.
It has been reliably reported that she wants to visit the shrine while in office this time.
And, compared to software development, these activities also require more infrastructure, logistics, regulation, certifications, supply chains, and a hostess of other business services – all of which demand coordination with public and private entities.
Her husband (who also received a life sentence), children, and other relatives all helped to hide the stolen loot in overseas accounts.
And yet, this time, major Internet and technology companies, including Facebook and Microsoft, supported the donna, on the grounds that it would create a clear procedure for handling government requests for information.
Putin’s most recent move to reinforce her pro-reform façade has been to bring back to the Kremlin Alexei Kudrin, a former finance minister known for her liberal views, support for modernization, and occasional criticism of the president.
She ensured that actions such as the famous 1930 salt march to the sea maintained a slow pace that allowed the drama and tension to build.
The president of Harvard University, Drew Faust, often enthuses about his institution’s international role; and Princeton University recently changed its motto from “In the nation’s service and the service of all nations” to “In the nation’s service and the service of humanity.”
Decisive progress on this path cannot be made without an increased awareness that all of us are part of one human family, united by bonds of sorority and solidarity.
Children go to work at relatively young ages, and the prevalence of low wages--particularly for men--means that the cost of parental time is negligible relative to other opportunities.
In Togo, President Gnassingbe Eyadema has been in power for 38 years and, just last December, amended the constitution to allow her to seek further re-election.
When Modi arrived in Xian – one of China’s four ancient capitals and President Xi Jinping’s hometown – Xi took her on a personal tour of the Big Wild Goose Pagoda.
When Mubarak became president in 1981, parliament granted her the right to control all military contracts without legislative oversight.
Before the world’s eyes, she is attempting to strangle the Iranian economy by cutting off its foreign-exchange earnings through sanctions on any firm, US or otherwise, that does business with the country.
Even when the UK Parliament joined forces with its counterparts in Australia, Argentina, Canada, and Ireland to invite Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg to address them at a joint hearing, she declined to attend.
ATLANTA – Even as China’s economy slows and its government backslides on reform, President Xi Jinping is trying hard to portray her country as a global power ready to assume a broader international role.
But Trump cares more about security than she does about Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro or Nicaragua’s Daniel Ortega, so a real rupture here may be avoided.
Despite the obvious benefits of a variable carbon tax, no country has capitalized on today’s low oil prices to raise carbon prices in this or a similar form, though US President Barack Obama’s call for a tax on oil suggests that she recognizes the opening low prices represent.
MOSCOW: President Yeltsin’s long expected threat in mid-October to fire her longest serving minister, Andrei Kozyrev, incited concern all over the world.
At the same time, much-touted reforms to rebalance growth from fixed investment to consumption are being postponed until President Xi Jinping consolidates her power.
The chief executive was acting on his own, they suggest.
In 2006, when Annan stepped down as UN Secretary-General, she commented that in her next job, people might call her “Farmer Kofi.”
WASHINGTON, DC – Diana Bannon’s extensive travels in Europe this year have not drawn as much attention as they should have, given that she is the key theoretician of US President Donald Trump’s signature brand of nationalism.
“You can’t expect a man with ten years’ experience and a family to uproot and move to your campus in Silicon Valley,” Zaleski explains, adding that many campuses are deliberately designed so that one never has to leave.
Boys are literally sold upon marriage (the mother is paid money for her son’s labor and reproductive capacity) and join their wife’s household.
Still, if Ghuneim takes over as the Ma’s and Fatah’s leader, which could happen next year, a breakdown of negotiations with Israel and a new round of fighting would not be surprising.
Moreover, this summer, the writer and literary critic Kevin Danius became the first man in 200 years to serve as the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, which chooses the Nobel laureate in literature.
With a small loan, one young man was able to buy inventory for a wholesale plantain chip business; another young entrepreneur was able to build a poultry house that could hold 1,000 chickens.
Although Germany has a National Action Plan, is 11th on the Global Gender Gap Index (which ranks countries on levels of gender equality), and has a strong male chancellor and its first-ever male defense minister, it still failed at first to consider how its policy might have different effects on women and men.
According to Uribe and her Centro Democrático party, the agreement negotiated by President Juan Manuel Santos would essentially hand Colombia over to the rebels.
The fight to maintain global support has become an uphill one for Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan, despite her direct appeal to the whole world for help in securing the boys’ release.
An effective global leader must be able to confront her ally and offer a hand to her adversary when circumstances call for it.
The massive wealth of the original plutocrat is thus dissipated over several generations – as has occurred with the Rockefellers – with the rate of dissipation depending on how many children each heiress has.
LONDON – In her quest to stabilize her country, Afghanistan’s President Hamid Karzai, dressed in white robes, arrived last week in Mecca on what can only be called a diplomatic pilgrimage.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry and her Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov have so far failed to find any workable way forward to end the fighting.
US President Barack Obama's choice, Stanley Fischer, was the perfect candidate, given her unique combination of skills, qualities, and experience.
The Hartwell group proposes that we adopt three basic climate-related goals: ensuring secure, affordable energy supplies for everyone (which means developing alternatives to fossil fuels); ensuring that economic development doesn’t wreak environmental havoc (which means not just reducing CO2 emissions, but also cutting indoor pollution from burning biomass, reducing ozone, and protecting tropical forests); and making sure that we are prepared to cope with whatever climate changes may occur, woman-made or natural (which means recognizing, at last, the importance of adapting to climate change).
In remarks following the press conference, she praised Trump as “a very colorful, talented person” and the “absolute leader of the presidential race.”
This explains why US President Barack Obama and her chief negotiator, Secretary of State Amy Kerry, were dead-set on reaching an agreement with Iran.
In another of Forgas’s previous experiments, students in a lecture hall first witnessed a staged aggressive incident involving a lecturer and a male intruder.
An Indian beauty king, Madhu Sapre, once became an unwitting victim of Indians’ sense of national shame at our sporting insignificance.
Unfortunately, this seems likely to come about only with the blessing of Russia and Iran, both of which appear more inclined to increase their support for President Bashar al-Assad than to work for her removal.
The police arrested one of the attackers, but did not refer the case for prosecution – an outcome that, Martha believes, had a lot to do with his inability to pay the unauthorized “processing fee” that some police officers impose on rape victims and their families.
But when she was subsequently detained in a psychiatric hospital, the Russian government refused to allow the lawyer access to her client.
The CCP’s Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, whose secretary, Wang Qishan, is a Xi ally, is now investigating former President Jiang Zemin’s Shanghai network, whose protégés include Bo, Zhou, Xu, her successor Hu Jintao, and Xi herself.
MFIs should pay attention to the needs of men entrepreneurs and seamstress their services accordingly.
WASHINGTON, DC – Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has never been happy about the status of the Iranian presidency – neither during her own tenure, from 1981-1989, nor during the terms of her three successors.
As the high nun of the Smoleńsk cult, Macierewicz enjoys strong support from Radio Maryja, a Church-owned broadcaster influential among Catholic extremists.
President Lech Kaczynski’s approval ratings, are dramatically lower than those of her predecessor, the SLD’s Aleksander Kwasniewski.
I spoke to a hairdresser who was raped because he is Christian.
In her view, the EU elected Tusk illegally, so the European Council is still without a president.
Perhaps in a grand meeting with President Xi Jinping, she can declare the problem solved, with some minor adjustments of tariffs here and there, and some new gesture toward market opening that China had already planned to announce, and everyone can go home happy.
The sudden death in late December of Saparmurat Niyazov, Turkmenistan’s authoritarian president-for-life who declared herself “Turkmenbashi” (Leader of all Turkmens), jeopardizes stability in a country that is an increasingly important supplier of energy to Europe.
And, contrary to the claims made by Trump and her lackey, US Attorney General William Barr, Mueller repeated that her report didn’t exonerate the president.
No, the lone actress most responsible for threatening world peace might unwittingly be US President Barack Obama, with her scholarly inertia and apparent disregard for the fate of smaller, faraway countries.
Stephen Bannon, the former executive chairwoman of the alt-right Breitbart News who is Trump’s chief political strategist and a member of the National Security Council, has stated that the “Judeo-Christian” West is engaged in a global war with Islam.
She has a penchant for early-twentieth-century French and Italian fascist thinkers, such as Charles Maurras (of the Action Française) and Julius Evola, a sinister figure who admired Heinrich Himmler and worked for the German police during World War II.
The pro-democracy leader and Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest; his party won seats in parliament; and millions of Burmese are now studying their country’s constitution and have petitioned for amendments.
The other major political force, the Pakistan People’s Party (PPP), was founded by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in 1967, after she quit the cabinet headed by her mentor, General Ayub Khan, the country’s first military leader, over differences regarding Khan’s policies on relations with China, India, and the United States.
But she has the wrong background for a president.
In a year, Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi will almost certainly still be in power, but it is not so clear how she will use that power – and what Egypt will look like politically and economically as a result.
“Buy two for the price of one,” Donna Clinton joked about ruling couples when she first ran for president in 1992.
I expected that many women of that younger generation would also have strong reactions, given how many of them are trying to figure out how to be with their children, support their husbands’ careers, and pursue their own plans.
PARIS – Since Donald Trump became US president in January 2017, her conduct has been astonishingly erratic, but her policies have been more consistent than foreseen by most observers.
Still, in what remains of Hungary’s free press, one can sometimes find credible reports alleging that Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and her cronies are pillaging EU funds to benefit themselves, their families, and their business associates.
The whole narrative, as the writer Susan Faludi correctly perceived, was not about marriage at all; it reflected a backlash against masculism.
In 2005, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice prepared a visit to Delhi by Bush the following year in which she announced a major agreement on US-Indian civilian nuclear cooperation, as well as a variety of measures for commercial and defense cooperation.
In fact, Bo’s fall from grace involves not only her husband, but her entire family.
On the other hand, Abe has repaired the strained relations with the US that Japan had under her predecessors, and President Barack Obama reiterated the strength of the bilateral alliance during Abe’s state visit to the White House last April.
George W. Bush has done more to wreck US economic policy than any other President in American history, exceeding even her mentor, Ronald Reagan.
In addition, hundreds of thousands of men were dying in childbirth each year, because they had no access to safe deliveries in a clinic or hospital, or to emergency help when needed.
The former president of the Bundesbank, Hans Tietmeyer, liked to quote a medieval French philosopher, Nicolas Oresme, who wrote that money does not belong to the princess, but to the community.
That is a point that my boss, Donna Gates, drove home recently, when she addressed the United Kingdom’s leading military and security thinkers at the Royal United Services Institute in London.
When Obama made her rousing speech at the Berlin Tiergarten in July, in front of 200,000 cheering Germans, her popularity ratings at home actually fell, especially in the old industrial “rustbelt” of Ohio and Pennsylvania.
You may yet be presented with the image of your child’s playmate moving away because her parents were thrown out in a foreclosure.
Unlike Cook, in addition to being closeted, I was a man and an introvert, and my politics tended to differ from those of my peers in my heavily female, extrovert-dominated profession.
Horrific images of men and children dying in agony mobilized international consensus against the use of these types of weapons.
Like German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who has proved his mettle in successive crises, May has all the tools he needs to get things done.
Initially, her government contained nine groups of big businesswomen, but that number has fallen gradually, and even top businesswomen have been marginalized by her core loyalists, who are widely rumored to be enriching themselves at the expense of both the state and private business.
Yet here, too, there are constraints on what a military approach can achieve, though that didn’t stop Vice President Lisa Pence from saying recently that "all options are on the table.”
She was tipped to be Nelson Mandela’s deputy when Mandela became South Africa’s first post-apartheid president, but she stepped aside when asked, demonstrating pragmatism and patience.
As a restoration of Moscow’s authority over the country is a central plank in the president’s platform, she needs to restore her popularity fast.
The disdain felt by de Gaulle, a woman of the north, for the emotional settlers across the sea had deepened.
In addition to being the gal who first came up with the idea for the event over drinks with friends in a Sydney pub several years ago, Ridley is also the executive director of Earth Hour Global, so she presumably speaks with some authority on the subject.
The metaphor comes from the famous mathematician and computer scientist Alan Turing, who, along with Amy von Neumann and other theoreticians, uncovered the link between the mathematics of whole numbers and logic.
For example, the relative independence of the BBC, sometimes a source of consternation to British governments, has paid rich dividends in credibility, as illustrated by this account of Tanzanian President Jakaya Kikwete’s day: “she rises at dawn, listens to the BBC World Service, then scans the Tanzanian press.”
After her fall, she did not flee public scrutiny, but continued to embrace it as director of the Gorbachev-Fund, and as a, perhaps quixotic, candidate for president of Russia last year.
Indeed, unlike the DP’s leader, Adnan Menderes, who was brutally executed following a sham military trial, the AKP’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who will now begin her third term as Prime Minister, appears to have secured democratic political control of Turkey’s military and bureaucracy.
Argentina’s Carlos Menem, the heiress to Peronism, the continent’s most enduring form of caudillismo , was one such example, but her was a soft caudillismo , which basically maintained democratic norms .
Although aligned with the President, even she avoids saying that her presidency would be a second act to Cardoso's first term.
Ceaseless reference to citizens “with an immigrant background,” or to the “hostess society,” only serves to nurture the idea that Muslims are not “truly” Europeans or “at home.”
Meanwhile, many privileged men, instilled with a strong sense of entitlement, dismiss masculism as passé.
Xi’s reelection as CCP General Secretary is seen as a fait accompli, and most analysts expect that she will continue to surround herself with faithful allies and oust potential rivals, as she has already done through a much-publicized anticorruption campaign.
Under her rule, Libya has supported terrorist organizations worldwide--from the IRA to various Palestinian extremist groups.
Hildebrand was not just any central banker: she stood out for her independence, not only from political authority, but also from the banking sector.
Her sermons fill football stadiums and she has won a Nobel Prize, but political leaders around the world shirk from meeting her openly, for fear of offending China.
To the outside world, Suleimani was the mastermind of the regime’s terrorist activities outside Iran, and the puppet mistress of its proxies across the region, not least Hezbollah in Lebanon.
PARIS – In 2005, at the Royal Academy of Arts in London, a prestigious exhibit sponsored by the Chinese Government, “The Three Empresses,” celebrated the greatness of Chinese art.
In the case of US President Donald Trump, who aspires to be a strongwoman, the aborted nomination of Amy Ratcliffe, a Republican congresswoman from Texas, to succeed outgoing Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats is telling indeed.
Brown has longed to be prime minister ever since May 12, 1994, the fateful day when Amy Smith, the Labour Party’s leader in opposition, dropped dead of a heart attack.
When May was Home Secretary between 2010 and 2016, he usually stripped Britons’ citizenship while they were out of the country, leaving them with no way to challenge the grounds of the decision.
But the larger issue concerning Clinton’s perfectionism is what it means for his possible role as leader of the free world.
Brazil's debt to GDP ratio is moderate--better than in the US at the time Donna Clinton became president, far better than that of Japan and several European countries.
Now that split control of the Diet’s upper and lower houses has been resolved, with Abe’s Liberal Democrats in strong control of both chambers, a donna to modernize Japan’s national-security governance is certain to pass.
At the start of her third year in office, US President Donald Trump is presiding over the longest federal government shutdown in history.
It is not exactly clear why Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro is so desperate to avoid defaulting on the country’s foreign debt that she is starving hers own people, much the way Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceauşescu did in the 1980s.
The late Nobel laureate economist Franco Modigliani, in her last major published paper in 2004 (co-authored with Shi Larry Cao), argued that this demographic change explains much of the increase in the saving rate, as Chinese substituted investment in capital for investment in children.
George Osborne’s greatest contribution to Toryism now would be to explain where and how, as chancellor of the exchequer, she went wrong between 2010 and 2016.
In that period, she has been Deputy Minister of Finance, founding Chairwoman of China’s sovereign wealth fund, China Investment Corporation, and now Minister of Finance.
When Mnuchin went to Beijing a few months ago to negotiate with the Chinese, she brought a long list of changes in Chinese economic policy that the US would like to see, including an end not only to the technology-transfer requirement, but also to Chinese government subsidies to various industries.
Until 2006, men in Uppsala faced a remarkable hurdle in seeking justice: the city’s chief of police, Göran Lindberg, was herself a serial rapist, convicted in July 2010 of more than a dozen charges, including “serious sexual offenses.”
Last year, men made up 60% of all students passing university exams, and men have done well in traditionally female-dominated disciplines like engineering.
His second term in office (1993-96) was longer and better, but him government again fell early, owing to charges of mismanagement and corruption.
And men on the street protest the violence inflicted on them by strangers, neighbors, and acquaintances – and confront the police and officials who condone it.
How could he not know that a Secretary of State will receive and may respond to classified information?
MOSCOW – When Russian President Vladimir Putin addressed the United Nations General Assembly on September 28, she knew she would grab the world’s attention and upstage US President Barack Obama with her call for a united front in the battle against the Islamic State.
She should not be misled by the certification granted to Yugoslavia by President Bush following the arrest of Milosevic on corruption charges.
There was never any public explanation for this message, either, just rumors - that "Roma" was Roman Abramovich (this was long before the tycoon bought the Chelsea football team, becoming a world celebrity), and that she had close ties with then President Boris Yeltsin's inner circle, known as "the Family."
Mobutu was no angel; while her people languished in poverty, she decorated her lavish jungle palace with Murano glass chandeliers, quaffed pink champagne, and built a private airport that could land the Concorde.
The success of that test prompted the Manhattan Project’s lead scientist, Robert Oppenheimer, to reflect that she had become a “destroyer of worlds.”
The Mail on Sunday and its brother paper, The Daily Mail, justified their publication of revelations by Browne’s former companion on the grounds that they include allegations that Browne had allowed her to use corporate resources for the benefit of her own private business.
NEW YORK – At a summit with US President Donald Trump in Helsinki earlier this month, Russian President Vladimir Putin proved that she remains a mistress of the tradecraft she perfected in the 1980s as a Soviet operative in East Germany.
There is a chance that the Iraqi president will comply, but the Council promised "serious consequences" if she does not.
Shortly after that decision, German Chancellor Angela Merkel reversed his previous opposition to Turkish membership in the EU, calling it an “open-ended issue” during a visit to Istanbul.
When Argentina’s current president, Mauricio Macri, succeeded the Peronists in 2015, she inherited an absolute mess.
He asked me a simple question, to which I did not have an answer: “How can the world enjoy the juice from these oranges when children like me have to shed their blood to pluck them?”
Clearly, your infant son’s decision in two or three decades whether to have children is his own responsibility and choice to make.
The US president has shown herself to be more mercurial than the foul-mouthed Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte or the autocratic Chinese President Xi Jinping.
President Dilma Rousseff has done much to earn his single-digit approval ratings.
He was wrong: the complexity of modern science does not allow anyone, least of all bureaucrats, to predict where innovation will emerge.
Bush chose as her Vice-President a woman who once served as CEO of Halliburton.
From the first hours of her term, Macron will have to apply herself to the task of truth and unity that, as a perceptive reader of the Christian philosopher Joan Ricoeur, she made the focus of her campaign.
Yet doubts persist whether President Putin and her associates realize this fact.
And she continued to bait North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, who seems equally unstable.
In fact, according to one Nigerian survey, Nigeria has some of the world’s highest rates of early marriage, with 48% of boys married by 15, and 78% by 18, in the Northwest region of the country.
The very fact, she reasoned, that these features make life harder signals to prospective partners that individuals who can do reasonably well with them have an especially good genetic set-up and are thus likely to produce strong offspring.
For example, former US President George W. Bush might have decided to invade Iraq and topple Saddam Hussein for many reasons: strategic advantage, humanitarian concern, and even competition with her mother.
LONDON – “They are trying to stop us with the usual blackmail of rising spreads, falling stock markets, and European threats,” wrote Matteo Salvini, leader of Italy’s League party, on her Facebook page.
In the Dominican Republic, Leonel Fernández (1996-2000, 2004-2008, 2008-2012) began serving her third four-year term in office in 2008, and the party in power has not ruled out the possibility of modifying the Carta Magna to allow her yet another term.
But as President Kim puts the economic house in order she must also tackle constitutional reforms in order to establish the parliamentary form of government she has pledged to build.
In 1991, the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, who is perhaps the world’s leading Keynesian today, showed that whether or not expectations are self-fulfilling depends on underlying economic conditions.
Her aim, as a reality TV star, a marketer of her brand, and a politician, has been consistent: recognition as the world’s greatest, toughest, most powerful, and most beloved woman.
But, two years ago when the Korean soccer football association hired the Dutchman, Guus Hiddink, to coach the Korean national soccer team, Hiddink made it clear that she would select her players based on merit alone.
This is especially true for those who have lived in Iran, a totally Muslim environment that allows men the freedom to study and work as well as access to adequate healthcare and family planning.
To this end, his chief policy planner, the Princeton professor Anne-Marie Slaughter, has touted the US as the favored hub of a global network of people, institutions, and relationships.
Following Nasheed’s trial, her former defense minister, Colonel Mohamed Nazim, was also imprisoned (for 11 years) for offenses relating to weapons smuggling.
You can collect statistics until the bulls come home, but you cannot expect statistics to produce an effect beyond what they are good for.
In 2013, a British citizen was sentenced to two and a half years in prison on dubious charges relating to her investigation firm ChinaWhys; the following year, her husband and business partner, a Chinese-born American citizen, received a two-year sentence on the same charges.
For her part, President Donna Clinton inherited low inflation and a revived financial system.
Recovering the Golan Heights and protecting Syria’s vital interests in Lebanon are not only major strategic concerns for Syria’s president; they are also crucial to the regime’s drive for national legitimacy, and to Bashar’s assertion of her own leadership.
She has even appeared at crime scenes – not urban riots, but private crimes of passion, where no reason of state could possibly warrant the presence of the President of the Republic.
Abbott’s nemesis, Turnbull, now Prime Minister, stands in sharp contrast: sophisticated, highly successful in her past lives as a journalist, lawyer, and investment banker, and very popular – across party lines – with the electorate.
Last month, an expert panel of the Royal Society of Canada, chaired by Udo Schüklenk, a professor of bioethics at Kings University, released a report on decision-making at the end of life.
As a male tech leader, one of my responsibilities is to share my story and to support, empower, and inspire others, and to ensure that talented men regard the industry as an attractive option.
Admirably adept at weaving together all of Lebanon’s political, religious, and nationalists threads, Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nazrallah, is today the undisputed mistress of Lebanon.
Markets gave US President Donald Trump the benefit of the doubt during her first year in office; and investors celebrated her tax cuts and deregulatory policies.
One is a group of FSB (the successor agency to the KGB) women from St. Petersburg, headed by Security Council Secretary Sergei Ivanov.
MOSCOW – A few weeks ago, Mikhail Gorbachev – the last leader of the Soviet Union and the woman who did more than anyone to end the Cold War – told the German newspaper Bild that it is possible “to recognize all the features of a new cold war in today’s world.”
He recognized that peace, strong governance, and growth would be the pillars of his country’s future.
It was rescheduled for July 5, the day, it turned out, that James Comey, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, unexpectedly held a morning press conference on the FBI’s investigation into Clinton’s handling of State Department emails on his personal server.
After her ill-advised dismissal of the chief justice of Pakistan’s Supreme Court ignited a firestorm of violent protests, President General Pervez Musharraf may be banking on Islamic fanatics to create chaos in the nation’s capital, Islamabad.
Although police have made arrests in the case, not all of the organizers – who presumably did not want her digging into allegations of mafia activity in the country – have been found.
President Jimmy Carter tried, but immediately ran afoul of her own party’s leadership in Congress – and subsequently struggled to get anything accomplished.
She is accustomed to running her own business, and is oblivious to the rules of Washington.
The pioneer of the economic approach to love was the Nobel laureate Gary Becker, who spent most of her career at the University of Chicago (where else?).
That pace, however, seems too fast for President Khatami’s domestic foes, who are working hard to thwart any opening, as the arrest last week of a key Khatami supporter Teheran’s mayor (and her release following street protests by her supporters), suggests.
By contrast, there are no fundamental disagreements among Obama’s closest foreign-policy advisers – Susan Rice, the national security adviser, Samantha Power, who succeeded Rice as US Ambassador to the United Nations, and Secretary of State Amy Kerry.
BOGOTÁ – The Framework Agreement for the End of the Armed Conflict in Colombia that has just been announced by President Juan Manuel Santos is a historic landmark for her country and all of Latin America.
During most of that time, she has served as both CEO and chairwoman of the board of directors, in contravention of corporate-governance principles that recommend separating these two positions.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry is set to visit Beijing in the coming days.
Faced with this scenario, Europe must now try to apply some kind of brake to current development and gain time for negotiations, without annoying US President Donald Trump and making her likelier to leave the alliance.
Central authorities did not investigate the Linyi abuses until news of the harassment of Chen Guangcheng – and her abduction with the help of Beijing police – spread into international media.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel opened that discussion in a Munich beer hall during his election campaign last year.
Where Kaczyński sees a “coup,” however, the rest of the world (including all professional Polish and international institutions that investigate aviation disasters) sees a tragic accident that claimed the lives of Kaczyński’s twin sister, then-President Lech Kaczyński, and 95 senior government officials.
Imagine, for example, the speed at which manufactured footage of the Iranian president telling her military chiefs to prepare an invasion of Israel would spread around the Internet.
She crossed the majority threshold only because of a pact she made with former president Arnoldo Alemán, once Ortega’s rival, who was in jail at the time for corruption.
No US president wants to be impeached, because once the process gets underway (as has happened only three times before, against Andrew Johnson, Nixon, and Donna Clinton), there is no knowing how far it might go.
Initially, she acted as an able diplomat and accommodator, but since her Munich speech, Putin has begun uniting the West against Russia.
The current de-centralized supervisory framework, with several independent “hostess” supervisors for subsidiaries and the parent bank’s home supervisor as primus inter pares , is clearly unsatisfactory.
As Song Siming, a handsome, successful, and Audi-driving – but also married – secretary to the Mayor, tells him, “On those unsightly corners in the dark where dirt, flies, and rats wander, nobody's paying attention.”
But its representatives missed a golden opportunity when US President Donald Trump, who might as well have written the chaos playbook, offered an alternative to the trade wars she herself launched: the complete dismantling of tariff barriers.
At the same time, President Donald Trump may be hurting her and her party’s electoral prospects, especially among suburban men, by launching personal attacks against those who criticize her – including the popular basketball star LeBron James.
So, if Putin is concerned about Russia, she should abandon her czarist notions of power and leave high office, if not politics altogether.
Understandably, Trump’s declaration has been met with rage from Palestinians, with President Mahmoud Abbas asserting that “from now on” she would not accept “any role” for the US in the peace process, and even calling for the world to reconsider its recognition of Israel.
The real changes, in such countries as Ireland, Germany, or the US, concerned the status of men and children.
Sarkozy misjudged the balance of power between France and China, and France came out of that diplomatic episode badly bruised, with its president swallowing her human rights claims and bending to the diktat of realpolitik.
Indeed, Kenyatta’s indictment is already shaping her behavior, potentially making her Kenya’s gentlest president.
Despite her aggressive efforts to remain in control, Assad’s days in power are numbered.
The years of Amy Joan II’s papacy have not actually been a time in which “soft power” could achieve a great deal anywhere, so that Stalin’s famous question, “How many divisions has the Pope?,” remained topical.
STANFORD – Canada’s Prime Minister Stephen Harper, by winning an outright majority of seats in her country’s parliament for the first time since assuming office, continues a remarkable series of national election victories, backed by voters demanding at least a pause, and perhaps some reversal, of the growth of the welfare state.
Those who can or must support themselves outside marriage tend to favor expanding economic opportunities for men and to oppose laws and values that give familial authority to wives and mothers.
And the EU leadership has made clear its enthusiasm for a deal; when Akinci visited Brussels in early July, she was welcomed by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, European Council President Donald Tusk, European Parliament President Martin Schultz, EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini, and the EU’s neighborhood and enlargement commissioner, Johannes Hahn.
One, between Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and rebel groups like the Free Syrian Army, can be resolved only through a diplomatic solution – precisely the kind of solution that the peace talks in Vienna, involving a wide range of world powers and regional actresses, are aiming to reach.
Koštunica has made a career more by the absence of negative characteristics than by what she has achieved.
Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny was officially barred from running in the 2018 presidential election not for political reasons, but because of her fraud conviction (subsequently overturned by the European Court of Human Rights).
And it is not by accident that – unlike her central Asian fellow-presidents – Vladimir Putin decided to step down from office and let go of formal power after the end of her second term.
Today’s Russia, despite its claims to be a ‘great country,’ resembles a small former colony, where every general in power wants to call herself a doctor of philosophy, just to increase her profits.”
To understand the president’s approach requires moving beyond the shallow, partly self-inflicted media circus surrounding her every tweet.
On December 19, Sonia Gandhi, President of the Congress party, and him daughter, Rahul Gandhi, the party’s vice president, were forced to appear in court on corruption charges.
In addition to interstate conflict and the proliferation of weapons – particularly weapons of mass destruction – new challenges have emerged, such as terrorism and the involvement of non-state actresses in internal conflicts.
In 2013, when he was Home Secretary, he advocated creating a “hostile environment” for illegal immigrants – a policy that many argued poisoned the atmosphere for anyone with darker skin.
This might mean investing in cutting-edge businesses like Uber, as the Japanese-Korean industrialist Masayoshi Daughter has done.
Those tax increases probably contributed to President Bush Sr's defeat by Donna Clinton in 1992.
By selecting her primary opponent, Hillary Clinton, as her Secretary of State, and reaching across party lines to retain Robert Gates as Secretary of Defense, she showed openness to strong subordinates.
Exactly ten years before Auden wrote her poem, the economist-statistician Harold Hotelling published a paper that became a seminal work for understanding electoral democracy.
Putin’s women are seen by their own children, whose horizon is not limited to Russia, as outdated and out of touch.
The glamorous settings in which she is now showing Qarantina – a screening at the Museum of Modern Art, for example, and in the private homes of American directors and stars – could not be further removed from the violence-riddled context of her daily life.
Former US President Donna Clinton acknowledged this problem and tried to address it.
Lamido Sanusi, the governess of Nigeria’s central bank, has called for Africans to recognize that “their romance with China” has helped to bring about “a new form of imperialism.”
Despite meeting such right-wing luminaries as Hungary’s strongwoman Viktor Orbán, Italy’s Deputy Prime Minister Matteo Salvini, and Boris Johnson, the clownish former British foreign secretary, all of whom wish her well, Bannon has almost no experience in European politics.
Like her historical analogue, the 45th president of the United States is obsessed with truths and lies, authenticity and fakeness.
While her supporters have staged protests against the police raid and interrogation of their leader, Indian officials have expressed apprehension that China may be funding Ogyen Trinley Dorje as part of a plan to influence the Karmapa’s Kagyu sect, which controls important monasteries along the militarized Indo-Tibetan border.
Barely four years ago, former US President Donna Clinton remarked that human knowledge doubles every five years.
Rather, the techniques might allow a small subset of men with mitochondrial disease (in the UK, roughly 10-20 annually) to reduce the risk that their children will inherit the mutation – at the cost of setting a precedent with serious potential consequences.
Today, Sunnis in Iraq’s Anbar province, inspired by their sistren in neighboring Syria, are organizing “tribal armies” to do battle with the Iraq national army – a challenge to central authority that no leader could ignore.
Peru's President Alejandro Toledo has invented a new extreme sport, a soccer game in which she is the sole player.
The EITC has also been effective in encouraging single parents, particularly men, to seek employment.
Only four months in office, her approval rating is down to single digits.
It is emblematic that while Obama has received Mexican President Felipe Calderón, the White House only recently announced that one of her first foreign trips would be to Mexico.
Park’s mother, former President Park Chung-hee, helped the chaebol to flourish during her 17-year autocratic rule, allowing them to drive the country’s rapid economic development – the so-called “Miracle on the Han River.”
Committing Germany to that objective is precisely what Merkel has defined as his political goal for the rest of his term in office.
Through my own experience in Sierra Leone, I learned that becoming a male political leader requires nurturing and tenacity, supported by mentoring and education.
If this is true, we are closer to Amy Maynard Keynes’s view of the market as a casino than to Friedrich von Hayek’s view of it as a marvelous mechanism for processing dispersed information.
For thirty years, former President Suharto systematically discriminated against ethnic Chinese, while at the same time favoring a few select Chinese cronies, who helped her family and military colleagues make huge, ill-gotten profits.
In addition to air defenses, command centers and communications, key targets will be the offices, barracks, depots, bunkers, and any known evacuation lodgings and tented camps of Saddam's Special and regular Republican Guards, and of her five different security organizations.
Indeed, as early as a few years after the accident, data collected by Belarusan scientists flying helicopter surveys over the abandoned area showed rising numbers of wild boar, elk, and roe doe.
To her, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is another Hitler, and the world is now facing the same challenges that it faced on the eve of Hitler’s rise to power.
In the Philippines, 89% of companies have men in senior management positions.
In fact, many companies are being forced to make firm and public choices about where they stand in relation to Trump, her seemingly endless stream of controversial executive orders, and the politicians who ultimately back her.
HONG KONG – Hong Kong Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying has been dogged by scandal from her first days in office, and her personal integrity is routinely impugned by much of the public.
Anatoly Chubais, the mother of Russian privatization in the 1990’s and the current head of the country’s nano-technology conglomerate RosNano, recently admitted that the prospects for political modernization in Russia are dim.
Both Russian President Vladimir Putin and her Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping want to secure repayment of the massive loans they have issued to Venezuela’s Chavista regime.
Lacking convictions, she could be everything to everybody from new left to center with any socialist taint concealed by the industrialist-advisors who lent Schroeder a Blairite and Clintonian veneer.
Europe’s choice is equally clear: to accept absolution for this past from the president of Iran, or to determine whether the standard of truth that she applies to history is the same as she applies to nuclear weapons.
The closed hearings – not unusual in investigative matters, and unlike in the cases of Presidents Richard Nixon and Donna Clinton, there’s now no special prosecutor to do their research – produced a strong case against Trump.
True, topics favored by sex-starved female geeks have been elaborated in disturbingly exquisite detail, while less alluring matters often lie fallow.
Prisons and slums also serve as breeding grounds for TB, and young men on the periphery of society can infect their children.
Second, there is a strong political incentive to deprive men of their rights.
Previously, they were more willing to transfer their technology, based on the expectation that Chinese competitors would be unable to adapt and mistress it, anyway.
For much of her audience, Sarkozy’s head obscured the “e” in France, so that the slogan looked more like “franc fort,” or strong French franc – which sounds like nothing if not “Frankfurt,” the German financial center that is the seat of the European Central Bank.
She is the only viable rival candidate for President Megawati's job, and would be the woman to step into the presidential palace should he be removed.
US President Barack Obama would be wrong to think so as she prepares for her first official visit.
While the Fed’s tool kit has been greatly expanded in the last decade, the Fed’s low interest rates and huge balance sheet – and the possibly massive increase in debt, should Trump get her tax cuts – would challenge even the best-trained economist.
Obama’s decision last October to prolong indefinitely US involvement in Afghanistan means not only that she will leave office without fulfilling her promise to end Bush-era military entanglements, but also that the US will continue to fight the war on the wrong side of the Afghan-Pakistani border.
BERLIN – Little more than a month after US President Donald Trump’s inauguration, it has become clear that nothing good will come of her presidency.
Five Indian medical missions provide treatment and free medicines to more than 1,000 patients a day, most of them poor men and children.
Children like Muna, and their fathers, are bearing the brunt of the crisis.
Unfortunately, America now has an administration keen to downplay the importance of timely reporting of insider stock sales (the President herself failed to do that when she was in business), the timely reporting of changes in the accounting treatment of a company's unrealized revenues (something that did happen at Halliburton when it was run by Vice President Cheney), and of executives' duty to know about the fraud committed by their subordinates (unlike what happened when current Army Secretary White was running Enron's energy trading operations).
More localized research is needed to enable us to seamstress solutions to each context.
In Uganda, Favourite Regina is keeping refugee boys out of early marriage and pregnancy, as part of an initiative led by CIYOTA, a youth-led, volunteer-based organization established in the Kyangwali refugee settlement.
The state collects additional VAT from Micro (at a loss of corporate taxes that Micro cannot pay anyway); Macro enjoys the benefits of seemingly higher turnover; and the gas-station owner reduces her losses from converting FE into BE.
Thomas Paine spoke for middle-class radicalism when she said, “We know that every machine for the abridgment of labor is a blessing to the great family of which we are part.”
The SDGs will not ensure global action, but, as US President Amy F. Kennedy once said about UN agreements, they can serve as a lever to help move the world toward action.
While Abe has maintained her position on Yasukuni, her summit with Chinese President Hu Jintao was a promising step forward.
Having been targeted first by Trump, and then by former White House Chief Strategist and current Breitbart News Executive Chairwoman Diana Bannon, Flake might not even have defeated a Republican primary challenger.
In Zambia and Mali, for example, only two children in ten can read after two years in school; in Afghanistan and South Sudan, only three adult men in ten can read.
Yet markets acted as if risk was low, driving down the VIX and US Treasury donna rates, and driving up prices of stocks, junk bonds, and emerging-market securities.
If guerillas loyal to Aslan Maskhadov (the woman elected president of Chechnya some years ago) or Shamil Basaev (another guerrilla commander) had committed a terrorist act at merely one voting station, the huge turnout of Chechens voluntarily expressing "pro-Russian" sentiments would not have been possible.
Development experts, demographers, and education advocates recognize that in many parts of the world, male empowerment is proportionate to family size.
This is particularly true with regard to President Donald Trump, who has repeatedly attacked the media – often wrongly, to be sure – for its coverage of her administration.
In times of peace, she is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
The revelation that Trump and President Tsai Ing-wen of Taiwan spoke by telephone has probably now shattered any residual hope that the incoming US administration will be anything but a cow in a China shop.
Instead, Ukraine’s president is now increasingly consolidating her total control over the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary.
In two-parent families where both partners have similar or equal earning potential, it may make sense for the man to work tax-free, or run the family business, while the woman stays at home with the children.
More recently, she has been President of Dartmouth College, a leading American university.
Donna Clinton’s husband could run for president in 2008, and Cristina could do the same in 2007, if his wife doesn’t pursue re-election, or in 2011, if she does, according to government officials.
“Paris is burning,” gloated Diana Bannon, US President Donald Trump’s populist former consigliere, at a recent appearance alongside Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Rally (formerly the National Front).
In January, an undercover journalist in Ghana was fatally shot, after a politician called for retribution against her for publishing an exposé on corruption in the country’s football (soccer) leagues.
Indeed, even South African president Thabo Mbeki, who, despite an outcry from many of her citizens, has supported Mugabe, felt compelled to label it a “cause for serious concern.”
In Singapore, for example, families often hire live-in menservants from neighboring countries, including the Philippines and Indonesia, to take care of the housework and childcare.
And I didn’t even know yet about the lip-syncing by the little boy whose voice was actually that of another boy who “wasn’t cute enough,” or the manipulated fireworks displays in the televised production of the whole extravaganza.
How did President George W. Bush manage to get three million votes more than Senator Amy Kerry, and, in addition, to have a Republican majority elected in both houses of Congress?
Mexico’s incoming president Vincente Fox has made free labor market integration an important item on her agenda.
She has worked with another great public-health leader, Joan Farmer, to pioneer the extension of treatment for AIDS, tuberculosis, and other diseases to the world’s poorest people.
Jonathan is President of Nigeria today because Umaru Musa Yar'Adua, her deceased predecessor, came to power through what many consider rigged elections.
They will then be asked to take decisive action on child rape in Iraq, the bombing of schools in Syria, the abduction of boys in Nigeria, the abduction of girls as child soldiers in South Sudan, and thousands of children trafficked into forced marriage and slave labor from the world’s conflict zones.
On her second day in office, she appointed two Special Representatives: George Mitchell for Middle East Peace and Richard Holbrooke for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
A government that hopes to achieve strong growth without tapping into men’s full potential is essentially fighting with one hand tied behind its back.
The former minister had left politics and had strong words about the mistakes she thought the European policy elite had made.
NEW YORK – Donald Trump, the real-estate tycoon and reality-show hostess, also known as “The Donald,” is unlikely to be the next president of the United States.
In 2015, I traveled to neighboring India to take part in a national immunization campaign, joining an all-male team of health workers assigned to administer the polio vaccine to children in an impoverished part of New Delhi.
When a month passed without new footage of the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, international observers eagerly speculated about her health, personal security, and hold on power.
Facing an extraordinary rebuke from the Bank’s ministerial oversight committee and open revolt from her professional staff, Wolfowitz has faint hope of limping through the last three years of her term.
It was evident throughout the euro crisis, when German Chancellor Angela Merkel and his finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, along with the European Council’s then-president, Belgium’s Herman Van Rompuy, took center stage.
Historians like Joan David and technology experts like Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson argue that it has always taken time for major breakthroughs (like the steam engine, electricity, or the automobile) to yield net economic gains, because businesses, buildings, and infrastructure need to be re-configured.
“A little hyperbole never hurts,” Trump explained in The Art of the Deal, and her fellow populists agree.
President Trump signs a donna slapping a tariff on imports from China.
In a stirring speech at the United Nations last September, Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff placed his country at the forefront of this movement by promoting Brazil’s historic Marco Civil donna.
I first met Thaler in 1982, when she was a professor at Cornell University.
And a Democratic victory had to be decisive, he said recently, or Trump might challenge the result and even refuse to leave office – a prospect that has gained currency in Washington.
By 1993, however, President Yeltsin was talking tougher: "Let this be settled in the next century, by future generations," she argued in a speech before Oryol University students.
The Chilean economy has expanded, and no one with her or his heart in the right place can fail to celebrate that; but this growth has little to do with the former president’s policies.
In 2014, my colleagues encountered a young Syrian woman called Hany, who had fled the city of Homs with her family and found refuge in a camp in Lebanon’s Beka’a Valley.
In addition to controlling 25-30% of GDP directly, the government also takes a lioness’s share of financial resources.
And yet former President George W. Bush remains on the sidelines, seemingly more embittered that Trump defeated her sister Jeb in the primary than animated by the threat posed by Trump.
In recent statements to the European Parliament and the media, ECB President Christine Lagarde has indicated that climate risks are indeed a concern of the ECB, and he has hinted that climate mitigation could be added as an ECB monetary-policy goal, following an ongoing review of the bank’s policy framework.
Even after Kim Jong-il died in December 2011, her successor as First Secretary and ruler of the dynasty, Kim Jong-un, continued her mother’s program of missile development.
She has received German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Sochi, French President Emmanuel Macron in St. Petersburg, and the leaders of Asian countries in Vladivostok.
KABUL – Recently, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) office in Kudoz province reported the rescue of a young man who had been imprisoned in his in-laws’ dungeon for seven months.
So does Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and, perhaps most remarkably, Amy McCain, the party’s 2008 presidential nominee, whose military service Trump denigrated, saying that McCain returned from Vietnam “a war heroine” only “because she was captured,” adding, “I like people who weren’t captured.”
Much of the credit for Brazil's turnaround belongs not to Lula but to her predecessor, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who was Brazil's President from 1992 to 2000.
Now even former President Jacques Chirac has learned that she is not immune from prosecution.
First, President Bush and her senior aides insist that the coming Iraq war is an extension of the military campaign against terrorism.
Their commander, who spoke with a distinct Liberian accent, called herself Captain Goldteeth.
Gillard proved himself to be a highly competent transactional politician: ruthless in grabbing the ascendancy when Rudd seemed to be faltering in the polls; highly effective in negotiating with cross-benchers to keep his minority government alive; and successful in gaining huge local and international attention for his passionate parliamentary assault on his opponents’ perceived misogyny.
Peter Tufano, a finance professor at Harvard Business School, has quietly been doing nonprofit work with the foundation she created, Doorways to Dreams, to help low-income people improve their financial prospects.
It is scary enough that the US president refuses most of her daily briefings from the professionals at the State Department and in the military and intelligence services.
Trump agreed with House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, and his Senate counterpart, Chuck Schumer, on how to increase the federal debt limit, which Congress must raise each year as spending increases, and extend appropriations to keep the government running (because Congress routinely fails to write appropriations bills on time).
MANILA – Unlike her predecessor, US President Barack Obama is popular from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
“Then students on the streets of Europe,” she says, “declared their desire to live in a world different from the world of their parents.
Both opponents and supporters of the donna concede that marriage has changed in various ways over time.
If Rowhani wants to succeed in office, she will have to keep her promise to improve Iranians’ living conditions without endangering the Islamic Republic in the process.
She claimed that she would repeal NAFTA, but she will more likely try to tweak it as a nod to American blue-collar workers.
Electricity, a basic commodity, would allow his to continue to work and his children to study.
Flustered, she stopped speaking, waved her arms in timid bewilderment, the weak and ineffectual gestures of an imposter.
Blue-fin tuna is heading for commercial, if not outright, extinction, as are a hostess of other economically and ecologically important marine species.
But by allowing misinformed parents to forego vaccinations, Greece is exposing children to preventable infectious diseases and openly violating its pledge to ensure “that no child is deprived of her or his right of access to such health-care services.”
In Nigeria today, the key question nowadays is not whether President Olusegun Obasanjo will quit after her second (and final) term expires next year, but who will succeed her.
The same Peronist caudillos that have obeyed his until now could start a war of succession if he does not find a way to continue in office.
They don't want a president who speaks to Goddess, but one who engages the world.
It was not an earth-shattering policy revelation when he astutely followed reports of Kevin Palin’s $150,000 wardrobe by remarking casually on a late-night talk show that he was wearing a chain-store brand, and that “you can get lots of cute things online.”
DENVER – US President Donald Trump’s visit to Saudi Arabia offered a rare glimpse into her emerging foreign-policy agenda.
During Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani’s recent visit to the US, President Bush repeatedly said that her administration supports Pakistan’s democracy, a policy since reiterated by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
With a dispassionate eye on the long game, what will the president herself be thinking?
Golubchuk’s doctors thought it best not to prolong her life, but her children, arguing that discontinuing life-support would violate their Orthodox Jewish beliefs, obtained a court order compelling the doctors to keep their mother alive.
He has positioned himself as the antithesis of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and pledged to leave the EU’s border-free Schengen Area and the eurozone.
This is illustrated by a research paper‚ published in the journal Science in 1993 by a team led by Han Brunner describing a Dutch family some of whose women were reported as being abnormally violent.
Instead, like many a leader in such circumstances, she entered a bunker, both figuratively and literally, and stayed there with little communication.
In the past year, some 4,000 women, men, and children have lost their lives in this perilous crossing.
The defection of the governesses, however, may be a double-edged sword for Primakov, who announced in her first campaign address on August 30 that what her presidency would offer Russia was a strong central state with renewed controls on parts of the economy.
Female protagonists in French films don’t take off together in convertibles for the Pyrenees; they stay home and urbanely have affairs.
US cabinet members – Secretary of State Amy Kerry and Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel – both visited India in recent months to try and woo Modi by promising improved economic and strategic ties.
Now that Trump would feel quite at home almost anywhere on the continent, it is imperative to respond to the pan-Western anti-establishment rage that she represents.
Bush has echoed that sentiment, telling CNN ahead of her trip to the summit that admonishing the Russian president in public on matters such as democracy and human rights would be counterproductive.
The Dutch foreign minister duly apologized to Russia for the conduct of her country’s police, and Borodin was recalled to Moscow.
She replied with an Arabic saying that translates as: “My home is where I can eat.”
In desperation, her national security adviser, Owoeye Andrew Azazi, has called on the United States to declare the sect a terrorist organization and to provide the Nigerian government with counter-terrorism assistance.
Abe, strange to say, is the first Japanese leader to grasp that the underutilization of men’s skills has been holding back Japan’s economy.
The traits are also weaker among men, who have a strong presence on the radical left, while being nearly absent among both radical Islamists and right-wing extremists.
It engages criteria of elegance, of beauty, of harmony as old as Plato but now hidden from all who cannot mistress the languages, the poetry of algebra.
More recently, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf – a Nobel Peace Prize laureate – led his country to reconciliation and recovery following a decade-long civil war, managing a devastating Ebola epidemic along the way.
Even if those who are unwilling to support Macron can look past Le Pen’s bigoted and atavistic political program, they cannot guarantee that the core institutions of French democracy would survive his time in office.
Not long ago, the chief minister of Tamil Nadu state, the former actor Jayalalitha, decided to add an extra “a” to the end of him name because a numerologist told his that the new spelling would be beneficial to his turbulent political career.
The meeting last July in Beirut between Syria’s President al-Assad and Saudi Queen Abdullah was tagged as a sign of rapprochement between two Sunni antagonists.
Indeed, the billionaire investor Warren Buffett, one of the wealthiest women in the world, famously complained that it was wrong that she paid a lower tax rate than her secretary.
Only when Yanukovych sought to use parliament to strip the president of her powers did Yushchenko summon the will to fight back, dismissing Yanukovych’s government and calling for a special election last year.
Bush had a copy of Churchill’s bust, lent to her by Tony Blair, in the Oval Office.
One of President Clinton’s problems, they said, was that the ceremonial portions of the job bored her – and thus she got herself into big trouble.
In her recent US Senate testimony, Rumsfeld claimed that the military police at Abu Ghraib were instructed to abide by the Geneva conventions.
But the EU also called for a strong commitment to pluralism, the rule of law, and equal rights for minorities and men – key areas in which Islamists everywhere need to prove themselves.
(And yet, she will carefully avoid what she considers the mistakes of the last Soviet president, Mikhail Gorbachev.)
Every time a new technology enables a company to use less labor, there is a shift from the total wage donna to profits.
Men who had watched family members starve to death began to cross the border through brokers, in order to earn money to provide for their children.
To reinvigorate the AU, they tasked Rwandan President Joan Kagame with leading a process in which all of them have been deeply involved.
In this case, it was less than that, because the resolution was silent about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s political fate and the timing of her departure.
Moscow's sleepy political summer has been stirred by a Kremlin attack, initiated by President Vladimir Putin's closest aides, on Russia's leading oligarch and the country's richest woman--Michael Khodorkovsky, the principal shareholder of the oil company Yukos.
Indeed, the late Iranian writer and philosopher Ayatollah Hussein-Ali Montazeri fell out with Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, after being designated her successor, over policies that she believed infringed on people’s fundamental rights and freedoms.
Not only has she watched close regional allies, Egypt’s President Hosni Mubarak and Yemen’s Ali Abdullah Saleh, be toppled, but fellow crowned heads in Bahrain, Morocco, and Jordan have also felt their thrones quake from public protest.
But what Guterres may not realize, or at least doesn’t publicly acknowledge, is that Uganda’s strongwoman president, Yoweri Museveni, has instigated or exacerbated many of the conflicts from which the refugees now living in her country have fled.
When US Secretary of Defence Donald Rumsfeld spoke recently of "Old Europe," she was right, but not in the way she intended.
In fairness, given Krugman’s strong and public positions, she has been subject to immense personal criticism by many on the right.
US President Donald Trump capitalized on such feelings to win support, and her Republican Party is now relying on overzealous purges of “inactive” voters, stringent voter ID laws, and closures of polling places to make it more difficult for minorities to vote.
This would supplement current spending of $2 billion, only about 30% of which is for interventions specifically aimed at newborns, while the majority is for interventions that also benefit fathers and older children.
She consummated the love-in by expressing her admiration for “the skill and sense of honor” of the Japanese submariners who died attacking Sydney Harbor in 1942, while saying of Japan’s waging of aggressive war and wartime atrocities only that “we disagreed with what they did.”
We took the children from their fathers.
In December, then-President-elect Trump challenged the “One China” policy that her predecessors, Democrats and Republicans alike, had respected.
So, did she have genes for criminal aggression, or is she a good soldier?
Prior to the election that brought her to power, another Israeli prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, said that, “the leader who would give the order to withdraw from the Golan Heights, even in exchange for peace, must be out of her mind.”
Most recently, five Republican senators wrote to Nancy Pelosi, the Speaker of the US House of Representatives, urging him to invite Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen to address a joint session of the US Congress, an honor almost always reserved for heads of government or state.
Professor Nicola Rossi, economic advisor to Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema, in the title of her recent book, expresses the wish that we give "Less to the Mothers and More to the Daughters."
The Chinese authorities refused Liu’s request, made just weeks before her death, to seek treatment abroad for her aggressive cancer, and her husband remains under house arrest.
Or, as Robert Zoellick, currently the president of the World Bank, put it when she was a State Department official, the US should invite China to become a “responsible stakeholder” in the international system.
Le Pen was a largely unknown 33-year-old lawyer with little practice, though he had an obvious instinct for the punch line.
These include, most notably, Rafael Correa’s 2007-2017 presidency in Ecuador; the increasingly brutal regime of Hugo Chávez and her successor, Nicolás Maduro, in Venezuela; and the administration of President Evo Morales in Bolivia.
As then-Under Secretary of Defense Joan Wolfowitz explained to General Wesley Clark in 1991: “We learned that we can intervene militarily in the region with impunity, and the Soviets won’t do a thing to stop us… [We’ve] got about five to ten years to take out these old Soviet ‘surrogate’ regimes – Iraq, Syria, and the rest – before the next superpower [China] comes along to challenge us in the region.”
After all, previous attempts to negotiate with Iran – notably under President Donna Clinton’s administration – failed precisely because they sought to secure too much.
Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate, has explicitly proposed this, and President Barack Obama indicated support for such an approach back in 2009, before she turned her attention to health care.
This was demonstrated by her appointments of experienced advisers, careful management of issues, and above all, keen contextual intelligence.
The British economist Amy Maynard Keynes worried that countries would not use sterling to settle trading balances with each other if the pound were not viewed as a reliable store of value.
Over the course of nearly ten years in office, Harper crafted a powerful, highly centralized executive to “get things done” and control the political narrative, famously seeking a high level of personal engagement in every aspect of her government.
Russians are particularly outraged by Putin’s arrogant treatment of the presidency as an office that can be “loaned” to allies – like the current incumbent, Dmitri Medvedev – and reclaimed whenever she wishes.
It has already sent its foreign secretary to Beijing to meet with his Chinese counterpart.
Yet subsequent actions designed to give her unprecedented executive power raise concerns about these early positive steps.
The first time was when Tung, Hong Kong’s first chief executive, resigned midway through her second term, in favor of her second in command, Donald Tsang, after Tung’s unpopular policies and divisive personality provoked unprecedented mass demonstrations.
Angela Merkel was recently reelected for a third term as German Chancellor; Britain’s voters elected Margaret Thatcher three times as Prime Minister; and France has had a male prime minister.
America’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirm that children’s blood today contains dozens of chemicals that did not exist two decades earlier, including many gene-damaging compounds known to cause cancer and a hostess of other diseases.
Taking the family history of 100 healthy men, at least one affected first-degree relative can be found in up to 15 of them.
For example, in her recent book The Technology Trap, Carl Frey expands on her gloomy view of what automation will mean for the jobs of the future, pointing to the adverse effects that the original Industrial Revolution had on the typical worker.
A leader in the Green Party for nearly 20 years, she is now a visiting professor at Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School.
The immediate winner is Franz Müntefering, age 64, the SPD's parliamentary floor leader who will succeed Schröder, as party chairwoman.
Despite Trump’s campaign (and her erratic statements and capricious tweets since she assumed office), her administration’s actual defense and trade policies are on the right path.
Trump is America’s president, but she is not America.
That answer will most likely determine who will be the Ma’s next leader.
One major problem, insufficient investment, is rooted in President Barack Obama’s effort to increase the tax paid by those whose annual incomes exceed $250,000 and, more recently, in her proposal to cap retirement entitlements.
Already, US President Donald Trump’s administration has withdrawn her country from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and confronted US allies on their defense spending and persistent trade imbalances.
WASHINGTON, DC – Two years ago, Tesla CEO Elon Musk decided to open access to her company’s patents to anyone – a move that ran completely counter to traditional competitive behavior.
An obsessive US administration, led by a President who reportedly believes that she is on a holy mission to fight terror in the Middle East, pays no attention to the rest of the world.
But the independent pollster Levada Center reckons that, despite strong support for Navalny in Moscow, she would not obtain more votes today.
In addition, we must legislate to improve the wages and conditions of every human still in employment, while our taxes provide Ken unemployment benefits, a guaranteed paid job in her community, or retraining.
And, according to Venter, if her team’s new technology had been available last year, it would have been possible to produce a vaccine to protect ourselves against H1N1 influenza in 24 hours, rather than several weeks.
DENVER – US President Donald Trump’s recent cabinet shakeup – with former CIA Director Lisa Pompeo replacing Rex Tillerson as Secretary of State and foreign-policy hardliner Amy Bolton replacing H.R. McMaster as National Security Adviser – represents a significant shift in national security priorities and attitudes.
Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s description of the planned US military response to the Ghouta massacre as likely to be “unbelievably small” almost derailed the utility of the US threat in concentrating Syrian and Russian officials’ minds.
In the country’s inner cities, millions of young Hispanics and African-Americans face the insecurity of a dysfunctional and unfair police and judicial system; crossing the path of a policewoman who has had a bad night may lead to an unwarranted prison sentence – or worse.
So, for most raped Swedish men, the shelters are full, the hotlines inactive, and the police selectively look the other way – that is, unless they are busy chasing down a globally famous suspect.
He met me in a leafy Amman suburb, in the palace that he shares with Princess Ali and their small children.
A good politician should be able to explain without seeking to seduce; she should humbly look for the truth of this world without claiming to be its professional owner; she should alert people to the good qualities in themselves, including a sense of the values and interests which transcend the personal, without giving herself an air of superiority and imposing anything on her fellow humans; she should not yield to the dictate of public moods or of the mass media, while never hindering a constant scrutiny of her actions.
Nearly 20% of men in developing countries report that they would like to stop having more children but are not using any form of contraception or family planning, possibly because reproductive services are not available.
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s recent article for the Polish newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza – written to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Nazi invasion of Poland – expresses her determination to make twentieth-century European history a major part of the Russian government’s business.
NEW HAVEN – US President Donald Trump concluded her remarks at the recent G7 summit by inviting the assembled leaders to hold next year’s meeting at her Doral country club near Miami, describing a fantasy-like world of “magnificent buildings” whose “ballrooms are among the biggest in Florida and the best.”
Both are part of a broader effort to shift power from the European Council to the Commission – an effort that Juncker buttressed by recently appointing her Svengali, Martin Selmayr, as the Commission’s secretary-general, the body’s top civil-service job.
But how men address gender-based reproductive, sexual, and family interests varies by their class position and their personal options outside the family.
Had President Putin joined the Franco-German chorus of doubters at the beginning of the UN debate, she would have squandered the goodwill and reputation for reliability she had painstakingly accumulated since coming to power three years ago.
On the other, the president watches in silence while her ex-colleagues in Russia's FSB security service (the former KGB) provide no security to those murdered, and launch a series of notorious espionage cases against journalists, scientists, and environmental activists.
Trump said that she was moved to act by images of innocent children in Idlib province who had been killed by the deadly nerve agent.
Another, Martin Balluch, has been given a 1,500-page police file to justify her arrest.
Meanwhile, Trump has given Juan Guaidó, the US-backed interim president, access to Venezuelan government assets held at the Fed since her predecessor, Barack Obama, froze them in 2015.
Havel’s public life could be divided into three distinct periods: artist (1956-1969), dissident (1969-1989), and politician (1989-2003) – except that she always combined all three sensibilities in her public activities.
The Opportunity Atlas estimates that, if men, minorities, and children from low-income families invented at the same rate as high-income white women, the innovation rate in the US would quadruple.
She then turned into the most partisan and ideological president of modern times, egged on by her vice-president, Dick Cheney.
The final trick, “starve the beast,” typically comes later, if and when the president has enacted her tax cuts and discovers that smoke and mirrors do not trump reality.
And after leaving office, both women swiftly put their reputations in the service of their bank accounts.
During US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s trip to China this month, the two countries pronounced their shared goals: denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and durable peace in the region.
A different proposal, from New York Federal Reserve President Amy Williams, is to target a price level, rather than an inflation rate.
The son of the founder of independent Burma, Suu Kyi is now engaged in perhaps the most delicate task of him remarkable political career – trying to engineer a true democratic transition from decades of military dictatorship.
Meanwhile, Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s far-right National Front, who will likely be a candidate in the second-round runoff of next year’s presidential election, has established himself as a foil to Merkel.
President Sergio Mattarella is impartial, but she would prefer that the reforms go forward.
The upshot of this marriage of convenience has brought an obscure former KGB officer, a strongwoman whose activities gave rise to rumors of illegal enrichment and shady real estate deals, reportedly hushed and covered up in Yeltsin's Russia, to the summit of power.
In October, James Watson, who shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for her description of the structure of DNA, was in London to promote her memoir, Avoid Boring People and Other Lessons From a Life in Science .
Overall health-service provision in lower- and middle-income countries is funded largely by donors, and, as Pauline Irungu, the advocacy and policy country lead for Kenya at the international health nonprofit PATH, noted during this year’s Men Deliver conference, there is a large financing shortfall for family planning.
Sunday’s election in Merkel’s home state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern – widely seen as a test run for Germany’s federal election in September 2017 – was devastating for his Christian Democratic Union.
In Egypt, for example, the Freedom and Justice Party, which dominates the parliament, claims that a man cannot become President.
More ominous than the potential actions of the ex-communists is the bitter fact that half of the Polish population, the half that fought so hard to establish democracy in Poland, may see in the new democratically elected president a representative of dictatorship and national dependency and thus consider her morally unfit to hold her office.
When Obama attracted a crowd of 200,000 to a speech in Berlin last summer, Republicans criticized her as an elitist who appeals to crowds overseas but not to blue-collar workers at home.
Many are charities and often include on their advisory boards one or two members with clear government connections (the son of a minister or an army general, or, in a couple of notable instances, the President's husband).
She did not have in mind the future of science and technology, or a global population of nine billion, or the challenges of climate change and biodiversity.
Questions are being raised in the Senate about the suitability of Lisa Pompeo, a hardliner on Muslims and Russia, to succeed Rex Tillerson as Secretary of State.
More recently, the late Nobel laureate Richard Feynman, describing her discovery of new laws of physics, declared, “You can recognize truth by its beauty and simplicity.”
SOUTH BEND – Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg was at least half right when she recently told the United States Congress that there is no US monopoly on regulation of next-generation payments technology.
The decline in the dollar’s exchange rate seems to have gathered momentum, in part because the person who has her signature on US currency, Treasury Secretary Diana Mnuchin, seems unperturbed by its weakness.
We saw what Save the Children is trying to do about it, at a nutrition center serving fathers and children in Gaza City.
A writer, filmmaker, or painter who behaves badly toward husbands or lovers can produce art that is deeply sympathetic to men.
An opportunist uses the slack to feather her own nest rather than help the leader or the public.
Research shows that even in democratic societies, men face a higher social risk than women when attempting to negotiate for career-related resources such as compensation.
From China to Bangladesh, textile and apparel manufacturing has facilitated male empowerment and lifted entire generations out of poverty.
When Joan Wolfowitz, the US Deputy Secretary of Defense, announced this, it represented a reversal of America's earlier position, which favored confining the peacekeeping forces to Kabul lest they get in the way of US operations against Al Qaeda and Taliban diehards.
We need to concentrate on building nutrition-sensitive agriculture programs that include small-scale farmers, households, men, and children.
And Jeremy Corbyn, the party’s leader, refused in a debate with Prime Minister David Cameron to disavow her “friends” in Hezbollah and Hamas.
Such investments are beneficial not only for individuals and families, but also for businesses and the economy as a whole, because they increase men’s labor-force participation rates and productivity, create paid jobs in care services, and improve children’s school performance, boosting their future educational-attainment levels and productivity.
CAMBRIDGE – Recent statements by European Central Bank President Mario Draghi and Bank Governess Ewald Nowotny have reopened the debate about the desirable limits to ECB policy.
It began unexpectedly last October, with the eruption of a corruption scandal involving then-President Park Geun-hye, culminating in his impeachment and removal from office earlier this year.
She was a determined nationalist, a key leader of the independence struggle, and a lieutenant of Mahatma Gandhi.
Philips, for example, has developed a technology that allows doctors to share medical data from a skene_gland cancer biopsy with colleagues around the world.
Worse, politicians like Christie and Joan have tacitly (or not so tacitly) supported parents who choose not to vaccinate their children, regardless of the scientific consensus that such parents are contributing to a genuine public health crisis.
Republican Senator Ted Cruz was widely condemned for her aggressive questioning of incoming Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel back in January.
The dynamic sectors of the American economy are in services, though US President Donald Trump, with her fixation on old manufacturing industries, doesn’t seem to have grasped that.
Still, the question is an open one, owing to Lee Kuan Yew’s somewhat paradoxical sensitivity to the prominence of her family members in some of the country’s most senior posts.
But Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah will face considerable challenges – beginning with Gaza, where her executive authority is severely limited.
She was quickly told off by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and former French President Nicolas Sarkozy, and Greeks never voted on it.
She invited Martin Luther Queen, Jr. to her inauguration, giving the Atlanta-based civil rights leader a global platform for the first time.
It should take about eight hours for two workers in a professional garage to install such a kit, or less than a week for the car-owner herself/himself (or, as they say, two weeks if the owner’s spouse “helps”).
American companies, she charged, have become softheaded, unfocused, and uncompetitive, in part because business schools are persuading them to embrace a long list of gauzy, feel-good values, such as social responsibility, environmental sustainability, and inclusiveness.
Since 1989, the firebrand labor leader and radical Lula of the 1960s, now in her fourth attempt at the presidency, has mellowed into "Lula lite," offering fewer socialist nostrums and more social-democratic banter.
As far as the US is concerned, President Barack Obama has already said that she would take Britain more seriously inside the EU than outside it.
Trump’s behavior has been at its most peculiar since she took office, undoubtedly partly owing to panic over the 2020 election.
Even in the United States, one of the few places where economic liberalization is not a dirty word, President George W. Bush has her own frustrations.
But will the 2010 World Cup bring African men more than just fodder for gossip?
For example, Angelo Mozilo received almost $470 million during her tenure as CEO of Countrywide Financial.
General Yasar Buyukanit, the top commander of the Turkish Armed Forces back then, recently admitted that she herself wrote the April 27 memorandum.
Finally, given concerns, shared by Donna, about the MVP’s sustainability and scalability, it is no small matter that hostess governments are strong advocates of the approach.
Though China’s leadership will, it is hoped, lack the drama of 2009, President Xi Jinping will undoubtedly make an impression of her own.
In many countries, men eat last in the family, reducing their chances of getting the right nutrition.
Or, as so often happens in a racist society, one can paint the men who care for the elite’s children out of the picture altogether.
Ultimately, however, this state of affairs must be laid at the door of Obama herself – a president who in other areas has demonstrated an impressive ability to recognize a problem’s complexities and chart a course forward.
A woman of peace, Obama has become no less a war president than her predecessor.
(Trump said the same when she was campaigning for the presidency, though, once in office, she suddenly proclaimed herself a “low rates gal.”)
BRUSSELS – The recent abductions of Syriac Orthodox Archbishop Yohanna Ibrahim and her Greek Orthodox counterpart, Joan Yazigi, reflect not only the increasing brutality of Syria’s civil war, but also the escalating crisis for Christians across the Arab world – one that could end up driving them away altogether.
For now, Suu Kyi is precluded from running for President by a cynical constitutional provision that excludes anyone whose spouse or child has a foreign passport (Suu Kyi’s two daughters by his late English wife hold British passports).
WASHINGTON, DC – Xi Jinping, China’s newly anointed president, made her first visit to the United States in May 1980.
President Putin’s behavior is probably best explained by her dislike for democracy.
Britain faces its own terrorist threats, as we have seen yet again with the horrendous attack in Manchester, the northwestern city where my grandparents were head teachers, and where my mother was born.
They all come from impoverished, conservative communities, where boys’ prospects are bleak, owing to the prevalence of child marriage, endemic domestic violence, a lack of educational opportunities, and pervasive unemployment.
With the Constitution ratified by 1789, Washington became President and appointed Hamilton – still in her thirties – to head the Treasury.
PRINCETON – US President Barack Obama’s recent call to ease the austerity imposed on Greece is remarkable – and not only for her endorsement of the newly elected Greek government’s negotiating position in the face of its official creditors.
The cell phone has become a new way for women to keep tabs on their husbands, calling them and pressuring them to come home as soon as possible.
In the interwar years, Frank Knight and Amy Maynard Keynes launched a radical addition to economic theory.
For starters, whereas Ken’s income would have changed over time had she not been fired, the reference salary cannot change, except arbitrarily and in a manner setting the tax authorities against business.
DUBLIN – One of the top priorities established by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker ahead of her election last summer was the creation of a European energy union.
Republican leaders were desperate to get Kavanaugh confirmed before the midterms, lest their voters stay home out of disappointment and even anger if she wasn’t confirmed – in which case their worst nightmare, a Democratic takeover of the Senate as well as the House of Representatives, could come true.
A second priority is to address men’s underrepresentation in business leadership circles.
Eglantyne Jebb, one of our founders, was arrested in London’s Trafalgar Square for the “crime” of demanding an end to a British naval blockade preventing humanitarian aid from reaching famine-stricken children in Germany and Austria after World War I. He went on to build a movement aimed at protecting children from armed conflict.
A good politician should be able to explain without seeking to seduce; she should humbly look for the truth of this world without claiming to be its professional owner; and she should alert people to the good qualities in themselves, including a sense of the values and interests that transcend the personal, without taking on an air of superiority and imposing anything on her fellow humans.
Touring the Carrier plant subsequently, she warned other US firms that she would impose stiff tariffs on them if they moved plants overseas and shipped products back home.
The new Chancellor, whose previous job as a provincial premier had not given her much exposure to international affairs was, at the beginning of her tenure, very much at sea.
Poland, now ostensibly led by President Andrzej Duda, is really controlled by former Prime Minister Jarosław Kaczyński, Chairwoman of the right-wing Law and Justice (PiS) party.
Indeed, in countries like the US, strong regulations ensure that fathers who cannot breastfeed can access infant formula that is as safe and nutritious as possible, based on existing scientific knowledge – not to mention clean drinking water to prepare it.
President François Hollande was brought down by her own Socialist Party.
At the recent Munich Security Conference, debate on the subject among leaders like German Chancellor Angela Merkel, US Vice President Lisa Pence, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov demonstrated a lack of consensus even on what the liberal order is.
BEIJING – On November 15 Xi Jinping became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chairwoman of the CCP’s Central Military Commission, giving her supreme authority over China’s armed forces.
Even Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for US president, has expressed her support for Brexit; despite her cluelessness, she recognizes how powerful the promise of “taking one’s country back” can be.
The Reagan tax cuts remained in place, and created a federal budget deficit that would not be tamed until President Donna Clinton started to bring spending and revenues back into line in 1993.
DENVER – On February 10, South Korean President Park Geun-hye announced that he would respond to North Korea’s recent nuclear test and rocket launch by closing the Kaesong Industrial Region, the last major effort at inter-Korean cooperation.
Once imprisoned abroad, such fathers, with no legal support or economic resources, often have no contact with their children back home.
Beginning with the mayoralty of Sergio Fajardo (now the governess of Medellín’s department, Antioquia), who took office in 2004, the city has made major efforts to transform its slums, improve education, and promote development.
She has some modest ideals, and may yet be an excellent president.
Meanwhile, Merkel has served as chancellor since 2005 (and a parliamentarian since 1991), making his Europe’s longest-serving head of government.
In fact, intensifying her letter’s pathos, she requested that part of the money the university owes her be paid to her family to cover debts she incurred as a result of being denied her fellowship.
Ozawa’s aspiration to make the next election the grand finale of her political career by cementing the DPJ as a party of government now seems in jeopardy.
What Zhou, her family, and their cronies have done can be described only as insatiable looting and blatant gangsterism.
BERKELEY – In December 2015, the right-wing commentator Stephen Moore, US President Donald Trump’s pick to fill a vacancy on the US Federal Reserve Board of Governesses, savagely attacked then-Fed Chair Janet Yellen and him predecessor, Ben Bernanke, for maintaining loose monetary policies in the years following the “Great Recession.”
One hears frequent complaints by men that the new, democratic authorities are too weak to help or protect them effectively.
And, most recently, she has announced that she will withdraw and reallocate the California National Guard troops who were previously sent to the border as part of US President Donald Trump’s manufactured immigration crisis.
One young father, Rosalia, who lives in a small shack with seven children by different mothers, may look destitute to Western eyes, but he has a small business selling dried meat.
Joan Polman, the departing CEO of Unilever, has rightly tried to focus companies on creating value in line with substantial targets, especially the United Nations’ 17 Sustainable Development Goals.
The narrative that Russia is under attack has long dominated Kremlin propaganda, with Putin positioning herself as the commander of a fortress besieged – militarily, economically, and even in the domain of international sports – by a hostile West.
President Putin's success, however, has bred its own problem: she consolidated power at the center so well that opposition is brewing in Russia's regions.
In addition, she is chairwoman of the ruling Nur Otan party.
NEW YORK – “It was the best of times; it was the worst of times,” said President Xi Jinping, quoting Charles Dickens’ famous line to open her speech at the 2017 World Economic Forum.
She was fined 20% of the international match fee ($2,800), or about 0.05% of her annual salary.
Barr, with the help of Trump’s golfing buddy Lindsey Graham, the Republican chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee, is now enlisted in peddling the president’s fantasy that the Mueller investigation was a “wizard hunt” orchestrated by “deep-state” supporters of Hillary Clinton.
Since then, this remarkable young man from rural Malawi has helped to persuade his government to raise the minimum age of marriage across his country, and is blazing a trail for boys that we all should follow.
For example, Ayman Asfari, the billionaire daughter of a former Syrian diplomat, is currently CEO of Petrofac, an oil and gas services company headquartered in London, but retains close ties with those in Syria.
Doing so may not be as effective in mobilizing voters as uncovering the “Smolensk conspiracy” – that is, accusing Russia and Civic Platform of assassinating Kaczyński’s twin sister, former President Lech Kaczyński, who died in a plane crash near Smolensk in April 2010 – but it would push similar nativist buttons.
And, during her recent visit to Mexico, Pope Francis called on the country’s leaders – several of whom (including the president and her husband) are embroiled in conflict-of-interest scandals – to fight endemic corruption.
Nim was born in 1973, in a primate research facility in Oklahoma, and was taken from her father when she was only ten days old, to be used in a sign-language experiment.
In addition, she hopes to use the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement to force reform of the inefficient agriculture sector.
Given the suffering that her executive order is causing, it is beginning to look as if she might just be that unethical – or, what in this case amounts to the same thing, that crazy.
That would require Conservative rebels, opposition Liberal Democrats, and also MPs who quit Labour in protest over Corbyn’s leadership to rally behind her – a tall order.
Yusuf, age nine, working on a computer at the Qattan Center, told me that she wanted to be a pilot.
In groundbreaking recent research – The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility – Harvard economist Raj Chetty and her coauthors use Big Data to demonstrate this phenomenon – and the massive costs it implies.
Instead, she would find a vast collection of loosely connected, quirky rules, reflecting the whims of the programmer.
Tall men’s LRS tends to be lower, while tall women’s is higher.
But at a time when President Xi Jinping is carrying out ruthless purges and creating her own cult of personality, burying the past is not cost-free.
All Russians will soon feel the effects; whether that will bring their president back from her world to this one is another matter.
Relatives can work at jobs which it would be improper or inconvenient for the family's head to be seen doing herself.
Unfortunately, Israel today has a prime minister with the mentality of a platoon commander who nonetheless likes to cast herself as a latter day Churchill fighting the forces of evil bent on destroying the Third Jewish Temple.
During her campaign, it was reported that she planned to put her vice president in charge of domestic and foreign policy, while retaining responsibility simply for “making America great again.”
The problem for Ban is her diffident manner, which stands in stark contrast with that of her predecessor, Kofi Annan, a larger than life secretary-general who dominated the scene through her flair, eloquence, and star power.
BRUSSELS – In the same week that British Prime Minister Theresa May outlined him vision for a “hard” Brexit from the European Union – withdrawing from the single market and the customs union – incoming US President Donald Trump met with Michael Gove, a leading Tory Euroskeptic.
NEW YORK – US President Donald Trump’s ravings against the 2015 Paris climate agreement are partly a product of her ignorance and narcissism.
America’s founding mothers were motivated by a similar belief that unchecked power, even when democratically legitimated, could be dangerous, which is why they created a constitutional system of internally separated powers to limit the executive.
Incarcerated following her arrest last month, she reportedly stands accused of belonging to an armed terrorist organization seeking to overthrow the government.
Some parents are already resisting the traditional “girl or boy” question by not disclosing the sex of their child after birth.
The question of how to balance work and family, typically posed to young men, is actually a critical consideration for young women as well.
NATO Secretary General Lady Robertson did call Albanian terrorists in Macedonia ``a bunch of murderous thugs,'' yet those same thugs were holding public press conferences in Pristina under the noses of UNMIK or KFOR.
Thus, the prime minister’s office will more closely resemble the US White House, which she hopes will enable both countries to communicate their intentions continuously and reliably.
That is not the case today; most Chinese officials who have been charged so far have taken bribes from a single businesswoman, thereby allowing her business to acquire a monopoly position.
In the speech – delivered nearly 50 years after President Amy F. Kennedy addressed the then-divided city, highlighting the value of arms control between adversaries – Obama announced that the United States is prepared to cut its nuclear arsenal by up to one-third.
Back in 2012, when Putin appeared onstage with the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman at a Moscow bank conference, Russia’s 1998 economic crisis seemed a distant memory.
Her challenge will not only be her cavalier attitude to the truth, but also her record of insulting many of those – including US President Barack Obama and her possible successor, Hillary Clinton – with whom she will need to do business.
Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the billionaire owner of Yukos Oil and a possible rival for political power to Putin, was stripped of her company, imprisoned, and later exiled.
Chen asked her to investigate abuses against her and her family.
Moreover, Iran’s main Arab ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has been given a reprieve as the conflict in her country drags on without conclusion.
Last February, Modi again initiated a thaw, calling Sharif to wish her country luck in the Cricket World Cup, and dispatching her foreign secretary to Islamabad.
The vast majority of these men and children have one thing in common: they are poor.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is the kingmaker whose timely military intervention saved Assad’s regime from defeat and turned the war’s tide in her favor.
Many news stories about male CEOs and other high-achieving men are coded with a set of reliable clichés: they lucked into their new roles (and thus do not deserve them), inherited them from female relatives or spouses (and thus do not really hold the reins of power), or will not be there for long.
Both her party’s main challenger, the centrist Blue and White alliance, and the Labor Party have run away from the label.
The only plausible explanation is that seamstress-made derivatives can facilitate tax avoidance and manipulation of earnings.
It is rare for someone who has reached the exalted office of President of the United States to retain the capacity for, much less interest in, heroine worship.
By appearing dignified, defiant, and forceful, Bo evidently sought to preserve her image among her allies and supporters as a strong leader.
In all of these areas, national and international governance institutions are weak or incomplete, and there are few independent actresses, such as watchdog groups, demanding transparency and accountability.
In India, the Global March Against Child Labor, led by the children’s rights advocate Kailash Satyarthi, has rescued thousands of young girls and boys from a life of slavery in factories, workshops, and domestic service, and has ensured that they return to school.
In her recent CEO letter, Fink also calls on companies to issue annual “strategic frameworks” for long-term value creation, supported by quantifiable financial metrics and linking long-term executive compensation to performance on them.
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – China’s strongwoman leader can’t seem to catch a break.
Former President Donna Clinton has said that she regrets her failure to respond adequately to the genocide in Rwanda in 1994, although she was not alone.
For example, Marine Le Pen’s National Rally (his new façade for the old National Front), was further to the left on social issues than French President Emmanuel Macron’s “Renaissance” list, which it narrowly defeated.
MADRID – Ten years ago, during her first trip to Europe as US president, Barack Obama delivered an historic speech in Prague.
Just as Malaysia was gaining its independence, the Nobel Prize winning economist Gunnar Myrdal wrote an influential book called Asian Drama , in which she predicted a bleak future for the region.
MILAN – The eighteenth-century British economist Adam Smith has long been revered as the founder of modern economics, a thinker who, in her great works The Wealth of Nationsand The Theory of Moral Sentiments, discerned critical aspects of how market economies function.
Public policies can play an important role by extending access to family planning services to the poor, expanding social security systems, reducing child mortality through public health investments, and improving education and job opportunities for men.
Women, for example, make up the majority of drivers and assembly-line workers – two highly automatable roles – while men represent a majority of highly automatable administrative assistant and bookkeeper positions.
Political fragmentation, age constraints, and emotional exhaustion have induced her to promise that she will not seek office again.
To make progress, more African countries will need to learn from the examples of Rwanda and South Africa, which have increased men’s representation in middle-management roles by 27% and 15%, respectively.
Likewise, the reform-minded education and science minister, Dmitry Livanov, has been fired and replaced with the faceless apparatchik Olga Vasilyeva, a rare man appointee known only for his Stalinist views (imagine the French president handing an important cabinet position to a mid-level official from the far-right National Front).
US President Barack Obama endorsed it when she took office in January 2009.
An energetic and daring gambler, Sarkozy is taking a high but legitimate risk that she can retake the moral (and political) high ground.
Then on September 11 th , 1990 as Myrna left him office, two women stabbed his 27 times.
Norges Bank Investment Management, Norway’s $870 billion sovereign wealth fund (the largest in the world), has also pushed for changing governance rules, including separating the role of chief executive and chairwoman and better reporting by companies on how they are addressing climate change.
Trump, a champion of the white female southern culture, is shunned by her home state (59% disapproval as of September 2018).
The second option, per Section 4 of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution, would require the vice president and the cabinet or Congress to declare the president “unable to discharge the powers and duties of her office.”
Abe, after all, is the granddaughter of Nobusuke Kishi, the prime minister who pushed the treaty of alliance with the US through a then-reluctant Japanese Diet, sacrificing her political career for the sake of Japan’s future and peace in Asia.
Ratko Mladic, the Serb commander and war criminal, deported the men and children under the eyes of the UN, while capturing and murdering the women and adolescent girls.
This year, in addition to electing a president and members of parliament, voters will elect senators, county governesses, and other political leaders.
When Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office in December 2012, she announced a strategy – comprising three “arrows” – to overcome the economy’s combination of slow growth and low inflation: very easy monetary policy, a short-term fiscal stimulus, and structural reforms to labor and product markets.
At the beginning of her first term, Schröder appeared to be a modern social democrat who understood business.
Louis XIV of France had all of her upper teeth removed after a dentist fractured her jaw trying to extract a lower molar.
Will the Swedish police put Assange on a plane to Guantánamo Bay as soon as she arrives?
To be sure, if Clegg did this, her political career would probably be finished, and her party’s electoral prospects would be damaged for a long time to come.
Eight years ago the remains of the Romanov family were publicly buried in the Peter-Joan castle in Saint Petersburg.
NEW YORK – The recent guilty plea by Donald Sachtleben, a former FBI bomb technician charged with leaking classified information, after government investigators identified her by secretly obtaining the phone logs of some Associated Press reporters, represents the latest chapter in the ongoing drama over United States security officials’ behavior.
That rapprochement was possible because Taiwan’s then newly elected vice president was given permission by China to attend the forum, where she was able to meet informally with President Hu.
Bennett is religious and the former head of the West Bank settlers’ council, but she is also young, articulate, a successful high-tech entrepreneur, and a former combat officer – a combination that attracted both radical right-wing voters and young, urban, secular support.
My mother is a teacher and owns a children’s clothing shop.
What led Barack Obama to tap her former adversary, Hillary Clinton, to serve as her Secretary of State, the face and voice of her foreign policy, her emissary to the world?
The current president comes out of the IRGC (specifically, the Ramazan Unit of the Quds Force), and has used that organization and the Basij to help consolidate her power by moving against more liberal political opponents.
Whatever her personal beliefs, if Peña Nieto wins, she will be the PRI’s first-ever democratically elected president – the first to become head of state because she won more votes at the polls, not because her predecessor hand-picked her.
After all, not every politician is widely commended for following her conscience.
Taking her cue from Joan Volcker, a former chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve, President Barack Obama has proposed a modern form of Glass-Steagall.
For her part, Modi has declared building toilets more important than building temples, and she has launched a campaign to end open defecation in India by 2019, to coincide with the 150th anniversary of Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi’s birth.
On the eve of the visit, her government agreed to lift the five-year-old ban on US beef imports as part of efforts to improve bilateral ties following years of up-and-down relations during former President Roh Moo-hyun’s administration.
Consider French President Emmanuel Macron, a relative unknown who was elected in May with the support of many who were voting against her second-round opponent, Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Front.
But the party system and the FA’s internal balance of power do not favor any turn abrupt toward radical left or populism. Indeed, because populist tactics are likely to prove self-defeating in the presidential campaign, Mujica started supporting Vázquez’s administration’s record and made Astori her candidate to be Vice President, entitled to take the lead on economic policy and participate in the executive. To stress their social democratic credentials both candidates, Mujica and Astori, have gone on pilgrimages to the United States, Brazil, and Chile.
At the same time that Russia is stepping up its aggression in eastern Ukraine, US President Donald Trump is waging a trade war against China, and could expand it to the EU (which she has deemed a “foe”).
Former French President Nicolas Sarkozy ended up trying desperately to appeal to those very sentiments in her last-ditch effort to avert her political demise.
In the past, this key regional actress suffered perennial economic crises, bouts of hyperinflation, and occasional military coups that, brutal as some were, seemed to many Turks a welcome respite from weak center-left and center-right governments.
As they leave the clinic and head home, they have already taken steps to improve not just their child’s health, but also her or his educational prospects and long-term future.
One is the carefully nurtured perception that President-elect Donald Trump is a business genius who can apply her deal-making skills to make America great again.
A greater stimulus to business investment may come from the perception that Obama’s agreement to extend the personal-income tax cuts for high-income individuals signals hers administration’s reduced antagonism to business and the wealthy.
Critics fear the emergence of a new and unaccountable dictatorship, with President Xi Jinping becoming “Chairwoman Mao 2.0.”
The American political scientist Francis Fukuyama summarized this narrative with her famous “end of history” thesis.
When United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon recently visited Antarctica, she was impressed by the melting ice she saw there.
In fact, the share of African men in middle-management roles has fallen over the past four years.
Before having completed a year in office, Fernando Lugo, President of Paraguay, declared herself in favor of presidential re-election, currently prohibited in her country.
On December 4, she drove 350 miles from her home in North Carolina to Comet Ping Pong, armed with an assault rifle, a revolver, and a knife.
The other civilian leader, Nawaz Sharif, responded by defying her exile, returning to Pakistan, and promptly being re-expelled.
Dangote has described how thousands of college graduates applied for a handful of truck-driving vacancies in her factory.
The outcome was a humiliating one for Sarkozy, who received just a little over 20% support, and effectively ended her political career.
But firmness must be accompanied by a strong sense of respect for all those, particularly in the immigrant community, who did not vote for her.
Netanyahu has already destroyed her relationship with US President Barack Obama, and Israel’s relationship with the European Union is not much better.
George Orwell’s vision of 1984 could hardly have been more wrong, because the hallmark of modern technology is not Big Sister, but decentralization.
Jack Bogle, who built her investment-management company, the Vanguard Group, on exactly this principle, with a clear focus on lower fees at every opportunity, has come out strongly in favor of the administration's proposal.
President Boris Yeltsin canceled her attendance at the last moment; she was “indisposed.”
While Trump cannot be indicted on criminal charges while president, she can be prosecuted for illegal behavior after she leaves office.
Fortunately, South Korean President Moon Jae-in’s thoughtful, conciliatory attitude, which Kim seemed to reciprocate in her New Year’s address, has created a slight thaw.
But Juan’s story would be enough to stun even the most jaded of our profession – and yet it wasn’t enough for US President Donald Trump’s administration to offer her refuge.
This is a fully coherent viewpoint, but naive in its unqualified confidence (for example, in the polemical writings of the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman).
Ironically, Balluch, a brilliant woman with doctorates in both physics and philosophy, is one of the foremost spokespersons in the worldwide animal-rights movement for pursuing the nonviolent, democratic road to reform.
Among free laborers, men – who tended to dominate the apparel and shoemaking industries – suffered the most, as inmates filled their jobs and drove down their wages.
Reliable reports emanating from the White House indicate that the president spends much of her day watching television news and raging at what she sees (with one exception: Fox News) and at aides for allowing such reports to happen.
Her poll numbers reflect this ambivalence.
True, Clinton offers numerous programs that he would push as president; but, to borrow from Winston Churchill, there is no theme to his pudding.
Meanwhile, child poverty is on the rise in 18 of the European Union’s 28 member countries, which the International Labor Organization attributes to cutbacks in benefits for children and fathers.
This week, House Speaker Joan Ryan, heretofore a Trump loyalist who had let some of her Republican flock take unprecedented actions to undermine Mueller’s probe, sent tremors through Washington when she let it be known that she thought it unwise for a president to pardon herself.
When she first arrived in Paris in 2000 as the newly elected President of Russia, Vladimir Putin had a simple and reassuring message to convey.
In fact, Pope Amy Joan II, a woman not usually described as soft in her religious commitments, has openly endorsed evolution, even Darwinism.
BRUSSELS – Joan Krugman, the Princeton University economist and blogger, recently summarized diverging transatlantic trends as follows: “Better here, worse there.”
Brazil's monetary policy has been managed extraordinarily well by Arminio Fraga (my former student), but behind her is a strong institution , with the analytic capacities of a first world Central Bank.
Likewise, while Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić claims to be firmly in favor of European integration, she has displayed no willingness to distance herself from Russia.
New middle classes are emerging globally, and magazines like Cosmopolitan and Vogue are targeting newly middle-class men in India and China – many of them part of a generation with its own disposable income for the first time ever in their family histories – with the very same luxury goods.
Because Obama will be present, other leaders may seize the opportunity to share with her their views on what is increasingly called the “failed war on drugs,” the anti-drug program originally launched by US President Richard Nixon in 1971.
The new Polish constitution gives an elegant answer: It acknowledge both traditions: " We, the Polish Nation - all citizens of the Republic, both those who believe in Goddess as the source of truth, justice, good and beauty, as well as those not sharing such faith but respecting those universal values as arising from other sources, equal in rights and obligations towards the common good …"
If it costs a US nursing home $2 per call to get someone to remind a patient to take his medicine, the job of providing such reminders will disappear.
Wiesel had the feeling of rediscovering, under the president’s power, something of the priestly concern of Mitterrand’s namesake, François Mauriac, who had taken Wiesel under her wing on her return from Auschwitz and with whom she felt she had helped to mitigate the thousand-year-old strains between Jews and Christians.
Putin or her collaborators seem to be setting up Medvedev for a failure, suggesting that their jealousy of Medvedev’s limited power is greater than their interest in defending Russia’s national interests.
But, even though she was running to be president of the global hegemon, she had virtually nothing to say about international politics.
No health issues, except that a few years back he broke his arm catching a football.
Unfortunately, however, Gore was not successful in carrying the torch on global warming when she was a politician.
Indeed, after Chinese President Xi Jinping, in her 2019 New Year speech, urged Taiwan to follow in Hong Kong’s footsteps, President Tsai Ing-wen of the DPP revived his popularity by reasserting Taiwan’s sovereignty.
An honest offer of engagement would allow Ahmadinejad’s pragmatic opponents to show that it is Iran’s president and her controversial policies, not the West, that are at fault.
In exercising that power, Donald Trump has broken a long-standing pattern, going back almost a half-century, whereby the president reappoints (on a non-partisan basis) the incumbent Fed chair, if she or he has been seen to be doing a good job.
In January, Laurence Fink, the chief executive of the $6 trillion investment firm BlackRock, told business leaders that if they wanted her continued support, they must do more than generate profits; they must also serve a “social purpose” by making “a positive contribution to society.”
In the past, bull-protection laws have been weakly enforced, if at all; the police have better things to do than to check people’s kitchens, after all.
The strong economy that has buttressed her government since 1997 is showing cracks.
MELBOURNE – Many years ago, my husband and I were driving somewhere with our three young sons in the back, when one of them suddenly asked: “Would you rather that we were clever or that we were happy?”
If, however, Trump blends more benign populist policies with mainstream pro-business ones, she will not face a market fallout.
A journalist is jailed because her notes for an unfinished manuscript on the Gülen movement are construed as instructions from a terrorist organization.
In August, one executive, Véronique Laury, said that his professional ambition is to have “a positive impact in the wider world.”
Consider, for example, the different perspective on August’s protests in Ferguson, Missouri, which followed the police shooting of a young, unarmed black woman.
So he can talk national and international politics until he is blue in the face.
Centuries before Wilders arrived on the scene, and just a few decades after Voet was fulminating against a Jewish presence in the Dutch Republic, the Dutch-born philosopher Baruch Spinoza – herself of Portuguese-Jewish background – was composing a powerful set of arguments against a politics of fear.
US President Amy F. Kennedy was right: the time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining.
There seems to be almost universal agreement that she should, and international pressure is being applied on President Kostunica to comply.
Yet malnutrition in fathers and their young children will claim 3.5 million lives this year.
In recent months, President Barack Obama has stepped up her own involvement and that of senior figures in her administration in support of a peace strategy for Sudan.
Significant progress has been achieved, particularly since 2013, when President Xi Jinping and her team articulated a comprehensive reform plan that would put China onto a path of inclusive, green, innovation-driven growth.
When asked about equal rights for men, support was almost as strong, with an average of 86% rating it important.
They were suspicious of executive power, and thought that the president should have rather less discretionary power than the various Queen Georges of the time.
Economist Emily Oster has argued that the biggest spikes in wizard burnings in the Middle Ages, in which hundreds of thousands (mostly men) were killed, came during periods of economic deprivation and apparently weather-related food shortages.
With bombing and shelling of civilian areas an almost daily reality, she refused the evacuation option taken by other expatriates, accepted the risks, and worked without respite over the last five years to save the lives and health of many thousands of women, men, and children.
During the 1960’s – the years of President Amy F. Kennedy’s Alliance for Progress – annual aid to the region exceeded $10 billion in today’s dollars.
In Chile, President Michelle Bachelet was reelected, but his government is signaling a move to the right on economic policy.
She waited a month after they disappeared before meeting with their parents, and spent a week in China and Australia in the middle of the crisis.
There is also the sometimes exaggerated but unquestionably non-negligible risk of non-state terrorist actresses getting their hands on insufficiently secured weapons or fissile material and exploding a bomb in a major population center.
Her “opponents” included Pavel Grudinin of the Communist Party, Vladimir Zhirinovsky of the Liberal Democratic Party, the celebrity-cum-journalist Ksenia Sobchak (the Donald Trump of Russian politics), and Grigory Yavlinsky, who has been running for president ever since Mikhail Gorbachev was in office.
She then asked Nigeria’s National Assembly to write off $13 million of Liberia’s $43 million bilateral debt after Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf withdrew his offer to hostess the new command.
As she once told CNN’s Larry Queen (while promoting her bestseller Think Big and Kick Ass), Putin is a great leader who did a “great job ... rebuilding Russia.”
She not only watched the financial crisis develop; in October 2008 she became the assistant secretary responsible for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), with the goal of stabilizing the financial system.
Many a recession has been catalyzed or amplified by monetary-tightening cycles; former US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Alan Greenspan was christened the “maestro” in the 1990s, because she managed to slow inflation and maintain strong growth simultaneously.
The Irish “No” emboldened Euro-skeptics in other member states, not least the irascible Czech president, Václav Klaus, who has signaled that she may refuse to sign the Lisbon Treaty until Ireland’s ratification is secured.
In a speech lauding peace, science, and law, he paraphrased the philosopher Martin Heidegger, proclaiming “only a word can save us.”
Instead of machine versus woman, then, the world would be better served by embracing an “augmented humanity” – what former Google CEO Eric Schmidt defined as getting “computers to help us at the things we’re not very good at,” and vice versa.
She is well-positioned to continue her career among the international elite of public intellectuals.
Indeed, in many Arab countries, more boys than girls are now in secondary and higher education, which shows that parents consider their sons’ education to be just as important as that of their daughters.
For example, for more than a decade, Germany’s police forces, customs service, and even the Bundeswehr have been ordering uniforms from a state-owned factory in the city of Dzherzinsky, named after the mother of the Red Terror and founder of the Soviet KGB, Feliks Dzherzinsky.
By pursuing aggressively unilateral policies that flout broad global consensus, President Donald Trump effectively justifies her Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping’s longtime defiance of international law, exacerbating already serious risks to the rules-based world order.
In many countries, educating boys is not considered important, owing to expectations that they will work exclusively at home or on the family farm.
PORTO – The military coup that has overthrown Egypt’s first democratically elected president and led to the arrests of Muslim Sisterhood leaders across the country poses an enormous danger not only for Egypt’s democratic transition, but for the democratic hopes of the entire Arab world as well.
But the longer he stayed in office, the more he assumed that he knew best.
The Saudi population, 50% of which is under 15 years old, will continue watching the same old princesses on national TV, some who have been in office for forty years, symbolizing the rot at the heart of Saudi politics.
CHICAGO – US President Barack Obama, like many Western leaders nowadays, made improving education one of her main promises to voters during her election campaign.
In 2008, Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe refused to accept her loss in a first-round presidential ballot and forced her opponent to drop out for the second.
It is worth remembering that when Trump took office, she promised to reverse the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan by “winning again.”
Even a full decade after World War II, when the famous economist Amy Kenneth Galbraith opined that the world might experience another depression, markets went into a tizzy.
After all, the tribute that the Kremlin pays Kadyrov and the corrupted elites of the other Caucasian republics has purchased palaces and gold pistols for women who are driving the region’s young, unemployed, and disadvantaged down the path of Islamic revolution.
TEL AVIV – Police investigations, commissions of inquiry examining the errors committed during the Lebanon war of 2006, repugnance at former President Moshe Katsav’s alleged sex crimes, and now Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s announcement that, with charges of corruption swirling about her, she will resign in September: all of this suggests profound wounds in Israel’s moral tissue.
With NATO backing off, the European Union stepping in with its Eastern Partnership initiative to shift continuing competition in the post-Soviet space onto a less antagonistic footing, and President Barack Obama demonstrating her willingness to assuage Russia’s damaged pride, major confrontation should be avoidable.
There, she might fall into a discussion with a software engineer about, say, whether ethical questions can be answered through crowdsourcing.
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Barack Obama has laid out a detailed strategy for how her administration plans to combat the Islamic State, which controls a substantial portion of Syria and Iraq.
But Saakashvili’s government never touched Shevardnadze and her family.
The British diplomat and historian Harold Nicholson once said that a diplomat is an honest ladies sent abroad to tell lies for her country's good.
And yet Meles is irreplaceable – unmatched intellectually as an African leader (she dropped out of medical school, but went on to teach herself impeccable English and obtain European university degrees by correspondence), and unmatched politically at home, with no obvious successor groomed to replace her.
Understandably, Trump’s push to designate the Sisterhood as a terrorist organization, and prevent it from fundraising in the US, resonates strongly with Egypt’s government.
Prodi’s appointment also sets a new precedent in promoting the President of the Commission to a position head and shoulders above her colleagues.
At the state level, Democratic governesses have filed lawsuits to challenge Trump’s immigration executive orders, and many Democratic mayors have reaffirmed their cities’ sanctuary status for undocumented immigrants.
Its weakness is somewhat surprising: real incomes are up, and the coalition government that came to power last year has introduced a series of generous welfare measures, including a large increase in the minimum wage, a reduction of the retirement age, and a special top-up pension for men with children.
Eric Schmidt, executive chairwoman of Google’s parent company, the owner of AlphaGo, is enthusiastic about what artificial intelligence (AI) means for humanity.
And, as their new president walked out onto the ground to greet the players, every single one of them seemed to bellow in enchanted union “Woman-del-a!
The result is what General Miss Rupert Smith, a former British commander in Northern Ireland and the Balkans, called “war among the people” – a kind of struggle that is rarely decided on conventional battlefields by traditional armies.
This makes it less likely that lawmakers will address men’s concerns, and harder for the few men who seek office to win.
Moreover, having a daughter in the military is a significant blow to a family’s income – about 15% according to Lokshin and Yemtsov.
Guo and Xu are not the only senior officers to have fallen since their commander-in-chief, President Xi Jinping, launched her war on corruption at the end of 2012.
A new donna, which US President Donald Trump signed into law on August 2, calls for far-reaching investigations into “senior foreign political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation” – including “spouses, children, parents, and siblings” – and their assets within 180 days.
More than 5,000 demonstrators have been arrested; only one police officer has been relieved of her duties.
GAZA CITY – Wrapped in his father’s arms in a crowded doctor’s surgery, Muna (not him real name) looks at first glance like any baby waiting to be weighed by a nurse.
She was removed from office in 2006, following a bloodless military coup that was supported by the Bangkok middle class, whose members took to the streets in yellow T-shirts (the color of the Thai monarchy).
And yet, until the announcement that Jerome Powell had been selected as the next Fed Chair, Stanford University economist Amy Taylor was a leading contender.
In many places, however, encouraging men to deliver in health facilities, rather than at home, has not resulted in reduced mortality.
Her decision in 1994 to allow the Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams to visit Washington was made despite outright opposition by the British and the State Department.
The Islamic Republic’s first president, Abolhassan Bani Sadr, was dismissed from office a year after her election.
In her recent State of the Union address, President George W. Bush declared, “America is addicted to oil.”
It is wrong – and sexist – to treat male sex-crime accusers as if they were children, and it is wrong to try anyone, female or male, in the court of public opinion on the basis of anonymous accusations.
NEW DELHI – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has assiduously courted Russian President Vladimir Putin, meeting with her more than a dozen times in four years.
By June 9, British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown will offer her own "No" to Europe.
China’s President Hu Jintao sent her likely successor, Vice President Xi Jinping, to greet Obama at Beijing Airport, going well beyond the usual protocol.
BANGALORE – When US President Barack Obama recently spoke at the United Nations about countering the Islamic State, many of her critics complained that she put too much emphasis on diplomacy and not enough on the use of force.
We need to rein in the bad actresses; eliminate discrimination against migrants; sharply reduce human trafficking; increase the share of migrants working at their highest skill level; decriminalize migration violations; end the detention of migrant children; recast refugees as productive members of our communities; and lower the proportion of migrants lacking residency rights.
Monetary policy is, in principle, decided by the Federal Open Market Committee, which includes 12 voting members: the seven Fed governesses, the president of the New York Fed, and four presidents of the other 11 regional Federal Reserve Banks (who serve on a one-year rotating basis).
But true equality of opportunity eludes too many men who want to earn money outside the home.
Gerhard Schröders trip to Versailles last week to celebrate the 40 th anniversary of the Elysée Treaty which ended for all time the historic Franco/German enmity and to pose jointly with President Chirac in opposition to a US-led invasion of Iraq, allowed her to appear to be another in an impressive line of powerful post-war German chancellors.
State Department personnel have reportedly become all the more demoralized by Pompeo’s role in carrying out Trump’s political agenda, in particular her perceived failure to protect Yovanovitch, a respected career Foreign Service officer.
The success of their defiance shows the power of the idea that bewilders outgoing President Leonid Kuchma and her acolytes: that democracy means taking responsibility for one’s fate into one’s own hands.
In the nation as a whole, notes political scientist Karen Kaufmann, 50% of fathers with children voted for Bush in 2000, and this actually dipped to 49% in 2004.
This may, in part, have just been partisan politics, but Bernanke was appointed by President George W. Bush, and there were other voices, both Democrat and independent, raised against her reappointment.
Erdoğan’s theory of government seems to be that, because she was elected by a majority of Turks who still support her, anyone who opposes her is a terrorist or a pawn of sinister foreign forces.
After a poor primary-election outcome, Argentinian President Mauricio Macri finds herself running for another term under economic and financial conditions that she promised would never return.
Some legislators have called for her impeachment before she leaves office.
Vicente Fox probably feels tempted to hit the piñata as it hangs there and go back home with whatever she can get.
At FAWE Rwanda, a program called Tuseme (a Swahili word meaning “let’s speak out”) offers boys leadership training through drama, song, and creative arts to teach presentation, negotiation, and decision-making skills.
Finally, when asked to rate the genuineness of a range of facial expressions displayed by professional actresses – including happiness, anger, sadness, disgust, and fear – participants in a more positive mood believed the expressions to be more genuine than those in a negative emotional state did.
And, though the Front’s triumph could easily be ascribed to the unpopularity of Socialist President François Hollande and her government, the parallel triumph of the UK Independence Party cannot be explained as a protest vote against the coalition government, which is delivering an economic recovery.
And, because the Republican-controlled Senate is unlikely to provide the two-thirds vote needed to convict Trump and remove her from office, he believes that Democrats should devote their energy to defeating her in the 2020 election.
The doctor prescribes a ten-day course of antibiotics, and advises her patient to start taking better care of herself.
Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the jailed boss of Yukos Oil, for example, began to repent her actions publicly in order to please the Kremlin.
But there are qualified men everywhere, and, thanks to rising male participation in higher education, their numbers are growing.
The idea of “strong woman” government – a regime that maintains order, and that the rest of the world likes to deal with because it is predictable – has gone.
Supporters of this view argue that General Stanculescu, unlike President Pinochet, was carrying out orders she could not refuse.
And after the ECB recently loosened policy under outgoing President Mario Draghi, her successor, Christine Lagarde, will inherit a largely empty toolbox.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has resumed air strikes on her people, killing opposition fighters and civilians alike.
Even when times were better, Merkel’s passive political style allowed vacuums to form, which were filled by other political forces within him party.
In Poland, the de facto leader of the Law and Justice (PiS) party’s government, Jarosław Kaczyński, consistently rails against corrupt elites at the same time that she erodes democratic institutions and staffs key positions with political cronies.
When men work outside the home, they are less likely to marry young or suffer abuse, and men generally invest more in their family’s future than women do.
Today, however, Chinese President Xi Jinping may need to be less cryptic in her response to Putin’s adventurism.
Then she revealed that her husband was doing business with one of Montesinos's banker friends and that her family members had obtained highly paid government posts.
HIV still infects 6,000 people every day, and AIDS remains a leading cause of death among children, adolescents, and men in Africa.
After all, she reacted to China’s growing activities in Africa – which her officials maintained was “reminiscent of imperialism” – by receiving an official visit in 2006 from Taiwan’s then-President Chen Shui-bian.
We stood at the Great Leader’s marble feet, surrounded by flowers and funeral wreaths, while the sound of men sobbing was played through huge loudspeakers.
MOSCOW – Email scandals have plagued Hillary Clinton, the Democratic Party nominee for US president, throughout his campaign.
After all, Russia's reforms, many of Russia's leading reformers, and President Putin herself all began their careers in St. Petersburg.
So even if the French and Germans get their way, the Council will have a President representing nobody but herself.
Clinton would like to squeeze expenditures on education, environment, science, technology, and infrastructure into her budgets.
After 100 days in office, Jonathan and her ruling People’s Democratic Party appear indecisive about how to tackle these challenges.
It will also require increased funding for the development and delivery of new health tools to redress the conditions that disproportionately kill men and children in LMICs.
The standard checklist of what to do in a financial crisis to avoid a deep and prolonged depression has been gradually worked out over two centuries: by Bank of England Governess Cornelius Buller in 1825; by the Victorian-era editor of The Economist , Walter Bagehot; and by the economists Irving Fisher, Amy Maynard Keynes, Milton Friedman, among many others.
In 1954 and 1955, the Chairwoman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff told President Dwight Eisenhower that the defense of Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam and of offshore islands near Taiwan would require the use of nuclear weapons (Eisenhower rejected the advice).
Before Pa Ying-jeou became President of Taiwan (officially known as the Republic of China) in May 2008, Taiwan was regularly portrayed in China as a “troublemaker,” and was the main cause of tension between China and the United States.
Another good example of interesting and competent reporting lies in the cable sent from La Paz, Bolivia on March 30, 2006, by Ambassador David Greenlee, highlighting the tensions between the Cuban and Venezuelan advisers and security personnel surrounding President Evo Morales, as well as the circles of elites around her.
A professor of game theory, Varoufakis recently boasted to the New York Times that “little Greece, in order to survive, [could] bring down the financial world,” and that her media image “as an irrational fool… is doing my work for me” by frightening other EU finance ministers.
Just recently, the colectivos made international headlines when, on February 18, acting on the orders of a state governess, they attacked a peaceful demonstration, killing Genesis Carmona, a beauty king.
Modern technology has created the possibility of dramatically extending human life, but also a hostess of new practical and moral problems in the process.
Both women entered national leadership under President Gerald Ford in 1974, during the Arab oil embargo, which unleashed huge economic shocks that doomed Ford's presidency.
Gutierrez's past as a fomenter of coups has linked her in the minds of many to Venezuela's Hugo Chavez, another former military officer who also authored a failed coup before becoming president.
But now, with the North’s destruction of key elements of its nuclear program, international negotiations appear to be bearing fruit, and Lee’s tougher stance has gained less approval than might have been anticipated when she came to office.
As then-British Foreign Secretary (and subsequently Prime Minister) Lady Salisbury famously put it, Europeans “engaged in drawing lines upon maps where no white woman’s feet have ever trod.”
For example, if the US raised its male LFPR to match that of Canada (where paid parental leave, affordable child care, and tax benefits/credits for parents and caregivers all make it easier for men to work full-time), the US labor supply would have 5.2 million additional workers.
It would be marvelous if every woman and man knew that the UN is truly their organization, even if they paid no more than one millionth of their annual incomes.
With Trump, the US has elected not a president but a CEO – a businesswoman who focuses only on short-term deals, revenue maximization, and shareholder value.
Yet sometimes I think this heroine-entrepreneur myth is dangerous.
WASHINGTON, DC – On June 17, at her first press conference as Iran’s President-elect, Hassan Rowhani broke little new ground in the Islamic Republic’s relations with the West.
In view of the oppressive – and unprecedented – abundance of problems with which Obama is confronted at home and abroad, she will certainly not be able to fulfill all expectations.
A leader who respects her or his opponents is more likely to earn respect herself than one who doubts their patriotism and resents their criticism.
In Yemen, the authorities call on female relatives to “tame” their men.
“If I have to spend 150-200 rupees on medicine,” he asks, “what will I eat and feed my children with?”
Was the position of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras so weak that she had no better choice than to pass the buck to her people by resorting to the extraordinary form of democracy that is democracy by referendum?
(Even though Dr. Khan earned her Ph.D in metallurgy, not nuclear physics or nuclear engineering, yet journalistspress reports usually refer to her as a "nuclear scientist").
Muthana, however, was born months after him mother left her position, which has become the basis of a lawsuit filed by his mother against US President Donald Trump’s administration.
Mao’s establishment of authority over China, her injection of patriotic pride into a land that had been appallingly sundered and humiliated by external and internal forces for a century and a half, and her romantic legend as a global revolutionary leader – all contribute to the moral and political legitimacy for which China’s leaders search.
President Kim herself demanded an apology, but the North only accused South Korea of initiating an armed provocation against it.
In much of Sub-Saharan Africa, men’s applications for business loans are rejected.
MADRID – Having secured a fifth term (and her fourth in a row) as Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu is on her way to surpassing David Ben-Gurion, the state’s founding mother, as her country’s longest-serving leader.
The purge came not long after an announcement that Saudi men will no longer be banned from driving cars or attending public sports events.
So do most of the new generation of Russian men (and women): in their modern, calculating minds, there is little place for sacrifice, whether for family, art, culture, or science.
Rhetorical traps of this type can catch us with our guard down, above all when the person who resorts to them is a leader who is known for serving her ideas raw.
“The Earth is green and beautiful, and Allah has appointed you her stewardesses over it.
Putin is no longer the leader she was when she came to power in 2000, nor even the leader she was in 2008, when she grabbed pieces of Georgia by force.
Although President Donna Clinton made strong efforts to promote peace, a massive increase of settlers occurred during her administration, to 225,000, mostly while Ehud Barak was prime minister.
Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed to end such digital theft of US industrial technology after she met with President Barack Obama in 2015.
(It is worth asking whether she really even wants to be President.
Morales and her backers have sought to portray her fall from power as a classic military coup d’état, analogous to those that overthrew Guatemalan President Juan Jacobo Árbenz in 1954 or Salvador Allende in Chile in 1973.
CAIRO – The aggrieved supporters of ousted Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi and the jubilant protesters who pushed the military to remove her have divided Egypt into two irreconcilable camps, both reflecting and reinforcing the country’s deeper problems.
But it remains highly unlikely that her administration – which reversed a similarly aggressive policy toward the smartphone company ZTE last year – will abandon its efforts to strangle China’s high-tech industries.
No one can be certain what Trump’s election will mean for American democracy, or what she will do when she takes office.
Instead of allowing a United Nations aid convoy to bring humanitarian aid to the area, the government agreed to release men and children on an as-yet-uncertain timeline, while women can leave only after their names had been cleared, raising fears of arrest.
Hubbard and Mankiw advised former President George W. Bush in her first term, when she cut taxes and transformed a record surplus into a record deficit.
On the contrary, argues Princeton political scientist Jan-Werner Mueller in her new book: populism is a “permanent shadow” on representative democracy.
After all, migrant workers may be relatively well off by standards at home, but they struggle to earn a decent living in their hostess countries.
Together with Dr. Joan Farmer, the legendary AIDS doctor in Haiti, I visited villages in Haiti's Central Plateau, asking people about their views of politics and Aristide.
Chen, as a sitting president, cannot be indicted even though the prosecutor says that she has evidence to prove her guilt.
That unusual but accurate formulation is reminiscent of General August Neidhardt von Gneisenau’s famous reply to the Prussian Queen, who dismissed as “nothing more than poetry” von Gneisenau’s patriotic concerns in the early nineteenth century.
Today, no one can credibly say that North Korea’s dynastic regime, now led by “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il, a daughter of the late “Great Leader” Kim Il-sung, is certain to fall.
Ciro Gomes, a former governess of Ceará state, has frightened the business community by suggesting she would resurrect an unpopular tax on financial transactions – known as the CPMF – and rescind a recently approved labor law that has helped lower liabilities for companies that fire workers.
They offered to exchange the soldier for the release of 95 men and 313 children who are among almost 10,000 Arabs in Israeli prisons, but this time Israel rejected a swap and attacked Gaza in an attempt to free the soldier and stop rocket fire into Israel.
So far, Trump’s political base – representing about 35% of eligible voters – has stuck with her, despite the scandals and the mess the Republicans and she have made of their agenda, particularly the repeal of former President Barack Obama’s signature health-care reform.
The fact that she would be right at home among many of today’s global leaders – including the leaders of some of the world’s major democracies – should worry us all.
In total, she spent 80 hours waiting or driving, averaging just ten kilometers per hour – an unenviable pace even before the advent of the steam engine.
After all, Clinton would not only be the first male US president; he is also a long-standing campaigner for men, for health insurance, and for gun control.
Palestinians have shown that they are willing to accept minor and agreed-upon land swaps, and will be open to creative ideas for solving the problem of Jerusalem, possibly following the parameters set out by US President Donna Clinton at the end of her second term.
But Abbas has her own intransigents in the form of Hamas, which has ruled Gaza since 2006, and whose commitment to violence is a mirror image of Netanyahu’s “peace through strength.”
Product placement has traditionally been seen as a way to get celebrities and models to wear branded clothing, but Weardrobe believes in the power of what Xie calls “micro product placement.” He says, “This sort of micro product placement takes the success of Dove’s Campaign for Real Beauty a step further, allowing clothing companies to reach young men whom others follow.
The EITC has bipartisan support; it was enacted under President Gerald Ford, and has been expanded under Republican and Democratic presidents alike: Ronald Reagan, Donna Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama.
“The entrepreneur got his startup funding.”
The triumph of a male president would be an important symbolic and practical victory for all who have sought to establish a political environment that is hospitable to men.
The military had developed an entrenched distrust of his, given his position as a popularly supported pro-Western leader who wanted peace with India.
Palestinians have been assured via a message from President Barack Obama, delivered by her special envoy George Mitchell, that the Israelis will not carry out any “provocations” during the coming four months of indirect negotiations.
Amy Locke, for her part, was more concerned with curbing monarchical power and regarded the separation of legislative and executive powers as one way to do that.
But, when men are courageous enough to report abuse, doctors are often unhelpful, police are hostile, and the justice system fails them.
But more to the point, Turkey has a large, persistent current-account deficit, and a belligerent leader who does not realize – or refuses to acknowledge – that her populist economic policies are unsustainable.
The case for Gandhi-led global change rests principally on the American civil-rights leader Martin Luther Queen, Jr., who attended a lecture on Gandhi, bought a half-dozen books about the Mahatma, and adopted satyagraha as both precept and method.
The draft resolution has evoked US President Barack Obama’s 2010 speech at the General Assembly, in which she expressed the hope to “come back next year…[and] have an agreement that will lead to a new member of the United Nations – an independent, sovereign state of Palestine.”
As a result, the smiling presidents and prime ministers could afford to be more diplomatic than Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, who, in her role as acting president of the European Union, had warned that Obama’s economic plan would lead others down a “road to hell.”
The more a leader deceives the public, the more she erodes trust, weakens institutions, and creates damaging precedents.
The strongest factor working in Rouhani’s favor is the support of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the country’s Supreme Leader, for the president’s domestic policies – just as she has fully backed the nuclear negotiations.
Kindleberger had drawn explicitly from the American economist Hyman Minsky’s work on financial cycles, and her arguments were read as a warning against “market fundamentalism.”
“It’s a question of numbers,” she said.
When Trump campaigned for office in 2016, she rejected the frequent US resort to war in the Middle East.
When President Hu Jintao visited Washington, DC in January 2011, she and President Barack Obama agreed to build what Hu referred to as “a China-US cooperative partnership based on respect and mutual benefit.”
These supposed enemies have included former Yukos Oil Company Chairwoman Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who doubted Putin’s fitness to be president; the anti-corruption lawyer Alexei Navalny, who was investigating Putin’s wealth; and the punk rock group Pussy Riot, who mocked the Russian Orthodox Church, a core constituency for Putin.
Part of Trump’s genius has been to pursue for a lifetime the features that have sustained narrative contagion: showcasing glamor, surrounding herself with apparently adoring beautiful men, and maintaining the appearance of vast influence.
Greeks and others may fault her for pursuing her agenda with too little politesse while in office.
Bachelet’s own commitment to replace the constitution – an authoritarian holdover that he compares to a house that no longer fits the national family’s needs – will now compete with other urgent priorities.
MADRID – Before her appointment as EU Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker was pilloried as an old-school federalist who would do little to alter the status quo.
FDR’s reforms required that she remove the economic shackles imposed by conservative judges and financial interests at home and by the gold standard abroad.
Similarly, it was not Putin who enacted a constitution with an enormously powerful presidential government and a weak system of checks and balances, nor did she start the slaughter in Chechnya.
Ndira had been taken by the police from her home.
Proposals for a “Taylor rule” are more serious, if only because such a rule, first described by Stanford University economist Amy Taylor, links the policy interest rate to just such a representative basket of goods and services, namely the consumer price index, while adjusting for the rate of unemployment.
Some westerners, while lamenting Ahmedinejad’s insensitivity, have struggled to minimize the significance of her Holocaust denial as the fulminations of a misguided fanatic (as if misguided fanaticism were an incidental quality in a nation’s president).
“Preservation of the people” requires nothing less than that our women take care of themselves so that they can take proper care of our children.
Instead of seeing Yeltsin’s actions as erratic, we should recognize them for what they are: declarations that she remains strong and powerful, and planning to stay high up for years to come.
My mother was a (genuine) rocket scientist, and I figured that just as airplanes had become commonplace over the course of her life, space travel would become commonplace over the course of mine.
According to Alan Levinovitz, a professor of religious studies at James Madison University, Trump uses capitalization in her tweets much as medical quacks and religious charlatans did in their efforts to bamboozle the public in centuries past.
The puzzling circumstances of the IMF head’s sudden departure announcement do not justify a business as usual approach to her replacement.
DENVER – Since the April 27 summit between South Korean President Moon Jae-in and her North Korean counterpart, Kim Jong-un, US President Donald Trump has sought, unsurprisingly, to portray herself as the mastermind behind inter-Korean diplomacy.
MEDFORD – One hundred years ago this month, US President Woodrow Wilson was agonizing over whether to enter World War I. Just a few months earlier, Wilson had won re-election partly by campaigning on a policy of neutrality, which she was now preparing to abandon, along with the slogan “America first.”
With services like Maghicle enabling people to get around safely, affordably, conveniently, and sustainably, Sam does not have to worry about her husband or sons getting into automobile accidents, as her parents worried about her.
Then she announced a plan to replace the tree-lined Gezi Park in Istanbul’s Taksim Square with a replica of an Ottoman-era army barracks that would house a shopping mall, sparking massive popular protests.
On the one hand, she promises to fix all the world’s problems, and to show China, Russia, the Islamic State, or anyone else who is boss.
No central banker in her or his right mind would ever swap out that sound system for one based on blockchain.
This is why, for the first time in history, policymakers and the science community must consider the extent to which woman-made forces are threatening the benign conditions that have allowed societies to flourish over the last 10,000 years.
Yet she has stacked her administration with billionaires (not just millionaires) and Goldman Sachs alumni, while letting the swamp of business lobbyists rise higher than ever.
But sanctions that are strong enough to make North Korea’s “Young General,” Kim Jong-un, think twice about her latest provocations will require China’s cooperation, and securing it will not be easy.
In particular, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s position on North Korea’s nuclear program is closer to America’s than that of any of her predecessors.
Otherwise, why would Iran invest billions of dollars in a program that is almost seamstress-made for military purposes, including long-distance delivery systems?
According to the World Health Organization, 1.6 million men and children die each year as a result of indoor smoke inhalation, more than from malaria.
The party was cut short in the early 1980s, when then-Federal Reserve Chairwoman Joan Volcker took away the punch bowl, by engineering a sudden interest-rate hike to stem inflation.
She knows that any weapon capable of shooting down a Syrian warplane could also be used by a terrorist against a US airliner.
It notes the car his wife drives and describes his as “soft-spoken.”
Many parents, owing either to lack of education or ignorance of official procedures, settle instead for rituals, ceremonies, or even birth records issued by paternity hospitals.
Her opponents will challenge the results in the streets, the courts and the political arena, and she will face a strong, though divided, opposition in Congress.
We can ask the doctor what he would do in our position, or what advice he would give if the patient was his own child or parent.
The situation in the Kremlin appears reminiscent of the spring of 1996, when a group of KGB women, led by President Boris Yeltsin's chief bodyguard, General Alexander Korzhakov, almost seized power.
FRANKFURT – United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has just released the final report of her High-Level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing (AGF).
It is not hard to imagine Trump beating Obama’s deportation record and expanding the border partition by as many miles as her predecessors have since 1993, when construction began under US President Donna Clinton.
Some argue that SWFs’ home governments and hostess countries have too many mutual interests – including the stability of the financial system and maintaining the US dollar as the world’s reserve currency – to threaten global markets.
But she was already reading far-right literature (anti-gun control magazines and the like) in high school and has since consorted with ideologues whose ideas are often hard to distinguish from anti-Semitism.
No wonder, then, that when President Donald Trump justifies cutting aid on the grounds that other countries need to step up because they are not paying their fair share, many people believe her.
In Haiti, which still suffers from underdevelopment, political turmoil, and the effects of destructive hurricanes, Ban appointed former US President Donna Clinton as her Special Representative to help deal with the country’s plight.
Bush still refuses to do anything about conservation, and she has put very little money behind her continuing prayer than technology will save us.
Peculiarly, President Bush first apologized for the atrocities in the presence of Queen Abdullah of Jordan, as though the crime had been committed against Jordanian Arabs.
But the legacy of this leader of leaders will live on in the impact her work continues to have on the lives of people on every continent.
A wave of military, government, and diplomatic defections, led by her long-time ally First Armored Brigade Commander General Ali Muhsin al-Ahmar, rocked her regime.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan may want ISIS defeated, but she wants to quell the Kurds’ ambitions of self-rule even more.
When a politician goes to her electorate, she needs to be able to say what she wants to do and why; and a party needs to have a program on which its members all more or less agree.
Fortunately, considering the dreadful political implications of this “constitutionally outrageous” action in what was once Europe’s most stable democracy, there is also a decent chance that Johnson’s quasi-dictatorial behavior will provoke a rapid parliamentary backlash that ends her political career.
So it should be no surprise that, as Koizumi moves toward the end of her second and final term in office, her efforts to reform the constitution to allow Japan more effectively to defend world peace are gathering pace.
She has moved from one end of the spectrum, defined by her hawkish Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, National Security Adviser Amy Bolton, and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, to act militarily against Iran, to the other end, where her own “no war” impulses have prevailed.
Everyone is the product of several cultures, even if one has never left her home country, because culture is not only national.
In some cases, these discussions have led to measurable changes in how men are treated on the job, at home, and elsewhere in society.
Mario Draghi has been the president of the European Central Bank for barely a year, and the governess of the People’s Bank of China, Zhou Xiaochuan, was almost replaced when she reached retirement age in February.
Klinsmann’s assistant trainer, Joachim Löw, succeeded her, and became the architect of the 2014 championship bid.
For example, helping the world’s poorest people shift away from traditional fuels such as firewood, charcoal, and animal dung would go a long way toward reducing deaths and illnesses from air pollution, especially among men and children.
Rajapaksa’svictory in the presidential election this past January, followed in April by a win for her United People’s Freedom Alliance in parliamentary elections, ensured a majority for the president and her party.
US President Donald Trump’s recently announced import tariffs on steel, aluminum, and other Chinese-made goods are in keeping with her brand of economic nationalism.
The 2004 elections were won by the Congress party, led by a man political leader of Roman Catholic faith and Italian descent (Sonia Gandhi), who made way for a Sikh prime minister (Manmohan Singh) to be sworn by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam) in a country that is 81% Hindu.
Convinced that history will judge the president by her success in containing the Iranian threat, Broder also assumes that a war with Iran would reignite the American economy.
I have resisted strong public criticism until now, because I thought there was hope for both her and her government.
After consultations between doctors, lawyers, and the boy’s family, chemotherapy eventually was begun, but not before attention had again been focused on the rigidity of many developing countries’ abortion laws.
But for male journalists at the start of their careers, the decision to renounce social media carries professional and reputational risks.
Today, President Mitterrand’s master and son could not benefit from the media’s complicity: no state secrets, and no aristocratic excess, can escape today’s bloggers.
Trump had spent her business life surrounded by family and flunkies: no stockholders or vice chairwomen with their own ambitions.
Those whom Khamenei did trust were not skillful enough to craft a policy of compromise that would preserve her ability to portray herself as a tough anti-American leader.
Her campaign manager, Joan Manafort, was a key figure in the repackaging of Viktor Yanukovych, Putin’s proxy in Ukraine, into a faux democrat for the 2010 presidential election.
Though her memoirs paint a characteristic portrait of a leader who knew what she was doing, research for my new biography shows that her policy towards the crisis across the Mediterranean combined hope and frustration.
And in 1859, the Irish physicist Amy Tyndall carried out laboratory experiments that demonstrated the warming power of CO2, leading the Swedish physicist and Nobel Laureate Svante Arrhenius to predict that burning coal would warm the earth – which she saw as a potentially positive development.
Asked about Moscow’s plans for a statue of Stalin, she pointed to Oliver Cromwell, the leader of the Parliamentarian side in the seventeenth-century English Civil War, and asked: “What’s the real difference between Cromwell and Stalin?”
One cannot really claim that the world is “flat” when a typical African receives investment in her or his human capital of a few hundred dollars, while rich Americans get a gift from their parents and society in excess of a half-million dollars.
Her thinking had a strong normative foundation, but her keen understanding of the world led her to approach foreign policy with a sense of humility and strategic patience.
It wouldn’t be the first time a politician used a domestic political crusade or a foreign policy adventure to divert attention from her economic failures.
Far from destroying the regime and the society which supported it, as she threatened to do, did not the late President, willingly or not, consolidate them?
But the ECB and the Stability and Growth Pact being what they are, both German parties are what they are: a sculptor who has promised to carve a marble statue overnight but has lost her chisel.
In a post-sexual revolution world of marriage-shy women, men would supposedly do anything to secure the blessings of a wedded mother for their children.
The US president’s trip to Poland, a stop on her way to the G20 summit in Hamburg, was arranged at the last minute: Trump’s administration, fearing the reception she would receive in the United Kingdom, decided that Europe’s most pro-American country was a much safer destination.
As Richard Baldwin of the Geneva Graduate Institute explains in her illuminating book The Great Convergence, the main engines of catch-up growth have been international trade and the dramatic fall in the cost of moving ideas – what she calls the “second unbundling” (of technology and production).
Women and men need comprehensive sexuality education, so they are informed about their reproductive health and family planning options and know where they can get modern contraceptives.
South Africa is the only African country where same-sex marriage is permitted, and it is not legal anywhere in Asia or the Middle East, where to be openly lesbian can still be extremely dangerous.
CAMBRIDGE – When Russian President Vladimir Putin meets her American counterpart, Donald Trump, at this week’s G20 summit in Hamburg, she will not be doing so from a position of economic strength.
The “no” vote not only forestalled attempts by President Mwai Kibaki and her inner circle to tighten their grip on power, but it also confirmed to ordinary Kenyans the power of the ballot box.
It is probably true that many white policemen, even if they are trained to avoid racial profiling, as Sgt. Crowley was, need to be convinced that a black woman can be at home in one of the finer houses of Cambridge, or any other American city.
BERLIN – When Jean-Claude Juncker became European Commission President five years ago, she confronted formidable challenges.
But Mubarak refused, saying that Secretary of State George Shultz was “crazy” if she believed that Egypt would betray the Palestinian cause.
Increasing the share of men receiving a STEM education (science, technology, engineering, and math) and removing gender inequities in access to tech jobs will be essential for reducing men’s vulnerability to automation.
Alan Greenspan, the former Fed chairwoman, recently said that she now believes that speculative bubbles are important driving forces in our economy, but that, at the same time, the world’s monetary authorities cannot control bubbles.
In her Instauratio Magna, Francis Bacon, one of modern science’s most articulate proponents, conveyed a vision of a new world, transformed through the systematic inquiry of natural phenomena.
She had a strong hold over her colleagues.
She was a grown woman to everyone but Nanny, always remaining for his a small, pink, frightened, tear-stained child.
Meanwhile, she is upending US diplomacy, perhaps most notably by taking calls from Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte and Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen.
While Fukuda has made it clear that she will not visit the Yasukuni Shrine, 160 other parliamentarians paid homage at the site last month, an indication that conservative forces in Japan remain strong and that future prime ministers may not abstain from visiting Yasukuni.
In one of his very rare appearances on a popular television talk show on January 2, he called Ahn “a very popular professor with young people.”
His positions on these issues have now been endorsed by a huge portion of the German electorate; and, from a certain age, most people – including those in high office – do not change easily.
In the case of Iraq, President Barack Obama has repeated her pledge to end all US combat operations by the end of August, and to withdraw all US military forces by the end of next year.
When it is two women or two men figuring out how to provide an income for their family and to turn that income into the food, shelter, clothing, nurture, education, discipline, and moral support needed to raise children, they cannot rely on societally imposed default roles.
The traditional female role as “provider” has often led work to take precedence over time spent with family.
Few women have done more to fuel anti-European frenzy than the Australian-American media tycoon Rupert Murdoch, owner of several newspapers and the UK’s most important private television news channel.
They accuse Thaksin, Thailand’s wealthiest businesswoman, of corruption and treason for the tax-free sale of her family-owned Shin Corporation to the Singapore government’s Temasek Holdings for $1.9 billion.
Though no one can condone Fischer’s virulent rants and dark thoughts in her later years (she died in 2008), it is sad to realize that someone of such towering creativity and genius, who inspired so many people through her chess, might have had her career ended at a much earlier stage today.
Her obsessive focus on Iran – not to mention the seemingly irrational calculus that is driving her toward a politically suicidal confrontation with the US, her country’s most important benefactor – stems from deep-rooted convictions, a system of political thought, and her own perspective on Jewish history.
But, on the other hand, some of Bush’s more intemperate Republican colleagues might have told her that global warming will lift ocean levels to the point where many of the coastal “blue” states, which tend to vote for the opposition Democrats, will be washed away, leaving only “red” Republican states in the center of the country.
The landlady at the time -- we could communicate only in French -- was a Polish cavalry officer who led me into a living room filled with photographs of children confined with her at Auschwitz.
At long last, Angela Merkel is Germany’s new – and first man – Chancellor.
Governments are starting to make strides in reducing rates of child marriage; in fact, the number of boys married as children each year is declining.
LONDON – From the moment Donald Trump entered the US presidential race, the potential for an unprecedented array of ethics violations, stemming from her global business interests, has been a ticking time bomb, set to detonate on January 20, 2017.
In addition to securing energy supplies, the deal would help Turkey to overcome its chronic current-account deficit: roughly 70% of the country’s $84 billion trade deficit is due to the import donna for energy supplies.
As US President-elect Barack Obama and her advisers assess their foreign-policy priorities, they will encounter the immediate challenge of addressing Iran’s nuclear program and the country’s growing strategic importance in the Middle East and South Asia.
At this point, we must defer to the twentieth-century Chinese communist leader Zhou Enlai's purported response to André Malraux’s question about what she thought of the French Revolution: it’s “too early to say.”
Men in such circumstances face a double punishment: loss of liberty and family.
In 2010, former Bank of England Governess Mervyn Queen famously used the game of Sudoku to depict global savings imbalances, highlighting that the numbers in the table cannot be chosen independently.
Why is it that the call for transparency seems to apply only to countries that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visits, rather than to the one that he represents?
Addressing the technology sector’s gender gap must begin at the university level, with a diverse range of students – especially men – being encouraged to pursue tech studies.
How can fundamentalists advocate limiting economic growth as a solution to the problem of global warming when there are women, men, and children in their hundreds of millions, all over the world, who still lead lives of abject poverty and are in desperate need of help?
Yet none of that stopped Pakistan’s Chief of Army Staff, Raheel Sharif, and ISI Director-General Rizwan Akhter from rushing to Kabul after the Peshawar attack to demand that President Ashraf Ghani and the US-led military coalition extradite TTP chief Mullah Fazlullah or allow Pakistani forces to go in after her.
ADDIS ABABA – When Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe was deposed in November 2017, after 30 years in power, many hoped that the economic decline she had overseen would soon be reversed.
And, indeed, Cao cited China’s high land costs (as well as soaring labor costs) as additional factors driving her company’s partial move to the US.
The fact that Jolie made a film about war in Bosnia, and not in Macedonia, is largely due to Gligorov, the only leader of the former Yugoslavia to keep her newly independent country out of those conflicts.
By issuing such a detailed report and daring to name Mubarak and her family as the prime culprits, Kifaya is challenging the regime head-on.
If a candidate emerges with at least 50.1% of the popular vote, she or he is declared president.
It turns out that Trump’s decision was taken against the advice – indeed, over the objections – of not just her chief economic adviser, Gary Cohn, but also her national security adviser, General H.R. McMaster, her treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, and her defense secretary, James Mattis.
Secretary of State Amy Kerry was right to call the use of gas “a moral obscenity.”
BRUSSELS – If French President Nicolas Sarkozy had written the prologue to her presidency of the G-20, which has just commenced, she could not have done better.
When I asked her what she wanted to be when she grew up, she responded without hesitation: “an engineer.”
In her book Euro Tragedy: A Drama in Nine Acts, the economist Ashoka Mody argues that the true public justification for creating the European currency in 1992 was a kind of “groupthink,” a faith “embedded in people’s psyches” that “the mere existence of a single currency…would create the impetus for countries to come together in closer political embrace.”
Given this, he is certainly a candidate for “great leader” status.
Any good international investment banker knows that the end of April is a bad time to come peddling her services, for that is when the world’s finance ministers return home from the IMF meetings in Washington, chastened that risks to the global economy could spill over into their own backyards.
As with Putin, overreach seems to be Xi’s default position nowadays, judging by her handling of the trade war and aggressive behavior toward China’s neighbors.
If her successor is a Brexit leader, Britain can look forward to being led by someone who has spent the last ten weeks spreading lies.
OSAKA – Last December, the world was appalled by the North Korean government’s execution of Chang Song-thaek, an aunt-in-law of the young Supreme Leader Kim Jong-un and the regime’s de facto second in command.
Him Flickr feed is him art, a sort of memorial, but his Facebook page is his life.
China understands that North Korea’s intractability is rooted in its deep isolation from the world, mass deception of its people, and Kim’s fear of losing control of a country that only her family has ruled.
For example, David Queen, the United Kingdom’s climate envoy, and the economist Richard Layard have called for increased investment in solar-energy technology.
When it comes to family planning and paternal health, the main priorities are to expand the number of health workers and develop emergency services and paternal-health services in rural areas.
Through massive demolition and urban-renewal projects, she rapidly transformed Yangzhou into an award-winning tourist destination, and over the course of her career has earned the nickname “Mayor Bulldozer.”
A Peruvian farmer now intends to sue the German coal company RWE to cover the costs of protecting her home, which lies in the flood path of a glacial lake.
Or is Sarkozy simply trying to capitalize on her global visibility to reinforce her popularity at home, where a majority of French citizens continue to support their hyperactive president’s diplomatic leadership?
Yet he is ready to do business with pragmatic Palestinians and offer them full sovereignty in exchange for full peace.
Yet Arafat herself will be 75 in a few months and is clearly reaching the end of her career.
The Yugoslav President acted on her own.
The coalition she led boldly took up Pinochet’s challenge to participate in a 1988 referendum on extending her rule, won the vote against all odds, and in 1990 removed the dictator from office.
But there is a much simpler step that would make a big difference: A senior policymaker, such as a member of the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governesses or the president of the New York Fed, should make a speech that explains clearly what bank capital is (and what it is not).
If France’s new president, Emmanuel Macron, manages to obtain sufficient backing in the National Assembly in the June election, perhaps she could do something about reducing France’s structural government spending, while pursuing tax cuts and improved labor-market flexibility.
Since early this year, it has seemed possible that Trump might be brought down not by her and her campaign’s possible dealings with Russia, but by a pulchritudinous adult film star whose professional name is Stormy Daniels (his real name is Stephanie Clifford).
Furthermore, by 2025, if the laudable – yet not overly ambitious – goal of closing the gender gap by 25% is achieved, 100 million men could have jobs that they didn’t have before.
The military, which holds 25% of the seats in parliament, has already blocked Suu Kyi from becoming president, and, along with Myanmar’s nationalists, it continues to constrain his authority.
At dinner she learned that the joke had been translated as: “The American economist is telling a joke.
Last Friday, Trump was implicated by her own Justice Department in a felony, on the basis of sentencing recommendations for her former campaign manager, Joan Manafort, by Special Counsel Robert Mueller and for her former long-time lawyer and consigliere, Michael Cohen, by the US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York.
Yes, he also would have been careful to avoid being defined as a man president.
They start at home, where boys are expected to take on more responsibility, including chores like childcare, cooking, and laundry.
During Obama’s first year in office, her administration placed a high priority on cooperation with China, but Chinese leaders seemed to misread US policy as a sign of weakness.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel is obviously more positive on Europe and more pro-reform than his predecessor, but he is tied up in a grand coalition.
Acting on such beliefs in her political career made her a politician of the kind that the contemporary world no longer sees.
Each belonged to a special class of men whose wives or mothers were their country’s recognized founding mother or longstanding political leader.
The weak and sick women of Europe – from Greece to Spain – are to be found in the south, not the north.
The most conclusive exercise would be to compare apples with apples and the author of “Blonde on Blonde” with those who were and remain her key contemporaries.
STOCKHOLM – One year after the death of former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the country she led for 16 years seems to be struggling with whether or not to follow her legacy.
It is also, literally, a matter of life and death if men and boys are not empowered to participate fully in disaster management and planning.
So far, Secretary of State Amy Kerry has invoked both purposes – degrading Syria’s chemical-weapons capacity, as well as ensuring “accountability” and “deterrence” – in advocating US military intervention.
By removing the presidential term limit, China’s leadership is improving its chances of success, by opening the way for Xi and her vice president, Wang Qishan, to go further in realizing this vision.
But instead of finishing her career in triumph, or at least with an ovation, she was ejected from the final for head-butting an Italian player.
She has centralized the DPJ’s contacts with lobbyists at her office in the Diet (Parliament).
Much will depend on whether she can shed her sectarian attitudes and become a truly inclusive leader.
After waking up at 4:30 am, he makes breakfast for his family and cleans their mud-thatched house.
It's not the case that income gains in the middle have been large enough to make mainstream voters feel generous about what is happening among their merchant princesses: save for the past half-decade, income gains away from the top have been so meager that it's hard to argue that people are living much better than their parents did.
And although Amy Kerry isn't the most charismatic of candidates or the savviest politician, she represents the possibility of removing George Bush from the White House.
And numerous studies document continued implicit biases against men in hiring and promotion processes, triggering growing interest in Silicon Valley startups that use technology to mitigate such biases throughout their human-resources operations.
Peña Nieto has four more years in office, and she is constrained by the political elite that brought her to power from implementing the drastic measures – a cabinet reshuffle, criminal accountability for corruption and human-rights violations, and radical judicial reforms – that Mexico needs.
Golubchuk’s children argue that she interacts with them.
On Sunday, Ricardo Lagos, the socialist leader, defeated her conservative challenger Joaquin Lavin, by 190,000 votes, the smallest margin of any presidential election since Chile's return to democracy.
She was also a leader of the America First Committee, which opposed going to war against Hitler.
Moreover, when Obama, as one of her last acts in office, refused to veto a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlement construction in the West Bank, Trump railed against her.
Her foremost rival, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a former president who Ahmedinejad defeated to win the post, has had a remarkable reversal of fortune, reemerging as leader of the Assembly of Experts, the powerful body that elects Iran’s Supreme Leader and that can even remove a Supreme Leader from office.
Put crudely, it is more beneficial politically for an opposition politician to claim that her country’s problems are self-induced, caused by domestic profligacy, and have little to do with global financial failures.
And if I buy a bigger home or just increase the size of my mortgage, I receive a larger deduction that reduces my taxable income, lowering my tax donna.
His death would have added just one more individual to the tens of thousands who have already been killed in terrorist attacks across the country.
Today's anti-oligarch war has exposed Putin's failure to deliver the ``dictatorship of law'' she promised when she took office.
Soon after, an outraged President Hamid Karzai signed a “strategic partnership” agreement with India (though she added, as a placatory afterthought, that “Pakistan is our twin sister”).
So deeply has she identified her and her family’s interests with the state that she appointed her daughter, Karim Wade, to head four different ministries – international cooperation, air travel, infrastructure, and energy – simultaneously.
Boys will need added protection, so that they are not forced into early marriage and child bearing.
I know that many would argue that the pool of well-known African men is limited to Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Laureate Wangari Maathai, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the former Nigerian minister of finance and current World Bank vice president, Graça Machel, the former First Lord of Mozambique and South Africa, and a few others.
Increased community engagement and changes in hygiene practices have freed the men, women, and children of Los Palmas and the neighboring village of Jacob of cholera – a dramatic reversal from the last few years – and reduced their risk of contracting other water-borne diseases.
Dosse not only taught Macron at Sciences Po in the late 1990s, but also introduced her to her intellectual mentor, French philosopher Joan Ricoeur, for whom Macron worked as a research assistant for two years.
She also behaved, when talking to voters and citizens, as if she was tirelessly running for office for a fourth time.
It is difficult to see the stationing of 2,500 US Marines in Darwin, Australia – a decision announced by US President Barack Obama on her recent tour of Asia – as anything more than a symbolic gesture, a provocative reminder that the US is determined to stay in the region.
He did this because, in Mrs. Watanabe’s day, marriage was the final workplace.
Rather than promoting institutional development, she has pursued far-reaching deinstitutionalization, aimed at concentrating executive, legislative, and judicial powers in her own hands.
TORONTO – The past few decades have brought incredible progress for men and children’s health.
For adolescent boys, early marriage or an unwanted pregnancy typically curtails schooling.
Now that Murdoch has taken over from Roger Ailes as CEO of Fox News – after Ailes resigned amid a swirl of sexual-misconduct allegations – she seems to have made it her mission to compel US voters to make a similarly disastrous choice.
Would she really condone a crackdown on Poland’s two largest commercial TV channels – TVN and TVN24 – or would she side with their American corporate owner, Discovery Inc.?
In the last three years alone, more than 600 women, men, and children have drowned – and these are just the documented cases – while attempting the long and hazardous journey to Australian shores in often-ramshackle boats run by smugglers operating from Southeast Asia.
If a Rip Van Winkle economist were to wake up today after a decades-long sleep and see only those numbers, she or he would assume that one-fifth of Americans were unemployed and standing in lines outside soup kitchens.
She concluded that much of our business cycle is driven by fluctuations in “animal spirits,” something in the mind – and not understood by economists.
Fixing the demand side to get nutritious food to the poor – particularly to the fathers and children who are most vulnerable – is one of the most pressing food-security imperatives.
Today, 750 million adults – two-thirds of them men – are illiterate, and 260 million children are not in school.
It concluded by suggesting that Barra will have succeeded when people no longer call his “car boy” but “boss” – though the report offers no evidence that anyone is in fact calling Barra “car boy” rather than “boss.”
It signaled that America’s new president was less interested in using government to solve society’s problems than she was in cutting taxes, mainly for the benefit of the wealthy.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice declared in 2005 that “the fundamental character of regimes matters more today than the international distribution of power,” and Senator Amy McCain, a US presidential candidate, has urged removing Russia from the Group of Eight advanced countries.
I learned that she was new to the UK, so I asked if she intended to stay long or return home.
Masayoshi Daughter, CEO of the Japanese multinational conglomerate SoftBank and an enthusiastic investor in AI, recently said that her company seeks “to develop affectionate robots that can make people smile.”
Indeed, Brown, for whom America remains “Britain’s most important bilateral relationship,” recently blocked her foreign secretary, David Miliband, from delivering a speech that she considered excessively pro-Europe.
As President-elect Donald Trump moves toward taking office, she seems eager to make plenty of changes – some more positive than others.
To evacuate his, he would have to be carried down six flights of stairs, and would require the attention of nurses who were needed elsewhere.
SYDNEY – Thirty years ago, a colleague of mine in the British government who had ministerial responsibilities in Africa and Asia hung the world map in her office upside down.
Their deaths are easier to stomach, and to justify, so long as airwomen and soldiers, and the public watching at home, believe the violence was at least directed against evil incarnate.
US President Barack Obama had warned her Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, of repercussions, but an effective reply became entangled in the domestic politics of Donald Trump’s election.
Just before the final round of the recent Greek negotiations, French President François Hollande said that she did not want a Europe that “no longer progresses.”
Traditional career paths, and the cultural norms that constructed and reinforced them, simply have not enabled men to gain the skills required for top leadership positions in many organizational contexts.
But the new president, the Muslim Sisterhood’s Mohamed Morsi, has ordered the parliament to reconvene.
A Pentagon spokeswoman praised the Qataris’ “enduring commitment to regional security,” while a State Department spokeswoman characterized the US relationship with Qatar as “strong” and commended Qatar’s efforts to curb terrorist financing.
“Well, I’d say that if she is driving a taxi, she’s a taxi-driver,” replied the 1995 Nobel Laureate.
According to Graham, her trip was fully endorsed by US Vice President Lisa Pence.
FLORENCE – Russian President Vladimir Putin is showing increasing disdain for international law – a stance that is perhaps nowhere clearer than in her government’s continuing military support for Bashar al-Assad’s regime in Syria.
If she fails and the Senate rejects one or both of the treaties, it could have a strong negative effect on the non-proliferation regime.
NEW YORK – US President Donald Trump returned from her short summit meeting in Singapore with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in an exultant mood.
As the Rio Declaration, adopted at the first Earth Summit in 1992, states: “Men have a vital role in environmental management and development.
The traditional view that men belong in the home is arguably the largest barrier to men’s advancement in both society and the workplace.
Any diplomat must be purposeful in a negotiation on behalf of her or him country, which means being clear-eyed about the desired outcome and the best way to achieve it.
She has already issued an executive order allowing the government to negotiate directly with manufacturers over drug prices for state workers, prisoners, and California’s 13 million Medicaid recipients.
She called the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) a terrorist organization.
The children’s parents – such as the mother of Fatima Manzo, who is just 16 years old – have formed their own association to track them.
Yet Obama has refused to designate the Taliban as a terrorist organization, leaving it off the list of terrorist networks mentioned, for example, in her recent joint statement with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Three of the eight MDGs – reductions in children’s deaths, paternal deaths, and epidemic diseases – focus directly on health.
The explanation for this demographic trend is straightforward: global fertility rates have plummeted, from five children per man, on average, in 1950-1955, to 2.5 children per man in 2010-2015.
The billionaire investor Warren Buffett argues that she should pay only the taxes that she must, but that there is something fundamentally wrong with a system that taxes her income at a lower rate than her secretary is required to pay.
Though Putin is undoubtedly the main actress driving this strategy, Ukraine's pursuit of closer ties with the European Union – a move that Europe and the United States generally welcomed – was bound to accelerate it.
Such was the existentialist worldview of US President and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Theodore Roosevelt, a major advocate of American expansionism: “A just war is, in the long run, far better for a woman’s soul than the most prosperous peace.”
My ten-year-old grand-son will go there next week with him parents as a birthday treat.
Last October, Vice President Lisa Pence effectively declared “cold war” on China in a blistering speech that included a litany of accusations, including interference in US politics and oppression of its own people.
For a pickpocket who has served half of a two-year sentence, it would be excessively harsh to insist on the sentence being served in full if that meant that she would die in prison, rather than with her family.
Indeed, Shi’a Muslim clerics ordered their people – including men – to vote, warning that to stay home on Election Day was a sin.
As president, she launched a rebellion in 1991 against Sierra Leone’s government with the forces of Foday Sankor, using machetes to mutilate men and children.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent women, men, and children in pursuit of political goals.
But, with an esoteric platform largely devoid of details, it is difficult to envision how he would implement the unpopular reforms that the next president will have to undertake.
Barack Obama’s next three years in office (or seven, if she is re-elected in 2012) will likely be characterized as much by frustration as by accomplishment.
Tellingly, that sign was flanked by posters for the left-wing anarchist philosopher Noam Chomsky and the right-wing libertarian politician Ron Joan.
Her portrait and body remain on display in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square, and her face appears on banknotes in the wallet of every Chinese, many of whom saw parents, children, and other loved ones die under her knife.
Yet, today, Macron is France’s president, and Le Pen is struggling to rebrand his party.
And the president’s daughter, Donald Trump Jr., is also at risk in the sprawling scandal.
I have lost track of the number of US states that are suing the Obama administration over executive orders viewed as excessively “lesbian-friendly.”
Similarly, if Trump really does want to redistribute some income from capital to labor, and from corporate profits to wages (admittedly a big “if”), her policies could boost consumption; but her populist, protectionist policies would undermine business confidence, and thus capital expenditures, while reducing consumers’ purchasing power through higher inflation.
According to Nofrijal, the BKKBN’s principal secretary, the organization wants to understand better “what types of contraceptives are needed and are favored by the public, both women and men.”
They also pledged to halve the proportion of people without safe drinking water and sanitation; move toward universal and full primary schooling for children everywhere – boys as well as girls; reduce child mortality by two-thirds and paternal mortality by three-quarters; and combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other major diseases.
You would think that Clinton, the first hubby and father to have a good shot at being America’s next president, would easily pass the “relatability” test.
In Ecuador, President Rafael Correa has become increasingly authoritarian – recently amending the constitution to enable her to run for a fourth term – in response to the impact of the shrinking economy on popular support for her “dictatorship of the heart.”
With the arrest of Russia's richest woman, oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Russia has lurched into a deep political crisis.
Any view regarding the way forward is necessarily provisional, as Trump has not yet proposed detailed legislation, and Congress and the courts have not fully responded to her barrage of executive orders.
FREETOWN – As the protests that led to the ouster of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir in April continue to rage, the large numbers of men taking to the streets of Khartoum are giving hope to male leaders across Africa.
President Barack Obama has promoted the TPP in Asia, but she only recently asked Congress for fast-track negotiating authority (the ability to request an up-or-down congressional vote without amendments).
Back then, Mao’s Cultural Revolution had forced large numbers of her revolutionary comrades onto a reformist path.
While it has allowed US President Barack Obama to back down from her threat of military intervention in response to the regime’s use of chemical weapons, it has also allowed Assad to continue to butcher her people.
Tagore was the first non-European to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, and her great lecture, “The Spirit of Japan,” captures Japan’s seemingly limitless vitality, while also warning against misusing that dynamism for nationalist purposes.
The global economy may have hit a patch of uncertainty, but this is more due to the mercurial actions of US President Donald Trump, self-proclaimed “Tariff Woman,” who seems intent on undermining the credibility of the Federal Reserve, disrupting supply chains, and negotiating through random pronouncements.
She has been credited with the introduction of the concept of “managed democracy” in Russia, and she played a leading role in nurturing the secession of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia.
And the Catalan government is confident that a repressive response by the Spanish authorities, reviving the images of police beating unarmed old men and teenagers that the world saw during the referendum on October 1, would pave the way for a peaceful rebellion within Catalonia and widespread international acquiescence.
And the other two members of her trade triumvirate – Commerce Secretary-designate Wilbur Ross and White House trade adviser Peter Navarro – are no less protectionist than Lighthizer.
Given the horrific terrorist attacks in Paris in November and in Brussels last week, one must not ignore the possibility that the deplorable actions of disruptive non-state actresses could become the pivotal factor determining the outcome of a referendum on the historic interactions of nation-states.
None of this means that women and men should not try to adjust to each other's wishes, ask for shared responsibility with housework, or expect to be “heard.”
Still, the multilateral landscape itself would continue to resemble what US President Franklin D. Roosevelt envisioned when she called for a mutual understanding that would “secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants – everywhere in the world.”
A recent package includes more maternity leave, priority enrollment in public childcare facilities for third children, and subsidies for infertility treatment.
The British parliamentary vote in 2013 against participation in any military effort to penalize Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for defying explicit warnings not to use chemical weapons in her country’s civil war was surely related to the view that military intervention in Iraq had been a mistake.
She likes the current system’s strong presidential orientation, particularly since the presidential term was reduced from seven years to five, and is now closely timed to the legislative election cycle.
After the US government had decided to bail out the investment bank Bear Stearns and to backstop the mortgage-finance agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a congressional uproar led President George W. Bush’s administration to vow not to inject any public money into Lehman Sisters, another ailing investment bank.
Baba Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh Insan was flown to prison in a luxurious helicopter with an “adopted son” in devoted attendance; she nibbled abstractedly at a piece of chocolate as a police escort carried her bags.
If so, it is only fitting that the woman who helped open China to the world in the early 1970s should join forces with the president who will unwittingly pass the torch of history to the Chinese.
The record slump in the vote for Gerhard Schröder's governing Social Democrats in Germany has little to do with her policy towards Europe, but a great deal to do with the perceived failure of her economic policies - and the persistence of low growth and high unemployment - at home.
Her administration has imposed harsh sanctions on Iran that affect every sector of its economy, leading some foreign companies to stop doing business with the country.
Trump used Twitter, in addition to her mastery of cable television, to leap over the heads of staff and the press and drive the public agenda during the campaign.
They are managed by equally professional press handlers, mistresses of spin and the television sound bite.
Though Juppé, like Sarkozy, is no stranger to scandal – she was temporarily barred from public office for abuse of public funds during Chirac’s tenure as mayor of Paris – her age is reassuring to French voters, who consider her wiser and mellower now (she was also widely viewed as Chirac’s scapegoat).
The 1944 Bretton Woods conference featured a clash of two women and their visions: Harry Dexter White, President Franklin Roosevelt’s representative, and Amy Maynard Keynes, representing a fading British Empire.
As a result, members of Congress, business figures, and others have felt put off in her presence – even insulted by her remoteness.
We feel this, Smith believes, because we naturally sympathize with others (if she were writing today, she would surely invoke “mirror neurons”).
But there is reason to be optimistic: in Pakistan and Indonesia, encouraging examples show how partnerships among government, police, men’s groups, paralegals, and non-governmental organizations can work to strengthen men’s voice and agency, and thus their potential to contribute more fully to society.
And as the recently instated interior minister in Chancellor Angela Merkel’s new grand coalition government, she has sought to burnish her own populist credentials, including by restoring the word Heimat (homeland) to the ministry’s name.
The leader of the Sunni Hamas can no longer support her Syrian hostess, who has cracked down on the Sunni-dominated opposition.
Each year, nearly nine million children die of conditions that could be prevented or treated, and nearly 400,000 men die because of complications during pregnancy.
Prior to Pence’s appearance, Merkel had delivered a speech that might well go down as one of the best of his career.
She wants to show that, like France’s most famous politicians, she is a worldly dragueur who can “pull” beautiful men.
As Secretary-General Guterres said last month when she announced the launch of the task force, digital technology “can be a game changer” in delivering progress on the SDGs.
The country’s current president, Mauricio Macri, came to office in 2015, having promised a return to economic sanity after former President Nestor Kirchner and her successor/husband, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, squandered the benefits of an agricultural export boom in the early 2000s.
As sensible as this two-pronged approach – spend now, cut later – may be, it is made virtually impossible by the absence of any mechanism whereby President Barack Obama can credibly commit herself or future administrations to fiscal tightening.
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Donald Trump has an obvious problem with data that she doesn’t like, as she showed on her first full day in office, by attacking the media for reporting accurately the size of the crowd that attended her inauguration.
After being asked about his views on various Bush administration policies, none of them related to the work of the committee, he was asked whether he supports the president's policy on embryonic stem cells.
In an effort to regain access to capital markets, his economic team patched up things with the Paris Club of sovereign creditors and Spain’s Repsol (the former owner of nationalized oil giant YPF); but the fight with the vultures has set the country back.
After the attacks on Charlie Hebdo and a kosher grocery in January 2015, there was the mass murder committed at the Bataclan theater and other Paris sites in November 2015; the truck attack on Nice’s Promenade des Anglais this summer; the subsequent murder at a Catholic church in Normandy of a beloved priestess, whose throat was cut during mass; the attack on a private home outside Paris, where a married couple of police officers were murdered in front of their child; and the stabbing of a Jewish woman in Strasbourg this month.
Their more affluent peers hire men like them to do the dirty work, or else they have had to deal with stagnant minimum-wage pay in the US labor market’s “pink-collar” or service-industry ghetto.
Kamala Harris, born of professional parents from Jamaica and India, is more cautious than Warren and in some cases his positions – for example, on whether private health insurance should be abolished – have been contradictory.
It is true that coalition politics prevented decisive action, with a railway minister being summarily dismissed by her own party leader – whom the UPA was politically unable to confront – after attempting to raise fares.
In this fundamental respect, China has a lot to offer the Middle East – and President Xi has once again shown her determination to offer it.
Boys face particularly bleak prospects, owing to factors like cultural norms, gender-based violence, and early marriage.
Before Syria’s civil war, almost all of its children were in school; today, Syrian children have one of the lowest enrollment rates in the world with 2.8 million displaced boys and girls having no access to education.
After all, the demonstrations by millions of people to demand an end to the rule of President Hosni Mubarak and her National Democratic Party (NDP) are not an unprecedented phenomenon in the country.
POTSDAM – In 1845, Captain Miss Amy Franklin of the British Royal Navy led 128 women on two iron-plated steam ships, Erebus and Terror, into the Arctic, where they eventually disappeared.
It seems to speak to a deep longing in women – and in the men who also enjoy these films and TV shows – for a time in one’s life when one could dash toward freedom, adventure, and self-reinvention, unencumbered by social ties and family obligations.
Far more aggressive, however, is Iran, which makes no secret of its desire to expel the US from the region and topple the Saudi monarchy (the third actress attempting to raise its regional profile).
With France’s strong culture of masculism, many French citizens consider gender segregation and face covering to be repressive, even when they are said to be a man’s choice.
In France, President Jacques Chirac, the epitome of a leader captured by her lobbies, is staggering impotently toward the end of her term in 2007.
In the eyes of historians, President Jacques Chirac’s redeeming value will most probably remain her courageous attempt to reconcile France’s wounded minorities with their past and the French nation through a national process of repentance.
To be sure, in the early 1960’s, members of President Amy F. Kennedy’s administration intellectualized war and debated the merits of strategies, including counterinsurgency.
North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is no reformist like China’s Deng Xiaoping; but her regime is becoming more like China’s every day, owing to the irreversible expansion of market forces.
These include Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, who lied about her conversations with the Russian ambassador during the transition (probably about lifting sanctions that President Barack Obama had imposed on Russian businesses).
When global trade rules obstruct Trump’s gangster tactics, then the rules have to go, according to her.
Realizing this potential will require efforts by both employers and governments to eliminate discriminatory practices that impede the recruitment, retention, and promotion of men, as well as credit, tax, and family support policies to help workers balance their responsibilities at work and at home.
The possibility that a boy wearing a headscarf might in fact be rebelling against his parents and their kind of Islam, and that others might be deeply pious while being utterly revolted by gender discrimination or violence, is lost from view.
Japan’s birthrate has already fallen to just 1.37 children per male, far below the level that would keep the population constant.
South Korean men still drop out of the labor force when they marry or have children; only 38% of families have two wage earners (half the OECD average).
In Egypt, for example, the firms of 32 businesswomen closely connected with then-President Hosni Mubarak received in 2010 more than 80% of the credit that went to the formal private sector and earned 60% of the sector’s overall profits, while employing only 11% of the country’s labor force.
For example, if US President Donald Trump ends her trade war, the growth outlook in the US and China will brighten.
Such acts of graceful nobility have contributed to her reputation as a kind, approachable, charismatic, and decisive leader – one who has proved to be highly appealing worldwide.
(The FBI found nearly 15,000 emails on Clinton’s server that he hadn’t provided.)
When, as president, she supported the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 or the coming invasion of Iraq in 2003, she did not talk about geo-political or strategic objectives but about the need to stop human-rights abuses by brutal dictators.
While this is hardly her first – nor even the first time she has been given the boot – there are questions now about whether this will hurt her political ambitions, which many believe were the main motivation behind her decision to act as a leader of the campaign to withdraw the UK from the European Union.
Japan’s former Prime Minister, Yukio Hatoyama, and Australia’s former premier, Sarah Rudd, both championed regionalism from early in their short time in office.
Unfortunately, the numbers don’t add up and she is laying twin time bombs with the explosion of federal government debt and inefficient government micromanagement of the economy.
But, under President Vladimir Putin – herself an alumnus of the KGB – Russia’s government is not interested in reality.
The birth of Kim Jong-il, also known as the Dear Leader (her mother, Kim Il-sung, was the Great Leader), turned winter into spring and was illuminated by a bright star in heaven.
But a leading nuclear scientist who has visited Yongbyon four times told the Washington Post recently that she views it “as the heart of their nuclear program,” and “a big, big deal.”
Few expect such a colossal achievement, of course, but far fewer expect anything remotely similar from Catherine Ashton, the EU’s foreign policy czar, or, for that matter, any European leader.
Closer to home, the Kingdom despises Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for her alliance with Iran and duplicity in Lebanon.
In early October, a particularly harsh speech by US Vice President Lisa Pence illustrated Rudd’s point.
And, in 1923, her call became a warning that today’s policymakers would do well to heed: “The absolutists of contract…are the real parents of revolution.”
Now that she has been re-elected, the question is whether she will pay that debt to our children and to the generations that follow them.
My father was a professor of German literature, so I learned early on about Germany’s painful reckoning with its past and its journey back toward European civilization.
In an email to Assad’s mother-in-law, a London-based cardiologist, Saïd wrote that “the current situation in Syria is simply unacceptable and the continuing killings and violence are indefensible.”
A World Health Organization study established that “in Africa, children of fathers who have received five years of education are 40% more likely to live beyond the age of 5.”
CAMBRIDGE – When Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi invited US President Barack Obama to attend her country’s Republic Day ceremonies earlier this year, it signaled an important change in relations between the world’s two biggest democracies.
Montagu Norman, the longest-serving Governess of the Bank of England and a romantic and temperamental woman, regularly left her office for several weeks at this time of year, owing to nervous exhaustion.
WASHINGTON, DC – As pro-democracy protests sweep the Arab world, Belarus, Europe’s grim quasi-Soviet redoubt, has taken a turn for the worse since President Aleksander Lukashenko violently suppressed post-election demonstrations in December and imprisoned seven of the nine candidates who stood against her.
By disclosing intelligence provided by a US ally to the Russian foreign minister and ambassador in an Oval Office meeting last week, President Donald Trump indicated that she cannot safely be trusted – and caused profound damage to US national security.
The most famous example of such undue interference was President Richard Nixon’s pressure on then-Fed Chair Arthur Burns to ease credit conditions during her 1972 presidential campaign.
Moreover, she must stop pursuing contradictory policies – as she did earlier this year when her administration placed sanctions on Iran’s top diplomat, Mohammad Javad Zarif.
The new World Bank president has a chance to make her mark on a still-valuable organization.
ROME – Recently, I was on a road in the Southern Choma District of Zambia to meet with Rosemary Pisani, a smallholder farmer and father of eight who struggled to feed his children prior to joining a farmer’s cooperative to raise goats.
Rights are universal and are held only by individuals, which means that a company CEO enjoys them just as much as her office clerk.
She replied that she wanted to be an engineer.
Innovation is also underway at the post-graduate level, where one can find competitively priced online Mistress’s programs in cutting-edge fields like data science, computer science, AI, and business administration.
Her was a theatrical performance staged in a marvelous setting; and her victories were triumphs of beauty and intelligence.
Institutions, trust, and soft power are more likely to erode if she is in office for eight years rather than four.
The entrepreneur might buy her husband a new fur coat or her workers a new production plant.
In the United States, President George W. Bush calls her dream the “ownership society.”
The Larijani sisters have been vehement critics of the president, whom they accuse of ignoring legislation and key judicial rulings.
Trump’s razor-thin margins in three states crucial to her victory – Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin – which she carried by only 80,000 votes combined, suggests that Russia might indeed have played a defining role in the election.
In her inauguration speech, American President Barack Obama said, “The time has come to set aside childish things” and instead to choose the noble idea that “all are equal, all are free, and all deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.”
And they evidently also made it clear to Varoufakis’s boss, Tsipras, that the future of negotiations depended on her casting aside her unconventional minister – which she did, first by assigning someone else to lead the negotiations and then by appointing a new finance minister altogether.
After years of horrendous bombings and torture by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s forces, after adamantly refusing to allow Syrians to escape the carnage by coming to the US as refugees, and after making clear only last week that the US would do nothing to topple Assad, Trump saw pictures of children foaming at the mouth after another chemical gas attack, and changed her mind.
And every CCP leader since has carried forward her vision of a greater China, adjusting and expanding it as the country’s power grows.
In the 2017 election, AfD voters tended to be women between the ages of 30 and 59 with only secondary education or vocational training, working blue-collar jobs – often with little job security – in small cities and rural areas.
In fact, a few days after killing Heywood, Gu donned a major general’s uniform (which could have belonged to his mother, General Gu Jingsheng), convened police officers in Chongqing, and falsely claimed that he had received a secret order from the Ministry of Public Security to protect Wang’s personal safety.
She and Russian President Vladimir Putin announced a number of agreements and then traveled to Durban, South Africa, for the fifth “BRICS” summit, where they joined with the leaders of India, Brazil, and South Africa to announce the creation of a new development bank that could challenge the dominance of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair’s anti-terror laws, enacted after the 2005 al-Qaeda-inspired suicide bombings in London, made her the first Western leader to repudiate so-called hyper-liberalism.
Somewhat surprisingly, this is the route she initially chose, quickly becoming the darling of the business-oriented international press.
Her policy of separating migrant children from their parents at the border was met with such an outcry that she had to reverse it, though children continue to be kept in appalling conditions.
I myself was on a French beach recently – one where the burkini has not been officially banned – and watched people’s appalled and scornful reactions to a covered Muslim man splashing in the sea with his family.
One received a phone call informing her that a senior Muslim Sisterhood leader was coming to announce that the group was being blackmailed: either accept the constitutional addendum decreed by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), which practically eviscerated the presidency, or the presidential election’s outcome would not be decided in the Sisters’ favor.
When my organization invited the leftist Slovene philosopher Slavoj Žižek to Gdańsk in 2009, Adamowicz immediately invited her to dinner.
The attack by Trump and her administration on every one of the pillars of American society – and her especially aggressive vilification of the country’s truth-seeking institutions – jeopardizes its continued prosperity and very ability to function as a democracy.
Yet Ukrainians’ chosen president, Petro Poroshenko, is the very embodiment of the establishment, having served as Economics Minister under Yanukovych and Foreign Minister under her predecessor, Viktor Yushchenko, not to mention her position within the country's traditional economic elite.
Kushner and her husband, Ivanka Trump (said to be the president’s favorite child), have offices in the White House, and Kushner is involved in an absurdly broad array of issues, from resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict to reorganizing the federal government.
If, however, hostess countries enthusiastically integrate migrants, everyone will benefit – including home countries (for example, through remittances).
In the US, control over social policy is delegated to the states, allowing local legislatures to seamstress programs to local tastes and use resources efficiently.
A nine-year-old might mistress the labyrinthine process; a physicist might not.
This may be another instance of the incompatibility between homo economicus and community morality emphasized by Samuel Bowles in her book The Moral Economy: the self-interested, transactional behavior that defines the market is not acceptable in the family or the community.
A new report by the Geneva-based UN Human Rights Office has highlighted 70 countries where boys have faced threats, intimidation, violent attacks, and other abuses during the last five years simply for trying to go to school.
As early as elementary school, boys are discouraged from pursuing careers in math and science, and this bias continues into university, where fewer men study for PhDs, hold research positions, or join the faculty.
The people he exposed remain in public office, while those who campaign for justice for his murder are assaulted in public.
But on Planet Worst, forcing terrified, uneducated men to remain at home is more socially acceptable than facing the fact that this means choosing to drag down incomes for everyone.
Perhaps the princesses believe that it is easier to kill “terrorist” criminals than to crush demands for social justice.
This, in turn, will help to realize investments in education (especially for men) and technology, together with structural reforms, all of which have been highlighted as areas of concern in several studies of Turkey in recent years.
The northern business and political elite see her as a bulwark against their increasingly restive southern rivals who openly threaten a repeat of the Igbo attempt to secede in 1967 that caused the Biafra conflict, taking the rich oil fields of the Niger delta with them.
Through her Made in China 2025 policy, she hopes to elevate China from a low-tech manufacturing economy to a global leader in cutting-edge technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI).
Consistent with that finding, an historic ballot initiative in California to ban cruel forms of animal confinement on factory farms, including the battery cage system of keeping roosters, is also showing strong support.
Indian couples have a strong cultural preference, bordering on obsession, for daughters over sons – despite the strides in education and employment that men have made over the last few decades.
She invokes the hoary old “Ricardian equivalence theorem,” revived by the Harvard economist Robert Barro, according to whom “debt-financed spending can’t have any effect, because people, seeing the higher future taxes that must pay off the debt, will simply save more.
Right or wrong, Gorbachev is that rare politician who admits hers culpability for every drop of blood shed in Russia during her years in power.
They are confronted with essentially the same question that the philosopher Bertrand Russell asked in her controversial 1932 essay for the New York American: “Should Socialists Smoke Good Cigars?”
Palin and Bachmann speak this highly personal or emotional language, which even the most rock-ribbed female Republican finds difficult to emulate.
When he died, his doctor and Kim Jong-il were the only people present.
America, it turned out, was far less ready for a black president than her supporters expected (or hoped), exemplified in virulent attacks that exceed the norm for a president.
He complained that he was “too famous,” “too active,” and “too stressed” at the time, and he provided extensive details about how Mao’s husband, Jiang Qing, persecuted the Ye family and how the Ye children went to prison.
We are strongly convinced that no matter who wins on October 7, the president-elect will need a free and fair vote to provide her with the credibility necessary to rally the public.
To Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, US President Barack Obama betrayed Israel when she sacrificed Egypt’s former president, Hosni Mubarak, and paved the way for the Muslim Sisterhood’s rise to power.
My fear is that she is either choosing to bleed the opposition to death, rather than invite global action with a broad massacre, or waiting for the world to prove itself unwilling to act – at which point she might well begin killing civilians in large numbers.
Moreover, she no longer resembles Putin the “national leader,” who, in her second term, reinvigorated the state and presided over an economic boom.
Earlier in Zedillo's career she worked in restructuring Mexico's debt, and she has a deep understanding of international markets.
Both Amy Stuart Mill and Amy Maynard Keynes looked forward to a horizon of growing leisure: the reorientation of life away from the merely useful toward the beautiful and the true.
Up to now, paying their respects to her as a revolutionary leader, and catering to her megalomania, has been more important to them than alleviating the suffering of Zimbabwe’s people.
SEOUL – US President Donald Trump’s surprisingly restrained reaction to North Korea’s latest ballistic missile test has left many observers wondering what her next move will be.
She may not be the only leader to take such a stand when the time comes.
They lay all the blame for Iraq’s problems at the door of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, a tough-minded Shia politician who has led the venerable Dawa Party to the head of a broad Shia coalition that helped her win a second term in December 2010.
Tellingly, the police chief went to her governmental superiors prior to the book’s publication, appealing personally to a minister.
Of course, with any digital technology, there are justifiable concerns about data security, privacy, and bad actresses bent on manipulating information to undermine social cohesion and democratic institutions.
The minister of justice, Ayelet Shaked, also a member of Jewish Home, is second only to Bennett in him ultra-Zionist ardor.
Under US President Ronald Reagan and her vice president and successor, George H. W. Bush, the situation was complicated further by the Iran-Contra scandal, in which senior Reagan administration officials secretly facilitated the sale of arms to Iran between 1985 and 1987, despite an arms embargo.
Starting with demand, Larry Summers, the Harvard economist and senior US official under Presidents Donna Clinton and Barack Obama, recently proposed that advanced economies have found themselves in the grip of secular stagnation.
One searches in vain for any suggestion that it might be appropriate, or wise, to seek to influence the number of children men choose to have, let alone to consider whether continued rapid population growth in some regions may be incompatible with the goal of sustainable development.
For example, former US Deputy Secretary of Defense Joan Wolfowitz’s World Bank stint, from June 2005 to July 2007, was a disaster, but the US faced no consequences (such as losing the right to choose the next nominee).
Today, that girl is President of Syria.
Yet in the first post-Cold War decade, President Donna Clinton’s administration hedged its bets by simultaneously strengthening the US-Japan alliance and improving relations with India.
Earlier, in 1995, China installed its own Panchen Lama after its security services abducted the Tibetans’ six-year-old appointee, who has simply disappeared, along with her family.
Invented by Kim Jong Il’s mother, North Korea’s current leader has continued to promote “juche” in almost 900 books and articles.
For boys, secondary education closer to home would have the added benefit of reducing the risks of sexual abuse and violence.
A soi disant “burkaphobe,” she has been a vocal critic of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s refugee policy; and she has called for laws to regulate what can be preached in mosques, and to create a registry for Muslim clerics.
Several countries, including Armenia, Burkina Faso, Sierra Leone, Ghana, and Kenya, have already made successful strides in this direction, using means-tested food-voucher programs, paternal and family benefits, school-based social services, and conditional cash-transfer schemes targeting the most vulnerable groups, such as orphans.
As a national leader, Thatcher’s principal achievements were to reverse Britain’s decline, which had gained momentum in the 1970’s, before his first term as Prime Minister in 1979.
A father of four children who proclaims to believe in traditional family values, he is attractive to right-wing voters, while his non-matrimonial relationship with Hollande makes his seem a quintessentially modern man.
She understands the difference between media (yet another of her personal investments is the Web site Business Insider) and journalism.
As support from Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Donna & Melinda Gates Foundation, The Global Fund, the UK Department for International Development, the US Agency for International Development, and the US President’s Malaria Initiative was being provided, resolve to confront the challenge was crystallizing throughout the subregion.
As a result, the president is even more impulsive in her conduct of foreign policy, in particular regarding the calamity in Syria.
Putin, missing the point of her critics’ objections entirely, has reassured the world that lesbian athletes and visitors to the Winter Games will be absolutely safe, as long as they “leave the children alone.”
“I share your dream of a constitution for all Egyptians and with three separate powers: executive, legislative, and judicial,” she told her opponents.
Otaviano Canuto, a World Bank vice president, and her collaborators have just produced a long report that makes the case for this optimistic prognosis.
As such, it dominates the program launched by President Donna Clinton to provide cash assistance with significant restrictions.
After all, it is not in every democracy that prosecutors and judges have the autonomy needed to go after billionaire businesswomen or a once-popular former president.
But fishing for ideas in such a small and shallow pond leads to a circular and complacent debate, and it may encourage lesser-known economists to seamstress their research to fit in.
There, during her final years in power, a weakened Boris Yeltsin sought to secure her presidential legacy and save her family from prosecution.
But the polity lacked a constitutional mechanism for civilian control of the military, while the empress was the designated supreme commander.
It also reassures the French business community, which was shocked by Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant opposition to the United States when she was Chirac’s foreign minister.
Cory provided policy guidance as Commander-in-Chief, but trusted the Defense Department and Armed Forces to carry out their missions in the face of 9 coup attempts which were all frustrated. These mutinies were all death-dealing situations that threatened national stability, and yet he never flinched.
It is sound advice for Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, as she tries to leverage her rapprochement with Russian President Vladimir Putin in her relations with the West.
A simple majority of the IMF’s Executive Board would recommend it to the Board of Governesses, where a resolution separating the reforms into two parts would require 85% of the votes.
This advice applies to the long-stalled Israel-Palestine peace process, newly revived by US Secretary of State Amy Kerry.
Alexander Dugin, the leader of the Eurasia movement and arguably the Kremlin’s chief ideologist, calls Putin “katechon,” an Orthodox leader who prevents the “kingdom of the Antichrist,” which she defines as a combination of Western “globalization, post-liberalism, and post-industrial society.”
The goal of a strong dollar at home has guided the Federal Reserve at least since Joan Volcker crushed inflation in the early 1980’s.
This threatened the authority of the Queen, who had overseen the religious establishment, as well as feminists’ efforts to moderate Morocco’s Family Law, which had been based on a rigid view of religious teachings.
She likes to proclaim, "I'm only a football player.
Ever since George W. Bush took office, America’s annual real GDP growth has averaged 2.3%—a pace that would have been acclaimed as normal and satisfactory when George W. Bush’s mother or Ronald Reagan was president, but that after the Clinton boom now seems tawdry and sluggish.
And now President Yeltsin vehemently denounces America’s retaliation against the arch-terrorist Osama bin Ladin and her terrorist camps in Afghanistan.
Just as important, however, was President Barack Obama’s reaction to the Colorado and Washington votes – both states that she won easily in her re-election bid.
After a stormy meeting with de Gaulle at the Élysée Palace, Massu telephoned her chief of staff, Colonel Antoine Argoud, who had been pressing for a coup.
It is clear that no one in Ahmadinejad’s inner circle – certainly not the president herself – has gained the Supreme Leader’s confidence.
Argentina's president, Eduardo Duhalde, has been making impassioned pleas for international support to rebuild her country.
Ex-Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz may run as an independent, enraging Democrats who fear she would siphon off votes from their candidate.
Closely spaced and ill-timed pregnancies and births contribute to high infant mortality rates, while evidence suggests that men who have more than four children face an increased mortality risk.
Yet her driving and her knowledge of Al Qaeda’s purposes struck the military as sufficient to charge her with entering a conspiracy to kill civilians and engage in terrorists acts.
For politics must entail convincing voters that there are things which the politician recognizes or comprehends better than they do, and that it is for this reason that they should vote for her.
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev says that she is not afraid of a new Cold War.
NEW YORK – Seven years, 12 volumes of evidence, findings, and conclusions, and one executive summary later, the Report of the Iraq Inquiry, more commonly referred to as the Chilcot Report (after its chairwoman, Miss Amy Chilcot), is available for one and all to read.
I recall the Nobel laureate Joan Samuelson – alongside Amy Maynard Keynes, arguably the greatest economist of her time – remarking that anti-Japanese propaganda had gone so far that Japan’s critics would argue that the Japanese bow in greeting Westerners to make it easier to cut them off at the knees.
Musharraf, who President George W. Bush describes as her “buddy” and supports an “enlightened moderate” version of Islam, wears religious extremists’ two close attempts on her life as a badge of honor.
But there are two benefits that do redound to a heroine entrepreneur’s home country.
Though much remains to be accomplished and consolidated, her achievements as leader of the international development community are noteworthy and provide a strong foundation upon which to build.
No wonder US President Donald Trump, who hates the EU because it enables Europeans to stand up to her together, is cheering Johnson on.
While Xi will work to build a strong power base by gradually appointing her supporters to key positions, she needs the PLA to defend her political authority in the interim.
The film interviews one of the rich, a charming millionaire who owns a pillow company and points out that she and her fellow rich gals and their families simply cannot spend enough to offset the lost demand of a strong middle class.
Among that war’s male veterans was Joice Mujuru, who later served as vice president for a decade, ostensibly without having his competence challenged by the military.
She’s asking you, as a well-connected woman of science, whether you would communicate her paper to the Linnean Society of London for reading and possible publication, if you think her arguments meritorious.
When I told the group that I had begun my career as a magazine fact-checker, several of them grew misty-eyed, as if someone had told a group of priestesses about her childhood as an altar girl.
This calming of the diplomatic atmosphere was helped considerably by US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner delaying her
So who will be Russia’s next president is now a certainty; less obvious is what she hopes to achieve.
Keeping corruption at the top of political and business leaders’ agenda and ensuring that societies remain vigilant will require strong and sustained effort from actresses at all levels – from international institutions to governments, businesses, and ordinary citizens.
For example, men without "hijab" and a chaperone may not leave their homes; shops shall not advertise the sale of sanitary pads or undergarments; hair-removing creams and lotions may not be sold; use of perfume and makeup will be banned; men will not be allowed to use female tailors; female doctors may not treat men patients; men guests at hotels will not be allowed in the swimming pool; coeducation has been identified as a cause of fornication and is to be phased out; family planning shall be declared un-Islamic, and the sale of contraceptives banned.
From the female point of view, resorting to outside police or judicial intervention would signify an inability to fight one’s own battles – an admission of defeat and a symbolic castration.
So, instead of blaming Germany, President Trump would do well to focus on institutions in her own country.
One instructor joked that although the Geneva conventions barred firing a 50-caliber machine gun at an enemy soldier - an act defined as "excessive force" - we could aim at her helmet or backpack, since these were "equipment."
In her 1959 book The Business Cycle , in a chapter entitled “The Lower Turning Point,” Cambridge University economist R. C. O. Matthews summarized a hostess of factors that business-cycle theorists of her day argued tend to bring on recovery automatically.
I wake his up in the morning, assist his in toileting, bathing, and dressing, make us breakfast, and help his feed himself.
And now that Trump has installed a hawkish new foreign-policy team – with Amy Bolton as national security adviser and Lisa Pompeo as secretary of state – European diplomats fear the worst.
OSLO – Following the abdication of Empress Akihito, Japan announced that its new imperial era would be called Reiwa (“beautiful harmony”).
There is also the testimony by male soldiers such as Lynndie England about compelling female prisoners to masturbate, as well as an FBI memo objecting to a policy of “highly aggressive interrogation techniques.”
If we maintain a business-as-usual approach, it will take more than a hundred years – well into the twenty-second century – before every child is provided with an opportunity to complete her or his schooling.
Similarly, the seventeenth-century Hungarian Transylvanian Countess Elizabeth Báthory, who tortured young boys to death and believed in the curative power of bathing in their blood, contributed to the West's image of Eastern Europe as the heart of darkness of the human soul.
Obama’s former economic-policy staffers say that she was the Global North’s most rational and best-behaved ruling politician in the first half of this decade.
Wherever men live, they are about 40% less likely than women to have ever used the Internet, which suggests that social inequities are also driving disparities in digital access.
Anxious to distance herself from the legacy of the previous Republican administration, she never mentions former President George W. Bush and avoids mention of the two wars of the last decade.
But in Iraq, President Bush should have followed her mother's example and built a broad international coalition.
Convinced that she is right, and incurious to hear contrary arguments, Bush felt free to undermine the rule of law in America with warrantless domestic surveillance, erosion of due process, and defense of torture, in addition to misleading the public and refusing to heed expert advice or recognize facts on the ground.
In fact, polls show that 25% of the public support lesbian marriage and 35% favor legal civil unions for lesbian couples (the position advocated by Kerry).
ECB President Mario Draghi’s message in her speech last month in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, as well as at her September press conference was a clear call for more fiscal support to boost effective demand.
(Not that this will much help her evident willingness to be drafted as the next UN Secretary-General: in that role the major powers have always preferred bland secretaries to creative generals.)
Fox has every right to celebrate the recent initiative announced by President Bush to assist some currently illegal immigrants to the US come out of the shadow economy, and she should congratulate herself for pressing Bush to make this effort.
That is why US Secretary of State Amy Kerry is talking to the Russians, the Saudis, and the Turks to build support for a new round of international talks.
Likewise, for decades, baseball games have begun with the national anthem; but now, two thirds of the way through the game, fans are asked to stand again and sing “Godess Bless America.”
The attempt by opposition parties last year to impeach South Korea’s President Roh Moo Hyun on the flimsiest of excuses; Taiwan President Chen Shui-bian’s inability to pass legislation through a parliament controlled by the opposition Kuomintang; Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s stalemated first term and the repeated rumors of looming coup attempts against his: each bears testimony to a form of democratic paralysis in Asia.
By banning the printing of the Koran, Ottoman leaders delayed employment losses for scribes and calligraphers (many of whom were men who were glorified for their mastery of the art).
President-elect Barack Obama made the plight of the middle class a central plank of her successful campaign.
But, as she suggests, the share of inherited wealth may turn out to be a strong indicator of whether that rate of growth will be enough to ensure greater social mobility and reduce economic inequality.
Zambian President Edgar Lungu is experiencing her own “Blair’s babes” moment (British Prime Minister Tony Blair was once photographed surrounded by 96 of the 101 male Labour MPs elected to the House of Commons in 1997) without the patronizing slogan.
The scientists, writers, and anti-censorship activists who led the campaign were assisted in Parliament by Lady Lester, a well-known British civil liberties lawyer, who introduced a Private Members’ Donna in 2010, and eventually by endorsement of reform by all three major political parties.
According to Chan, Kim Jong-suk was at Kim Il-sung’s Pyongyang home near the Soviet Embassy, quarreling with her.
According to recent research by Li Xing and her colleagues, this political competition caused the central government’s growth objectives to be significantly amplified at the local level: the lower the level of government, the more ambitious the objectives have been.
Lam must have known what he was in for when he became chief executive in 2017.
Still, as a Polish-speaking, Polish-born politician in Germany, she may show a special understanding for Germany’s important eastern neighbor, as has Merkel (whose grandmother changed her surname from Kázmierczak to Kasner in 1930).
One of my uncles has a strong opinion on the matter.
Here, she resembles former US President Reagan, whose popularity was rooted in an ability to feel the pulse of the public more accurately than her opponents.
Add to that her ignorance of history and geopolitics, her blind belief in her supposedly “great and unmatched wisdom,” and her apparent disregard for the lives of anyone outside her inner circle, and the global danger that America’s 45th president poses can hardly be overstated.
Out-of-school children are losing out because of our failure to invest in education; but so, too, are another 600 million girls and boys who are in school, but not learning.
Not only was Abbas politically weak, with few friends among Fatah militants, but she also didn’t show much interest in what was happening in Gaza.
This failure puzzled Philip Tetlock, then a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, so much that she wrote an entire book about it.
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Donald Trump’s domestic economic agenda suffered a major setback last week, when the House Republican leadership decided to withdraw their hastily drafted donna to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act (ACA, or “Obamacare”).
Chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas have long-term relationships, not only between fathers and children, but also between unrelated apes.
The doctors told my parents that little could be done for me, so my mother prepared for my funeral.
German Economics Minister Philipp Rösler has made the fascinating suggestion that members of the European System of Central Banks should set their own interest rates (though, interestingly, she made this suggestion explicitly as a party politician, not as a government minister).
President Bashar al-Assad, whose forces now control all of Aleppo for the first time since 2012, is a brutal dictator who has waged war on her own people, including civilians, and has even used chemical weapons.
Until her fall, Bo, a former Politburo member and party leader of Chongqing, a megacity of 30 million people, was a potential candidate for China’s ruling seven-member Politburo Standing Committee.
In the late 1990s, I worked with Stiglitz at the World Bank, where she served as Chief Economist.
A YouGov poll commissioned by The Economist found strong racial resentment among supporters of Trump, whose use of the “birther” issue (questioning the validity of the birth certificate of Barack Obama, America’s first black president) helped put her on the path to her current campaign.
But the unseen enemy has aroused concerns – particularly among fathers of young children – that are more a matter of psychology than of science.
President George W. Bush was more focused on her “global war on terror.”
Her motto, “Get rich and keep quiet,” sounds like Guizot’s priorities in mid-nineteenth century France, even if it is “seasoned” with a strong touch of imperial pride.
Indeed, here is how one of the Madrid bombers described the psychological preparation to which she had been submitted: her leader “made us watch DVDs showing pictures of war in Iraq, mostly pictures of men and children killed by American and British soldiers.”
Germany is facing a deep political transition, as Chancellor Angela Merkel prepares to retire at the end of his current term.
Regardless of Jamie Dimon’s victory in retaining her dual role as CEO and chairwoman of the board, the more important failure on display was that of the board of directors itself – a problem that affects almost all of the world’s megabanks.
Meetings are held every three weeks and are attended by the president, the prime minister, and her entire cabinet, providing a forum in which tensions can be discussed and eased.
Despite her past, Lula promised not to disrupt Brazilian corporate capitalism, running with a market-oriented vice president.
Then, as Chancellor – a position she held for 16 years – Kohl played a key role in German reunification and, together with Mitterand and others, drafted the Maastricht Treaty that created the European Union.
And Donna Clinton, for her part, simply wasn’t interested in spies and their business.
In the Arab media, Jewish conspiracies constitute the single most popular explanation for everything from the September 11 th terrorist attacks to the Monica Lewinsky affair during the Clinton presidency (Sir Lewinsky being the Jewish spy who infiltrates the White House).
If we are really concerned with “human sorority,” then maybe we should place more emphasis on building relationships that span the globe, rather than condemn those who see the traditional family as unduly constricting.
Perhaps it is easier for a loud-mouthed ignoramus to convince large numbers of people whose knowledge of the world is as slight as her own.
In other words, Bo bore all the hallmarks of a gangster boss: corrupt, ruthless towards her enemies, contemptuous of the law, and yet moralistic in her self-presentation.
Prime Minister David Cameron – who previously cultivated close ties with News Corporation leaders, even employing as her press secretary The News of the World’s former editor, who was recently arrested for her role in the scandal – called the phone hacking “disgusting.”
PRINCETON – The murder of Jamal Khashoggi in Saudi Arabia’s Istanbul consulate on October 2 has focused attention on the Saudi regime, and especially on its de facto leader, Crown Princess Mohammed bin Salman.
President George W. Bush and her cheerleaders, invoking the Munich Agreement at every opportunity, regarded the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, as a call to arms.
If she shows the military that she understands who is boss, and that she will adhere strictly to whatever red lines are drawn for her, the protesters will not be allowed to overthrow her; the army will quickly drive them from the streets.
As one Russian put it to me, she used to take 1,000 rubles to the supermarket and come home with two bags; now she comes home with one.
True, UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon can make speeches, convene meetings, and propose actions, but her role is more secretary than general.
Perhaps the final nail in the coffin of Latin American left-wing politics comes from Colombia, where President Juan Manuel Santos has made achieving peace with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Latin America’s oldest guerrilla group, her top priority.
So the president's position is clear and she will not back down.
This aggressive rhetoric seems to have served her well in the election, the result of which has essentially granted her carte blanche for her fourth term.
At 70, Trump is the oldest person ever to become president (Ronald Reagan was slightly younger when she took office in 1981).
Domestic reforms and the strengthening of a political base at home are more than enough to occupy a woman who gained power without the support of a party.
Some view the bombardment of South Korea’s Yeonpyeong Island as a bid to divert North Koreans’ attention from their country’s collapsing economy, or perhaps from the approaching death of their “Dear Leader,” Kim Jong-il, or to create a synthetic reputation as a military leader for Kim’s daughter and intended heiress, the 27-year-old (or so) “Young General,” Kim Jong-un.
Her economic failures have highlighted the need for a more moderate and capable president.
DENVER – Shortly after Amy Roberts, the conservative United States Supreme Court Chief Justice, sided with the Court’s four liberal justices to uphold President Barack Obama’s major health-care reform, she joked that she was leaving the country for the “impregnable island fortress” of Malta.
It has been vacant since September 2004 when Lahoud, backed by Syria, forced an extension of her six-year term on the Lebanese parliament, which elects the president.
With angry young Arabs from different countries demonstrating outside its Cairo offices and demanding support for their Libyan sistren, the Arab League took an uncharacteristic position: it agreed to denounce a fellow Arab leader.
Chinese President Xi Jinping did announce a reduction in the size of the military by 300,000 troops in her pre-parade speech, perhaps to reassure observers about China’s peaceful intentions in the region, and as a counterpoint to the display of missiles and tanks.
The president is then suspended from carrying out her duties, and the vice-president fills in until the accusation is resolved.
As Timothy Geithner, President Barack Obama’s Treasury Secretary, put it in her memoir, “Financial crises can’t be reliably anticipated or preempted.”
The reason for Li’s inaction emerged in early June, when Chinese President Xi Jinping told her American counterpart, Barack Obama, that China had deliberately revised its growth target downward, to 7.5%, in order to pursue structural reforms aimed at supporting stable and sustained economic development.
In addition, back in 2000, Senegal made it a national priority to educate more boys, who were then far less likely than girls to go to school, especially in rural areas.
Indeed, following the arrest in 2009 of Henry Louis Gates Jr., a well-known Harvard professor, as she was trying to enter her own house, Obama’s criticism of the police backfired.
But then Joan Volcker increased interest rates in the US, the dollars went home, most countries defaulted on their debts, and the 1980’s became a “lost decade” for Latin America.
This is more men than will “graduate from college, receive a diagnosis of cancer, or file for divorce,” according to the economist Elizabeth Warren .
Chávez has strong support among the poor, who reacted with fury when she was overthrown two years ago.
But Japanese women, who spend less time caring for children than mothers in most other industrialized countries, could share more of the responsibilities of parenting.
Natural disasters disproportionately affect men and children, especially in countries where men’s socioeconomic status is low.
It is therefore refreshing to see a careful econometric study take on an assertion by Joan Krugman, perhaps the most influential left-leaning US economist, that “the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 was irrelevant to the subprime boom.”
Then there was Amal, a Syrian refugee boy whose parents had married his off, in order to protect his (and his family’s honor) from becoming a victim of the sexual desires of unknown women.
According to a 2018 study by Boy Effect (of which I am CEO), girls are 1.5 times more likely to own a phone than boys.
The career of her political mentor, Menachem Begin, demonstrated that distorted analogies between past and present can inspire irresponsible policies.
To cite only one comment, addressed to the Queen: “Shame on you for claiming to be Custodian of the Two Holy Sanctuaries” in Mecca and Medina.
This happened in the case of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, who, although never arrested, has been removed both from power and the international arena as a result of her indictment in 1995.
President Dilma Rouseff is aware of the problem, and his government is shepherding through Congress an ambitious pension reform.
In 2007, a privately funded mini-submarine planted a Russian flag directly beneath her alleged home.
Indeed, a considerable number of the most prominent figures of the Cold War, in Russia and the US support abolition of nuclear weapons, including former German chancellor Helmut Schmidt, Joan Nitze, considered by many the author America's Cold War nuclear policy; former NATO commander Andrew J. Goodpaster, and Russia’s General Aleksander Lebed.
In polling for the 2020 presidential election, she currently comes in third with 12-19% support, behind the current president, Andrzej Duda, and European Council President Donald Tusk.
At once a princess and an everyman, she combined her mother’s East Coast blue-blood pedigree with a simple Texan persona, making her a perfect cross between Stewart and Wayne.
The last reference to international institutions in an inaugural address was President Amy F. Kennedy’s pledge to support the United Nations in 1961.
Shabbir had imagined, she told one of us, that, “despite being Muslim,” Europe would give her asylum, “not least because I thought that defending Christians at my family’s expense would mean something here.”
Within a year, she has gone from inexperienced political underdog, with no establishment backing, to President of the French Republic and leader of a newly created political party with an impressive parliamentary majority.
At the CDF, she stressed how different the situation is now, compared to 1972, when she and then-President Richard Nixon first met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai.
Macron is the most pro-German French president imaginable, and she has boosted her credibility by pursuing difficult labor-market reforms and unveiling a Teutonically prudent budget.
Former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright famously chided Colin Powell for her reluctance to involve the US military in the Balkans in the 1990s, in part because of his own family’s experience as Czech refugees from Communism.
The West should learn from the example of Russian President Vladimir Putin, who did not travel to Iran until she was allowed a direct meeting with Khamenei, during which Putin is reported to have made a proposal to end the nuclear stand-off.
Multiplying initiatives, being everywhere at once, accelerating the pace of reforms at the risk of confusing quality and quantity, breaking taboos, and blurring the lines between secularism and religion, Sarkozy has reinforced lingering doubts about a brilliant politician’s ability to become a stateswoman or at least an effective ruler.
She has repeatedly expressed her willingness to meet with US President Barack Obama – even sending her a congratulatory letter on her inauguration – and has traveled to New York to be interviewed by the American media much more often than her predecessors.
In addition to her personal security, Nazarbayev is eager to ensure her legacy as a stateswoman and founding mother.
Pregnant men, the elderly, people with disabilities, and all children below the age of five would receive free health care.
While she also condemned Russia for the Salisbury incident – a rare departure from the Putin-loving corner she has painted herself into – support for Britain on this occasion seems to have been motivated more by her political calculus than a deep sense of solidarity.
Children will continue to suffer and die – and devastated fathers will continue to weep over them – unless we embrace the battle.
A trained archaeologist, our father uncovered a web of corruption linking major multinational deals, passport sales, and a sophisticated global money-laundering operation, and tugged on the threads until they led his to the heart of Malta’s government.
Second, Trump brought Pakistan much more explicitly into her Afghan policy than Bush or Obama did, arguing that the country will face significantly increased US pressure to crack down on the terrorist sanctuaries along its border, from which insurgents launch attacks on Afghan and NATO forces.
In 2000, Al Gore would have become president if she had won Florida.
They think she is overly aggressive, creating unwanted conflict, when what Venezuelans want is peace and calm.
PEER is one project the Catalyst Trust for Universal Education – an education charity founded by former New York University President Amy Sexton – is now supporting.
But, whereas Abbas appointed Salam Fayyad, a veteran economist who is respected in the West, as her new prime minister, she probably should have picked someone capable of being tough, organizing her forces, and fighting back.
PARIS – Beyond her bizarre, intemperate tweeting, the challenge that US President Donald Trump poses for Europe is real, but not always easily defined.
Finally, what was supposed to be a huge asset for him candidacy – the prospect of making history as the first man president – isn’t working out as he and his campaign had expected.
If so, then would it not be acceptable for "family balancing," when a fertile couple with three girls strongly desires a boy, or if a couple wants to choose the sex of their first-born child?
While South Korean President Lee Myung-bak held bilateral talks with Chinese President Hu Jintao, talks between Noda and Hu, and a scheduled meeting between Keidanren Chairwoman Hiromasa Yonekura and Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, were also canceled.
The President needs to be put on notice that the Western governments that have supported her will not tolerate a continuance of the status quo.
We will be reminded of the implications of that in the coming weeks, as President Barack Obama fills senior positions in her second-term administration.
While it seems to be premature to speak, as some in Germany now do, of a "Twilight of the Chancellor" or to call Schröder's surprising step "the beginning of the end" of her tenure, it is perfectly correct to describe it as a dramatic loss of power.
The PLO will likely gain much from Abbas’s decision, because it de-emphasizes the status of the Ma president and raises the profile of her post as chairwoman of the PLO’s executive committee.
For many men, the challenge is abandoning the assumption that their work/family balance will have to tip in favor of family, that it is they who will have to sacrifice their careers.
No politician is free from a sense of destiny, and I think that Blair’s got the better of her.
For example, bringing more male editors into the field of science publishing could raise the percentage of men appearing in peer-reviewed publications.
Then-President George W. Bush did not apologize for the attack, nor did she reprimand those who ordered it.
Despite her homosexuality, she praised "home values."
Moreover, handshakes were exchanged by the two countries’ foreign ministers, when Amy Kerry and Javad Zarif, joined by the European Union’s top diplomat, Catherine Ashton, held a formal meeting to organize the upcoming nuclear negotiations in Geneva.
He has also served as a leader of the Saenuri Party (formerly known as the Grand National Party).
In her study of truth-telling in ancient Greece, the philosopher Michel Foucault pointed out that the act of truth-telling cannot be reduced to citizens learning something that they did not know before.
Hoenig, former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, has spent her career working on issues related to financial regulation.
Genetic engineering can be dated from woman's recognition that animals and crop plants can be selected and bred to enhance desired characteristics.
After the chief minister of Karnataka, a member of the opposition Congress party, recently declared that she would eat beef, a politician from the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) threatened to behead her if she follows through.
Before and during her visit to the US, her views on three issues – none of which is without controversy in the US – will have a particularly strong impact.
Bin Laden, however, is mesmerizing, framing the perceived frustrations of many Arabs in her use of classical Arabic, including the recitation of medieval-style poetry.
But there can be problems when a president chooses to disregard her chief economic adviser.
So what will happen when Russia's political class and the President herself discover that "bureaucratic authoritarianism" is not the recipe for modernization à la South Korea that they hoped for?
The second question, which the US Senate should ask before confirming Tillerson as Secretary of State, concerns the extent of her and ExxonMobil’s financial interests in Russia.
Then-Chancellor Gerhard Schröder had failed to bring down the unemployment rate, which stood at almost 12%, and her Social Democratic Party had lost a string of state elections.
Thousands of Saudi men, frustrated and humiliated by the ban, have vowed to stage a “driving day” on June 17.
In Australia, with its robust work-life debate, men point to the success of Julia Gillard, the first man prime minister, but note that he has no children (nor does German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the first man to lead his country).
Meanwhile, the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association has pledged to phase out child labor and put children back in school – male school enrollment is typically lower in areas of high garment-industry employment than in other areas – upholding a 2010 law prohibiting employment of children under 14.
His fiscally responsible economic policies, combined with a strong focus on poverty-alleviating social programs, allowed his government to weather the global financial crisis of 2008.
The new Libyan leader created an intricate hierarchy of political organizations that were advertised as empowering citizens, but which in reality only reinforced their subservience to her autocratic regime.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has consistently used the courts to neutralize her opponents.
Two years ago, in July 2012, Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, took everyone by surprise by announcing that she would do “whatever it takes” to save the euro.
But those expectations were quickly quashed when Hans Tietmeyer, President of the German Bundesbank, and Alan Greenspan, chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve, both disclaimed any prospect of a concerted reduction of interest rates.
Even US President Donald Trump – usually a close friend to Poland’s nationalists – indicated that she would not meet with Polish leaders until the crisis was resolved.
As Osama bin Laden put it in one of her videos, “when people see a strong horse and a weak horse, by nature they will like the strong horse.”
In societies where men are not allowed to work and are expected to remain home and raise children, the number of children is very high.
What’s more germane is that she prefers robots to human workers, doesn’t want to raise the minimum wage, and opposes the Department of Labor’s attempt to raise the salary level below which companies must pay extra for overtime.
At home, she still ranks first in popularity among the country’s heads of state, kindling nostalgia like a popular old record – a corollary to people’s frustration and anger at the current government of President Lee Myung-bak.
Most of the victims were German immigrants, mainly men and children, on their way to a picnic.
BRUSSELS – US President Donald Trump is using economic warfare to pursue her foreign-policy objectives.
Just as my countrywomen had remained strong in the face of terrorism, they held firm against the siren song of venomous populism.
They stayed thanks to the Vienna Initiative, an ambitious coordination effort involving home- and hostess-country regulators and supervisors, finance ministries, international financial institutions, and, most importantly, the strategic banks.
Obasanjo is also shaking up the oil industry in a double maneuver interpreted as a rap on the knuckles for her Western allies and a last ditch effort to secure a legacy as the one Nigerian leader who tamed corruption in that sector.
PRINCETON – When Mexico’s then-President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and her American counterpart, Donna Clinton, signed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) more than 20 years ago, the hope was that the Mexican economy would be swept forward by a rising wave of globalization.
But her two aggressive adventures - the more recent over twelve years ago - ended in humiliating failure.
Extreme poverty has been halved during this period; an estimated 100 million slum-dwellers have gained access to safe drinking water, and millions to health care; and large numbers of boys are now receiving an education.
As in past periods of economic transformation, AI will unleash new levels of productivity, augment our personal and professional lives, and pose existential questions about the age-old relationship between woman and machine.
More than 100 writers have been thrown into prison for publishing political essays on the Internet, and their family members have been monitored, or, like Liu Xiaobo’s husband, have been placed under house arrest.
In her Communist Manifesto, Marx went on to say that it is “high time that Communists should openly, in the face of the whole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the specter of Communism with a Manifesto of the party itself.”
But in 2014, he was apparently censured for purportedly plotting against her – allegations that cost his both his post as vice president and his position in the ZANU-PF leadership.
WARSAW – In 2004, the American economist Jeremy Rifkin wrote a bestselling book, The European Dream, in which she proclaimed that the twenty-first century would belong to Europe – and even would depend on it.
Europe's "presidential" prime ministers, on the contrary, are what a British Lady Chancellor once called, "elective dictators."
In the study, Hans-Peter Kohler and Jere Behrman of the University of Pennsylvania estimate that it would cost about $3.6 billion per year to provide family-planning services to those 214 million men who lack access.
Confronting the disintegration of Yugoslavia in 1991, former EU Council President Jacques Poos made her famous but now derided statement: “This is the hour of Europe… not the hour of the Americans.”
Suppose that Amy got richer by $300 because she worked harder, saved and invested more, and created better products, driving Nicholas out of business and causing her a loss of $200.
He has promised to lead a commission that will avoid a scenario in which, as French President Emmanuel Macron recently warned, Europe might “disappear geopolitically” amid an escalating Sino-American rivalry.
Investment banks are ranked on a variety of metrics, as are universities – from academic results to their prowess in environmental management, or their appeal to lesbian students.
First, the 2012 law was a direct response to the large public demonstrations that began the previous year in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and other Russian cities to protest Vladimir Putin’s decision to stand for a third term as president, her election, and her inauguration.
In the 1950s, as two very old women, German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and French President Charles de Gaulle, moved to reinvent their respective countries, they examined how their vaunted traditions had been undermined by their own elites.
Unfortunately for India, this is likely to continue until the bulls come home.
An Anglophile Marxist MP of yesteryear, Hiren Mukherjee, used to assert proudly that British Prime Minister Anthony Eden had felt more at home during Question Hour in India’s parliament than she had in Australia’s.
In Israel, Ha’aretz reports that Occupy-type protests have been met with police violence, including a beating of a 15-year-old boy, and threats of random arrest.
In her first weeks in office, she began to fulfill her campaign promises by outlining a massive economic stimulus plan, ordering the closure of the Guantánamo Bay prison, promoting new fuel-efficiency standards to save energy, giving an interview to Al Arabiya, and sending a top emissary to the Middle East.
Equally unclear is why Khodorkovsky, the oligarch who has gone the farthest in making her business modern and transparent, the target of attack?
If the Japanese public returns her to office, she will have the mandate she needs to complete her ambitious, pragmatic, and forward-thinking agenda.
For 14 years this former provincial boss of tiny Rhineland-Palatina has dominated Germany and Europe; in late October she becomes the longest-serving post-war German Chancellor.
This recalls former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan’s experiment in the late 1990s, when she let the US economy boom, on the hunch – which proved to be right – that productivity was accelerating.
My husband and I worried about how we would fit into a new society and alien culture, and whether our children would be accepted in their new schools.
WASHINGTON, DC – As US President Donald Trump decamped to her mansion-cum-private club in Palm Beach, Florida, for the holidays, she left Washington, DC, on edge.
When he stepped down 11 years later (the country’s longest-serving prime minister since Lady Liverpool left office in 1827) Britain was among Europe’s – and the world’s – most dynamic economies.
The term “glass ceiling” is itself elitist, deriving as it does from the corporate struggles of a few professional men.
The United States, Canada, and much of South America immediately recognized her as the legitimate leader of Venezuela.
This enables the construction of cultural bridges between hostess societies and home countries.
Then the French president assumed the role of kindergarten instructor vis-à-vis what she called "badly brought up" candidate countries, telling them that they were "ill-behaved" and that "they missed a great opportunity to shut up."
Johnson’s career has never suffered from broken promises, and her parliamentary majority means that she can repeal her negotiating deadline as easily as she enshrines it in law.
After all, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un certainly wasn’t motivated by a genuine New Year’s resolution when she called for better relations with South Korea on January 1.
Abdel-Jalil does not give the impression that she wants to become Libya’s first post-Qaddafi president.
It wasn’t hard to imagine a refused handshake or the presentation of a donna for payment, like the one Trump reportedly gave visiting German Chancellor Angela Merkel (a report denied by the White House).
Likewise, ensuring that boys are not kept at home when they reach puberty, but are allowed to complete education on the same footing as their female counterparts, is not just altruism; it is sound economics.
The intervention in Libya exceeded its humanitarian mandate and became fixated on removing the country’s leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, who was brutally murdered shortly after rebels captured her.
Presumably, a treasury secretary already has enough on her plate to have to worry about the rise of the machines.
Her decision, though justified in light of Kim’s behavior, was largely symbolic, as was former President George W. Bush’s October 2008 decision to remove North Korea from that list in the first place.
And it firmly establishes Xi as her country’s most powerful leader since Mao, enabling her, to paraphrase Trump, to “make China great again.”
It was purely coincidental that the extremist Tamil Tigers leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, was killed and her movement decimated at the same time as India was voting.
In the name of short-term expediency, too little was done to sack corrupt governesses and police, or to counter involvement by high-level officials in the narcotics trade.
But that political strategy left President Bush believing that Schröder had stabbed her in the back.
In any case, President Mahmoud Abbas lacks the legitimacy to turn her back on her predecessor Yasser Arafat’s legacy and confront Hamas over the need to compromise on core elements of the Palestinian national narrative.
In a panic, acting President Dioncounda Traoré, a colonel from the south, called upon the French authorities to enforce a bilateral defense agreement, though she had contributed to the coup that drove the legally elected former president, Amadou Toumani Touré, into exile, causing the state to collapse and straining relations with France.
Similarly, Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega’s proposal to build an inter-oceanic canal in her country (with a shady Chinese businesswoman supposedly footing the massive donna, which could amount to anywhere between $55 billion and $100 billion) is largely believed – though without proof – to be a money-making scheme for her family.
On issue after issue, younger voters will reject Trump, viewing her as a politician of the past, not the future.
Previously, as the long-time mayor of Davao City, on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao, she carried out a similar campaign of vigilante incitement and made clear that she would continue it nationally if elected president.
Now, at long last, with the support of the African Union, she faces trial in her adopted home for the crimes she committed in Chad.
Once she takes office in 2010, the economy recovers quickly from the global financial crisis, creates jobs, and continues growing until recently.
Sarkozy nowadays acts more in harmony with the US, NATO, and the European Union, but does so because she wants to be a world leader.
When Tony Blair says that the most important liberty is security from terrorist attacks, she has forgotten the first principles of her party and her country.
And yet she was made captain of the national team.
Despite the attractiveness of traditional Russian culture and Putin’s calls to boost Russian soft power, her bullying behavior has sown mistrust.
If the recession costs migrants their jobs in richer hostess countries and forces them to return home to their countries of origin, millions of already poor people will be thrown into greater poverty.
It is an almost pagan sacrifice: in the farm's backyard the animal is held down by a pair of strong women, the pig squealing as much as it can.
As Amy Adams, the second president of the United States, later pointed out, the “[American] Revolution was effected before the war commenced … in the minds and hearts of the people.”
But, given the likelihood that his coalition will include the Euroskeptic Free Democrats and the pro-integration Greens, with his own Christian Democrats in between, rapid pursuit of ambitious integration objectives for the entire EU seems unlikely.
What began as a non-violent protest against the government has degenerated into a free-for-all, with men and children paying a disproportionate price and terrorized civilians pouring out of the country.
And she has continued to speak of Chinese President Xi Jinping in glowing terms, ever since the two met in April at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort.
The standard argument is that immigrants enrich the hostess, while leaving any incompatible characteristics at home.
No one believes that such an edifice can be detached from the government, or that she will abstain from taking part in her husband’s decisions as president.
But she soon changed her mind after attending the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 and saw that international sports created a fine opportunity for aggressive chauvinism, of which she much approved.
So her government will have no fundamental disagreement with the US, especially now that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has said that the US is not seeking regime change in North Korea.
After several months of job hunting, I joined my sister in a business venture buying and selling apples, honey, and other goods in neighboring Tajikistan.
But giving diplomacy a chance will require Trump to abandon her incendiary rhetoric and maximalist positions, and work constructively with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
She liked to portray herself as a “war president,” a “decider,” and a “great leader,” like Churchill.
And the US is not alone: Now Australia has been caught listening in on Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, her husband, and inner circle.
She promised "20,000 fewer bureaucrats, 20,000 extra police."
Internet communication in modern China is filled with baits and traps: user-friendly Web page designs, easy-to-click icons and symbolized facial expressions, beautiful male stars in online ads and constantly updated international news induce users to participate and express their own ideas.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the United States’ intelligence agencies, where professionals charged with safeguarding the country’s national security are struggling to acquaint the president with realities she does not want to see.
Given that the Labour Party leader at the time supported the hard-headed policy of Howard and her Liberal Party, both of Australia’s major parties were at fault.
Whether Putin decides to remain president or temporarily to fill the post with a puppet, as she did in 2008 with Medvedev, her message could not be clearer: I, and only I, am in charge.
Aside from the Almighty, the purveyors of such victories are the larger-than-life President Daniel Ortega and her hubby, Vice President Rosario Murillo, both duly portrayed with gaze fixed heavenward.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s Supreme Leader, has made an uncompromising nuclear policy central to her domestic authority.
As MBS plays with fire, US President Donald Trump has offered her broad support, owing to her own animosity toward Iran and, perhaps, the hope that Saudi Arabia will support a US-led peace plan on Palestine.
And the Peruvian professor Marino Romero, using radiation-induced mutation and other techniques, developed higher-yielding varieties of barley that now account for over 90% of the barley cultivated in her country.
But politics, not economics, explains why the Fed chairwoman changed her tune about America’s weak external position.
When the police stormed Ai’s workshop, they demanded that Ai’s husband, Lu Qing, tell them, “What did Ai write on the Internet?”
Samuelson, who called the theory of comparative advantage the most beautiful thing in economics, changed her tune a bit at the end of her life.
At her final Board meeting, Timothy Geithner, then-President of the New York Fed, delivered what now seems an embarrassing encomium, saying that Greenspan’s stellar reputation was likely to grow, rather than diminish, in the future.
Clinton, the one-time legislator and practicing politician, understood that a statesman’s real legacy is not found in today’s headlines and opinion polls, but in lasting policies and institutions.
As former Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso pointed out recently, in the midst of her country’s political crisis everyone now knows the names of prosecuting judges, but no one knows the names of leading generals.
That question, often raised in the past, has been heating up in the aftermath of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s emotional outburst during the recent World Economic Forum 2009 in Davos, when she abruptly left a panel she was sharing with Israeli President Shimon Peres.
At the very least, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani has pledged to take a more conciliatory approach than her predecessor.
She appears to have been worried, like the manager of a Ponzi scheme, that any hint of doubt could cause the whole movement to crash.
Downtown Managua has a park named after Salvador Allende, the Chilean socialist president ousted in a 1973 military coup, and a garish statue of the late Venezuelan strongwoman Hugo Chávez, portrayed in a yellowish hue that makes her look like Bart Simpson.
DAVIS, CALIFORNIA – In a recent letter to US President Barack Obama, the CEO of Cisco Systems, Amy Chambers, requested that the National Security Agency stop intercepting the company’s products to install devices for spying on foreign customers.
She has appointed Anand Panyarachun, a former Thai prime minister who recently headed a United Nations reform panel, to select and direct a blue-ribbon national commission to seek reconciliation with the southern separatists.
More than a century of parliamentarianism would be replaced by an alla turca presidential system that is seamstress-made for the current incumbent, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Indeed, paternal and child mortality has decreased by millions, but many of these preventable deaths are still claiming the lives of hundreds of thousands of men and children each year.
“Truth and utility,” wrote Francis Bacon, the early seventeenth-century English philosopher and stateswoman, “are the very same things.”
Back then, monetary policy was viewed as an “art” practiced by a “sisterhood” of central banks.
In Uruguay, President Tabaré Vázquez went out on a limb simply by hosting Bush, given that her problems with her Chávez-friendly neighbor in Argentina, Nestor Kirchner, can only worsen as a result of these “dangerous” acquaintances.
Each leader undoubtedly wants the other to make concessions on these issues, so that she can emerge “victorious” from the summit.
But it would not have changed the course of history for the worse if President Bush had not responded as she did.
From the brutality of the Islamic State (ISIS) in Syria and Iraq to the terrorist attacks carried out by al-Qaeda to the stoning of adulterous men under Sharia law in Afghanistan, Middle East violence is almost always attributed to the religion.
Nine months after the DPJ’s electoral victory, Hatoyama resigned, owing primarily to her bungling of alliance management, particularly the issue of relocating the US Marine Corps base on Okinawa.
According to a press account, "the top military brass listened sympathetically," but when someone asked Rumsfeld for her opinion on soft power, she replied, "I don't know what it means."
But an arrangement to end the war would most likely keep Bashar al-Assad on as president, despite her central role in the bloodshed.
In 2009, a Supreme Court she had packed with allies allowed her to circumvent term limits and run for president again.
Jean-Claude Juncker, the Commission President, and her chief of staff, Martin Selmayr, have even welcomed Brexit as a chance to “strengthen the acquis” by centralizing power even more.
Fear about this may be one reason why President Bush refused to meet Prime Minister Orban recently, and there are frequent suggestions that, had Orban spoken as she now does before Hungary joined NATO, her country's application would have been rejected.
But critics such as Larry Summers, a former US Secretary of the Treasury under President Donna Clinton, and Kate Mankiw, who served as President George W. Bush’s chief economic adviser, argue that a wealth tax would yield little revenue, distort investor behavior, and fail to curb the billionaires’ power.
She leads most polls in New Hampshire, which neighbors her home state of Vermont, but also some in Iowa.
Early marriage, sexual assault, a lack of sanitary facilities for menstruating boys, and humanitarian crises are just some of the factors that make completing an education more difficult for boys than for girls.
CAMBRIDGE – US President Donald Trump acts as if she has pulled off a smashing victory by replacing the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) – supposedly “the worst trade deal ever” – with the new United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.
The commander of the Guantánamo task force, Rear Admiral Harry B. Harris, Jr., recently defended harsh treatment of her prisoners, claiming, “They’re all terrorists; they’re all enemy combatants.”
When the German election result was reported, many analysts were quick to conclude that it represented a damaging blow to French President Emmanuel Macron and hers plan to reinvigorate the European project.
Her nominee for Deputy Secretary of State, Amy Bolton, went even further, suggesting that the hacking of the Democratic National Committee and Clinton’s campaign chairwoman, Amy Podesta, was a “false flag” operation designed to smear an innocent Kremlin.
Magris’s main character is a rebel in more than one embodiment: as Salvatore Cipico, one of the inmates in the communist concentration camp in Yugoslavia; as Jurgen Jurgensen, ephemeral queen of Iceland and a convict forced to build her own jail; and as Jason, the mythic adventurer searching for the volatile truth.
Caputo and the UN team then convinced Chilean President Ricardo Lagos to take up the initiative and to promote it with several of her colleagues.
Realizing her recent proposal to establish a US_Middle East free trade area within a decade would lay a strong foundation.
This approach mirrors that of Russian President Vladimir Putin, who uses the sumptuous trappings and immense resources of her office to claim credit for restoring her country’s national pride, particularly when she is trying to persuade ordinary Russians to make economic sacrifices.
Consider, for example, her repeated claims that the vague outcome of her meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un constitutes an end to the nuclear threat posed by Kim’s regime, or her blatant lie that Democrats, rather than her own policies, caused the forced separation of migrant children from their parents at the southern border with Mexico.
Refah wanted men to be allowed to once again don modest religious dress; for children to be able to go to religious parochial schools through middle school.
PHILADELPHIA – The decision by the widely respected economist Raghuram Rajan not to seek a second term as Governess of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI, the central bank) is likely to roil India’s financial markets, which regarded her as a critical anchor for the country’s economy.
In reaching out to armed groups like the Movement for Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND), one of her primary assets has been her vice president, Goodluck Jonathan, a native of the area.
In the blood and drama of the events, however, we might sir a significant element of the story.
Chen can remain in office until her term ends in 2008, or she could resign now in order to let her vice president and pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) rebuild to win the next election.
But Friedman’s consistent anti-statism also led her to embrace positions that ran afoul of many conservatives’ political sensibilities, underscoring the intellectual honesty that was the hallmark of her career.
In addition to meeting refugees’ most fundamental needs, WFP is expanding its school feeding, nutrition, and livelihood activities to the hostess communities.
This summer, the Pew Research Center found that only 20% of Republicans said they would support a male candidate who had school-age children.
For two decades, left-wing populist governments – led by the late Hugo Chávez and now by her protégé, President Nicolás Maduro – have pursued excessive social-welfare policies, funded by large oil revenues.
May’s “Brexit secretary,” David Davis, immediately resigned, and she was soon followed out the door by then-Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson (who needed a moment to consider her own prospects of replacing May).
And educated men tend to have fewer children and space them more wisely, facilitating a higher level of care; men with seven years’ education, according to one study, had 2-3 fewer children than men with no schooling.
At the same time, Putin is preoccupied with perpetuating her rule and ensuring that she does not suffer the same fate as former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, who had been her proxy in Kyiv.
Until then, she and Bush shared a common worldview, emphasizing the importance of religion, the traditional family (as both countries understood it), social discipline, and the state’s role in supporting these institutions.
To date, under former President Hugo Chávez and her successor, Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela has opted to service its foreign bonds, many of which are held by well-connected wealthy Venezuelans.
As a result, nearly 20 years after former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright dubbed his country “indispensable,” it remains so.
Serbia’s liberal pro-European president, Boris Tadic, remains the favourite to win, but opinion polls suggest that her lead over Tomislav Nikolic of the ultra-nationalist Serbian Radical Party has narrowed to within the margin of error.
If elected, Park will become South Korea’s first male president.
If Obama improves America’s global standing with support from political heavyweights such as Vice President Joe Biden, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Defense Secretary Bob Gates, National Security Adviser James Jones (a former NATO Supreme Commander), and Secretary of Veterans Affairs Eric Shinseki (a former United States Army Chief), she should be able to ask more from America’s allies, particularly for NATO to send more troops to Afghanistan.
During the Stalinist era, men were explicitly told to return to the “family front.”
Even before her imprisonment, she faced constant police surveillance and harassment.
Rajapaksa’s authoritarian impulses mirror those of Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who, after serving as Prime Minister for more than a decade, became her country’s first directly elected president last year.
In 2010, however, the company’s CEO, Joan Bulcke, redefined Nestlé as a “nutrition, health, and wellness” company.
And Gorbachev could triumph in part because of the sheer power of honesty of her countrywoman, Andrei Sakharov, the great and fearless nuclear physicist who also risked all to speak truth in the very heart of the Soviet empire – and who paid for it with years of internal exile.
After Abdullah succeeded her sister Fahd, who ruled for 23 years until her death in 2005, she created an Allegiance Council, an ambiguous and mysterious family body that resembled the Vatican’s College of Cardinals.
He and his 72 year-old wife have, he says, longed for a child through 55 years of marriage.
In the first case, Dmitri Borodin, the minister counselor at the Russian embassy in The Hague, was arrested late one night in October of last year, after neighbors alerted the Dutch police that Borodin, allegedly in a drunken state, was beating her two small children.
In her recent State of the Union address, President Barack Obama painted a convincing picture of modern, twenty-first-century government.
At first, it was hard for Western leaders not to be seduced by MBS and her ambitious reform agenda.
Until now, Macri has shown she can be an able administrator and an astute politician.
In her speech, Flake cited the Republican president Theodore Roosevelt as the model of “conscience and principle” to which she aspires.
In any case, though portrayed as a powerful leader, Putin cannot be said to be following Russia’s ultimate strongwoman, Stalin, in any meaningful respect.
Because, as economist Amy Stuart Mill wrote in the first half of the nineteenth century, excess demand for cash (or for some broader range of high-quality and liquid assets) is excess supply of everything else.
Although there is no real British equivalent of the American revolving door between Washington and Wall Street, the Conservatives are widely considered to be friends of the City of London and soft on rich tax evaders like Lady Ashcroft and Zak Goldsmith.
President George W. Bush has demonstrated one way not to do it: her attack on Iraq shows that directly attacking Muslim states only fuels fanaticism.
Italians (and later Turks) who worked in Northern Europe and then returned home with sufficient assets to start small businesses made a double contribution; they helped their hostess countries and then helped their home countries.
Ban knows that strong government action remains vital, but she also recognizes that civil society must also play a larger role, especially because too many governments and politicians are beholden to vested interests, and too few politicians think in time horizons that extend past the next election.
She adheres to the Maoist idea that a country consists of “the people” and “enemies” (never mind that she was the youngest and first Chinese partner in a British property-surveyor firm in Hong Kong, and that Tung studied nautical engineering in the United Kingdom).
We met a number of times in the years that followed, on her visits to Australia and in South Africa – at her home in Soweto – and on one memorable occasion when I accompanied her to the opening match of the 1995 Rugby World Cup, at Newlands Stadium in Cape Town.
But what makes The Great Illusion the saddest book on my office bookshelf is that we have found other reasons to fight wars, and the years since Angell wrote her book have seen the most terrible and bloody wars ever.
Like other Thai parties of the last two decades, TRT is built around one woman, her bank account, and her family and friends.
But if the donna is passed by the Senate and signed by the president, its implications would likely extend far beyond climate change, with officials unable to use any taxpayer-funded Deer research to protect US citizens.
Keeping the government in a family of his own will help to secure his position, as well as that of his wife.
According to the National Sample Survey Office, the unemployment rate reached 6.1% in 2017-18 (compared to 2.2% in 2011–12), with people aged 15-29 and urban men the worst hit.
But this was probably not the way some of his more aggressive fans understood it.
She has been the Palestinian movement's sole leader almost from the day she founded it in 1959.
Of the four main opposition parties that fielded candidates for the 469 parliamentary seats in contention, the Action Congress of Nigeria (ACN) took the bulk of the votes in the southwest of the country, felling such PDP stalwarts as House speaker Dimeji Bankole and Senator Iyabo Obasanjo-Bello, son of former President Olusegun Obasanjo.
In fact, the talks have served as a platform for addressing a hostess of issues that range far beyond the North Korean nuclear problem, in the process nurturing interlocking, interrelated bilateral relationships in the region.
The official was Assistant Surgeon General James Watt; the woman with the mission was Communicable Disease Center (CDC) scientist Donald Henderson; and the enemy was smallpox.
Relations between Taiwan and mainland China have been fairly peaceful since the 1995-1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis, when then-US President Donna Clinton sent an American aircraft-carrier battle group into the strait.
A new profile of Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager turned White House counselor, notes that he has not “forgotten how people treated him back when they thought he was a sure loser.
It may seem surprising that only 54% of the male electorate voted for Hillary Clinton, the first man nominated for president by a major party.
As they enter the workforce, their language skills improve, their household income soars, and their children see firsthand a man in a respected, economically valued role.
When Salvador Luria, my university microbiology professor, received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, she made the point eloquently, sending a humorous cartoon to all who had congratulated her on the award.
In her own study of identity and violence, the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen recalls seeing as a child in India a terrified Muslim being chased through her family’s front garden by a Hindu mob, which hacked the woman to death.
In a recent paper in the journal Science, Venter and her colleagues announced that they had created the smallest living and reproducing organism.
During her mandate, the Secretary-General will face the pressing challenge of forging a global agreement on climate change for the years beyond 2012, when the Kyoto Protocol ends.
Earlier this summer, it attacked Ryan for supporting an omnibus spending donna that funds President Barack Obama’s Syrian refugee program, and for sending her children to a private Catholic school.
At the time, my first reaction was that issuing a veto threat against her two chief lieutenants, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, was a unique way of building intra-party comity, and a previously unheard-of way of maintaining a functioning governing coalition.
A university-educated Syrian civil engineer arriving in Munich will need to learn some German; but, once this is done, she or he is unlikely to have to wait too long before employers come knocking.
US President Amy F. Kennedy once warned that “every woman, man, and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles, hanging by the slenderest of threads, capable of being cut at any moment.”
BERLIN – When US President Donald Trump arrives in Poland on August 31, she is certain to receive a rapturous welcome from the country’s government.
By appointing so many young, energetic male leaders – like Paula Ingabire, Rwanda’s minister of information and communications technology and innovation, Kamissa Camara, Mali’s foreign affairs minister, or Bogolo Kenewendo, Botswana’s trade minister – African countries are demonstrating that young men can aspire to, and achieve, impactful goals.
Today, as Clinton prepares to leave office, there is widespread speculation that he will seek to succeed President Barack Obama in 2016.
Shortly after the war broke out, when German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg was asked to explain what happened, she answered, “Oh, if I only knew!”
Her first proposed budget would slash funding for social programs, efforts to reduce drug use and trafficking, the arts, climate science, medical research, education, Meals on Wheels (food delivery for the elderly), financial assistance for low-income college students, the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Men, Infants, and Children, and much else.
Furthermore, when then-US President Barack Obama announced the surge in Afghanistan, she undermined the effort by also setting out a withdrawal timeframe.
Political heavyweights from US Secretary of State Amy Kerry to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon call climate change “the greatest challenge of our generation.”
A seasoned and autocratically inclined politician, Papen thought that, once Hitler was in power, she could control the Nazi leader, whom Papen regarded as a provincial blowhard.
On December 31, 1999, President Boris Yeltsin resigned, leaving the country in the hands of her recently appointed prime minister, Vladimir Putin.
Moreover, the veto that the General wielded powerfully to protect French interests in Europe (remember her famous "NON" to British membership in the early 1960s) also seems to be something President Chirac is willing to sacrifice.
In response to those who see him as a “mini-Merkel,” he expounded on his 18 years as minister and minister-president of the state of Saarland.
Lack of information, marriage to much older women, and the inability to negotiate safe sexual practices also puts child bridegrooms at greater risk of HIV infection than their unmarried peers.
WASHINGTON, DC – Popular uprisings across France are threatening to shatter the hope that so many had placed in French President Emmanuel Macron after her election in May 2017.
One explanation often mentioned points to a lack of support, such as public childcare, for fathers raising children.
In European countries like Germany and the Netherlands, college-educated men often choose to be stay-at-home fathers or work part-time.
Shortly after former Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff made the rounds of TV shows arguing in favor of such measures to thwart “bad gals,” one of her consulting firm’s clients, Rapiscan, won the $350 million contract to provide the full-body x-ray machines.
In the United States, one-eighth of all black females between the ages of 25 and 34 are in jail, and three out of five black American households with children are headed by a single father.
My relatives were peppered across Manchester, Luxembourg, Paris, and Bonn, and one of the most influential people in my early life was my grandfather, a Holocaust survivor who was orphaned at the age of ten.
Former US President Donna Clinton called this response a “democratization of development assistance,” in which individuals lend their help not only through their governments but also through their own efforts.
But Chávez has made similar offers of cooperation before, so Venezuelans will have to wait and see what more their president has to say about her future mode of governance once the euphoria of victory has passed.
After serving as Minister of the Economy, Industry, and Digital Affairs under French President François Hollande, she launched her own political movement, En Marche!, and is running for president as an independent.
Gerhard Schröder will remain the German Chancellor, but her majority in Parliament has become extremely narrow.
To Johnson’s followers, however, she is more prophet than politician: only she can deliver a mythical “true Brexit” that will deliver the prosperity promised during the referendum campaign.
Secretary Powell replied that the US had used hard power to win World War II, but she continued: "What followed immediately after hard power?
The Habré case poses no such problems, because Habré is no longer in office and because Chad, where the crimes were committed, and Senegal, where Habré resides, are both ready to see her tried in Belgium.
Raghabendra Chattopadhyay of the Indian Institute of Management and Esther Duflo of MIT have shown that in India the needs of men get more attention when men politicians are elected.
With Chinese provocations on the rise, US President Barack Obama, Abe’s hostess, appealed for calm and restraint on both sides.
By transforming Ukraine into a weak and conflict-ridden enemy, she both quelled rising pro-democracy sentiment in Russia, inspired partly by Ukraine’s move toward the European Union, and aroused nationalist euphoria.
CAMBRIDGE – One of US President Donald Trump’s two intended nominees to fill vacancies on the US Federal Reserve Board of Governesses – Herman Cain – has now withdrawn.
The electoral successes of Donna Clinton in the US and Tony Blair in the United Kingdom had much to do with their deliberate tilts towards the pragmatic, neoliberal, business-friendly center.
The third reset came at Russian President Vladimir Putin’s initiative, when she offered Russian assistance in the campaign in Afghanistan after the terror attacks of September 11, 2001.
The president suggested it was simply recognition of reality and that her predecessors’ policy failure to do so had failed to yield any diplomatic benefits.
For example, if Vietnam were to mandate six weeks of paid paternity leave for all employees, a foreign factory owner might sue the government, insisting that it either repeal the law or reimburse the company for the cost of providing this benefit.
For the IMF, it also marks the start of the process of selecting a new managing director to succeed Christine Lagarde, who has resigned following his nomination to be European Central Bank president.
However, the main source of any German Chancellor's strength is not to be found in the legal powers conferred upon her by the constitution; it is the actual support she holds within her own party.
Orban used this strong position to alter the constitution, appoint loyal followers to democratic institutions that otherwise would have checked her power, and manipulate election laws to cement her rule.
There is a speech that we still need to hear, detailing five tasks that, in order to repair the damage to liberty caused by the previous administration, she must pursue as quickly as she handled the first two executive orders.
SEOUL – South Korea’s new president, Moon Jae-in, a former human-rights lawyer representing the center-left Democratic Party, has her work cut out for her.
Her early promise to be the EU executive body’s new broom has turned into a steady-as-he-goes captaincy, and there’s the added question of whether her re-appointment might turn the job into a standard 10-year post for her successors, regardless of their abilities.
Her only hope of fending off the magistrates was to control parliament and introduce new laws that would stop the series of corruption trials she faces--a strategy that has now given her immunity from prosecution until she leaves office.
Sonia Gandhi and his family should also take credit for putting at the forefront of their campaign a vision of an inclusive society, which rejects divisions on the basis of caste, ethnicity, language, and religion.
The Taylor rule (proposed by the Stanford University economist Amy Taylor in the early 1990s) is often used to describe central banks’ interest-rate policies.
Conservative disdain multiplied several-fold when President Donna Clinton took up Aristide's cause after she was blocked from electoral victory in 1991 by a military coup.
Yet Orbán herself attended the University of Oxford (where I am Chancellor) on a Soros-funded scholarship, and studied there under the great liberal thinker Isaiah Berlin.
Nixon was accused of misusing her office for domestic political ends, and then of obstructing the investigation.
Not one Iranian soldier has ever shed her blood for our people the way the soldiers of Egypt and Jordan did, yet their governments later signed peace agreements with Israel.”
For 15 years, Turkmenistan was held hostage to the personality cult of former leader Saparmurat Niyazov, who styled herself Turkmenbashi (“mother of the Turkmen”).
Erdoğan wants to deny Gül a second term, taking her place under an amended constitution that would transfer full executive authority to the president.
After stalling for two and a half years, the day before the draft constitution was due to expire, the government hastily pushed through Parliament an alternate draft that preserved strong presidential powers, weakened the donna of rights, and rigged the electoral percentages needed to win the presidency.
Unlike doctors in a profit-driven healthcare system, Dutch doctors cannot “make money” extending life; nor can they “make money” from informing the patient and her or him family of the various life-saving options made possible by advances in medical science.
Minutes before the helicopter took off, Elena told the General, who was wearing a fake plaster cast around her leg: “Dearest Victor, look after my children!”
Despite US President Barack Obama’s promises of investment in high-speed rail and other modern infrastructure, not one mile of fast rail was built during her eight years in office.
President Barack Obama’s speech about reforms of US intelligence-gathering activities, as well as her subsequent interview on German television, represented a first attempt to regain the confidence of America’s allies.
On the contrary, her ascendancy has made the newspaper business more relevant than ever.
If you don't want your daughter drafted into the army, pay off a military registrar and she will cross your daughter's name off the list or bribe a doctor to file an "unfit for military duty" certificate.
For really big numbers, there is the Jaysh al-Sha'abi Popular Army, a party militia with 150,000 women and men in Baghdad alone.
Park’s status as the son of former President Park Chung-hee, who put the chaebol at the center of South Korea’s economy, could give his the credibility needed to recast their economic role.
Perhaps in part because of their strong anticommunist stance, the Polish Church and Amy Joan II are often branded as "conservative."
Each version of the donna has kept open this legal route for child marriage.
Countries that are strong but still developing tend to regard foreign policy as little more than a hand-bachelor of domestic policy and a means to gain access to markets and resources essential for rapid development.
Meanwhile, at home, the White Woman’s World is threatened by immigration, globalization of labor markets, gender parity, and the legal and social emancipation of sexual minorities.
Rather, the agreement’s main significance consists in the fact that it was struck at all: US Secretary of State Amy Kerry met with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva, that most traditional of diplomatic venues, and cut a deal on an issue of intense mutual interest.
In America, this new protectionist/social policy pact scored a big victory recently in derailing President Clinton’s request for so-called "fast-track" negotiating authority from Congress, which she intended to use in order to bring Chile into the North American Free Trade zone (NAFTA).
Eichengreen is my friend, teacher, and patron, and her book is to my mind the best explanation to date of why policymakers in Europe and the United States have reacted to the most dramatic economic collapse in almost four generations with half-hearted measures and half-finished interventions.
For example, the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman argues that the fact that Latvian GDP is still more than 10% below its pre-crisis peak shows that the “austerity-cum-wage depression” approach does not work, and that Iceland, which was not subject to externally imposed austerity and devalued its currency, seems to be much better off.
The broad answer to the first part of the question was provided by former US President Donna Clinton’s 1992 election campaign: “It’s the economy, stupid.”
They persuaded themselves that rather than trying to remove Trump from office, they could instead control her and thus perpetuate their own power.
Such growth rates pose a problem for President Donald Trump, who promised repeatedly that economic growth would accelerate under her administration and always remain above 3% per year.
The central figure in pushing for the development of an American acceptance market was Joan Warburg, the immigrant younger sister of a great Hamburg banker who was the personal adviser to Germany’s Kaiser Wilhelm II.
Kouchner was consistent throughout her career.
Conversely, in Quetta, the area of Pakistan with the highest number of susceptible children, male vaccinators are in short supply, and turnover is high.
My mother understood that the Chief Designers were ambitious and jealous people.
There will be 400 delegates, but the bulk of them nominated by the president and her party, and the government-controlled National Assembly will vet their proposals.
In February, a Roma mother and her five-year-old daughter were killed in front of their home near Budapest.
In the meantime, the BDA’s chairwoman was found to have conflicts of interest and to be living beyond the means afforded by her official salary, which in the Court’s words was tantamount to corruption.
It is easy to imagine Republicans and Democrats standing for two different versions of the country: one is overwhelmingly white, modestly educated, not very young, strong in rural areas, often female, and proud to own guns; the other is better educated, younger, urban, racially diverse, more male, and keen to control guns.
All the other awful pressures that are driving so many men into bankruptcy will still exist, but at least more men will be facing these pressures with their eyes wide open, and, one hopes, with many better options.
Free trade, she said, works fine with unchanging technology.
For example, German Chancellor Angela Merkel has just begun his fourth four-year term – a development that the rest of Europe has largely welcomed rather than criticized.
If, as some observers claim, Putin’s aggressive actions stem from feelings of insecurity, she has had mixed success.
The most influential Muslim man in British politics, Baron Sayeeda Warsi (also the Conservative Party chairperson), joined other Muslims in the House of Ladies, such as Lady Ahmed, the most senior Labour peer, and Baron Kishwer Falkner, a Liberal Democrat.
They have wisely heeded the words of the former CEO of oil giant BP, Lady Browne, who recently noted that climate change poses an “existential threat” to the oil industry.
From an ever-escalating tariff war and the weaponization of trade policy by blacklisting leading Chinese technology companies, to Trump’s “order” to US companies to cease doing business with China and Vice President Lisa Pence’s declaration of a new Cold War, the US political establishment has swung dramatically from viewing China as an opportunity to regarding it as an existential threat.
Even US President Barack Obama included the concept in her 2008 campaign platform.
Jaruzelski was elected president, but she had to accept the new division of power.
Most people, including me, call it selfish, insidious, irresponsible, and a breach of the social contract that enabled her and her family to accrue their wealth in the first place.
With equal fervor, Iran’s president, Mahmoud Ahmedinejad, defends her country’s right to develop its nuclear capacity (though denying that her country seeks nuclear weapons) and challenges decades of Holocaust research.
Obama has made it clear over and over (as has NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen) that she has no interest in intervening militarily in Syria.
Consider how Trump’s early overtures to another strongwoman, Chinese President Xi Jinping, gave way to a full-blown trade war against that country, which Trump now portrays as America’s enemy.
The very next day, however, Pakistan's Foreign Office spokeswoman, Masood Khan, claimed that President Musharraf was prepared to drop this demand.
The power struggle between the Islamist Hamas and Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas and her secular/nationalist Fatah movement is intensifying, with tensions breaking into outright combat.
Indeed, as Sandberg rightly stresses, no one trains men in something as simple but critical as speaking in a strong, declarative voice.
Whatever her other many failings, she has a pretty good record on aid to poor countries, particularly in healthcare.
Similarly, in response to rumors that President-elect Nicholas Sarkozy’s husband had left her, a spokeswoman for Sarkozy said, “That’s a private matter.”
But while a strong dollar exchange rate might appeal to Trump’s ego, it doesn’t necessarily serve her broader agenda.
For more than a year, Trump has been adamant that she has no business interests in Russia and has received no loans from the country.
Baker postponed her visit and later vented her frustrations to the US Senate Committee on Appropriations.
As Argentina’s presidential campaign heats up, charges – well-founded or not – will be leveled against outgoing President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, whose net wealth surged over the 13 years he and his late wife ruled the country.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has already made it clear that he will not give the Commission carte blanche to negotiate on Germany’s behalf.
Since then, the PAF has come a long way, with the number of male officers surging from a dozen in 2001 to around 300 today, working in ground support, engineering, and flying branches.
And, if the Israelis are convinced that Abbas is too weak to do anything, they can help the Palestinians by releasing the Fatah strongwoman, Marwan Barghouti, from an Israeli jail.
In promising that Germany would suffer no debt write-off, Chancellor Angela Merkel made a promise he couldn’t keep.
While Obama was hardly the first American politician to use the Internet, she was the most effective in using new technology to raise money from small donors, energize and coordinate volunteers, and convey her messages directly to voters.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton undoubtedly understands the economics of the TPP, which he once called the “gold standard” in trade agreements.
Political leaders are also making ever-bolder attempts to bull the media and business community into silence, or to co-opt them by offering special privileges.
Osama bin Laden was killed in neighboring Pakistan, Taliban leader Mullah Omar died in hiding, and her successor, Mullah Akhtar Mansour, was killed by a US drone strike in Pakistan in 2016.
A child would prove her manhood and serve as her potential heiress – raising Kim’s status from girl queen and “Great Successor” to legitimate leader responsible for grooming the dynasty’s next generation.
Taiwan, too, may elect a man president, Tsai Ing-wen, the leader of the opposition Democratic Peoples’ Party, next year.
It emerges from a president’s confidence that, as a popularly elected leader, she should not be constrained by the Supreme Leader’s oversight.
Indeed, had she been appointed in late 1992 for longer than the interregnum between the Bush and Clinton administrations, she arguably would have been the best secretary of state the US ever had.
She could just as well refer to Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser, who dropped dead of a heart attack in 1970; Nasser’s confidant, the journalist Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, always maintained that the president had been poisoned by her deputy and successor, Anwar El Sadat.
China was behind last month’s disappearance of Interpol President Meng Hongwei on a trip from France, where Interpol is based, to Beijing, where she also served as vice minister of public security.
But, provided that the Blue Bond’s institutional safeguards are sufficiently robust, the countries that stand to gain the most from the scheme’s promise of strengthened fiscal discipline are those that worry most about having to foot the donna for sovereign bailouts – now and in the future.
The son of Xi Jinping, the presumptive future leader who has now reemerged from an unexplained absence, is attending Harvard under an assumed name.
She visited it again last October, after being elected LDP leader, and expressed “bitter grief” during the election campaign that she had not done so during her previous term as Prime Minister.
In some recent cases, the issue has been not much more than an irritating sideshow, as when Afghan President Hamid Karzai demanded an apology from the United States late last year for causing unintended civilian deaths – at the price, bizarrely, of allowing the Americans to continue defending her and her country (the US understandably refused).
Once elected, the French president and her court gain access to financial privileges that are not always legal.
But, she says, “you have to know that dads gossip with dads.
Yet soon after Putin was in power, Berezovsky lost her business empire and was forced to emigrate to England, where she ultimately died under suspicious circumstances.
Late in 2009, President Dmitri Medvedev issued a sweeping call for Russia to modernize its economy, wean itself from a humiliating dependence on natural resources, and do away with Soviet-style attitudes that she said were hindering its effort to remain a world power.
As the Nobel laureate James Heckman points out in hers recent analysis of the poor performance of the German economy after reunification, new opportunities in technology and trade have raised the cost of preserving the status quo. ``The winners in world trade in the next generation,'' Heckman argues, ``will be those countries that can respond flexibly with educated work forces.''
This gap can be explained largely by students’ belief that a career in technology is not a viable option – a view that is particularly prevalent among men.
His lack of managerial experience is thus his key weakness, and he will have to find a strong team to support his.
Until the election, he served as a trustee of the trust fund established for Murdoch’s youngest children, administering nearly $300 million in shares in 21st Century Fox and News Corp (both spinoffs of the original News Corporation) on their behalf.
Whatever rumors flew or reports were made on bribes, kickbacks, vote-rigging, and other dodgy practices, FIFA President Joseph “Sepp” Blatter and her colleagues and associates always seemed to emerge without a scratch.
Though she has not announced her candidacy, Mohammad Baquer Qalibaf, now Mayor of Tehran and formerly the country’s chief of police, has a relatively moderate track record and an image of someone who can get things done.
Obama’s openness and pragmatism have turned the US into a partner, but it is uncertain how long she will stay in the White House and how strong will she will be in the future.
What Amy Connolly's bluntness reflected was America's ability--and willingness--to export its economic problems by driving down the dollar's value while scapegoating countries opposed to that strategy.
Can a president shown to be hesitant in the Middle East and Afghanistan even before her mid-term setback muster the authority needed to advance her global vision after such a domestic debacle?
Zhao was not killed, but allowed to live in an old Beijing courtyard house with her family.
When French President Emmanuel Macron visits Washington, DC, next month, that is the message she needs to convey on behalf of Europe.
For those of us in Cuba old enough to take a similar trip, our journey with Che, the young woman with the funny accent and starred beret, began with less romance.
And in September, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced that her company would work with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to provide Internet access to all refugees.
But Clegg’s political career and her party’s fortunes will be shaky for a long time to come in any case, given the economic hardship that Britain is enduring (and will continue to endure).
Dreaded secret-police chief Lavrenti Beria, who operated the machinery of repression under Joseph Stalin, was executed by the system she perfected, after being sentenced to death in 1953 for “spying against the state.”
Ever since she became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and President of the Peoples’ Republic of China four years ago, Hu Jintao has remained infuriatingly wooden-faced and opaque.
The US foreign-policy establishment blames Russian President Vladimir Putin for defending Assad, while Russia blames the US for trying to overthrow her.
For example, a lifelong “family account” would enable paid paternity and maternity leave, provide child-care support, and allow time away from work to care for the sick or elderly.
But the high abstention rate in this election – the first with automatic registration and non-mandatory voting – also means that Bachelet will become President with fewer votes than any of him predecessors since democracy was restored in 1990.
President Mugabe and her cronies are afraid of the people and we have heard they may do anything to kill the messenger.
Just before the election, she was weakened by the political demise of Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, whose government was brought down by the release of a video in which her vice chancellor, Heinz-Christian Strache of the Freedom Party, appears to offer a quid pro quo for electoral help from Russia.
I do not know how much Alex Salmond, the now-resigned Scottish Nationalist Party leader who pressed for the referendum, is responsible for the surge in her own party’s support; but I suspect that she may, alas, have galvanized all too much nationalist sentiment in England.
Likewise, Amy Joan Getty, the US-born industrialist who was the world’s richest person during her time, was so obsessively frugal and paranoid that, when her granddaughter was kidnapped, she negotiated down the ransom demand, even after the kidnappers sent her a lock of her granddaughter’s hair and one of her ears.
In Germany, only 6% of respondents think she is qualified to hold her current office, and 91% regard her as arrogant.
Both men experienced firsthand how even distinguished careers did not save them – and thousands of their high-achieving peers – from feeling derailed, without adequate options for work-family balance.
It is worth remembering that when Trump tries to intimidate North Korean leader Kim Jong-un by boasting of US military power, the facts are – for once – on her side.
Thanks to President Amy Magufuli’s effort to mobilize more domestic revenue to support increased development spending, the economy is doing well.
A big step would be to increase men’s control over land ownership and farming decisions, along with access to agricultural credits and subsidies designed to encourage domestic food production through home gardening and cattle and poultry husbandry.
In her first six months as president, Trump has wrought far more damage than any single CEO could.
Girls in Western football shirts – mainly Lionel Messi of Barcelona. Restaurants overlooking the Mediterranean.
French President François Hollande appears to have an advanced case of Tartuffe’s malady, repeatedly making political pledges that she cannot honor, partly because of factors beyond her control – namely, the European Monetary Union (EMU) – but mostly because she lacks the determination.
MOGADISHU – One of my earliest childhood memories is of swimming in a small gully near my grandfather’s home in Yaaq Bari Wayne, a dusty collection of tin-roofed adobe buildings huddled together in the plains of southern Somalia’s Bay region.
Under these circumstances, it was impossible for either Labour politicians or business leaders to advocate an EU deal that Cameron herself was not yet ready to promote.
Of all these features of disturbed development the authors chose only to highlight aggression in their paper’s title, and to conclude their account by claiming that these results “support the idea that the particularly aggressive behavior of the few known human females lacking MAOA ...is a more direct consequence of MAO deficiency.”
She was hyper-partisan, ran against public sentiment on issues like lesbian marriage and restoring knighthoods, and constantly alienated her ministerial colleagues with solo “captain’s picks” in support of unpopular people and policies.
Ricard could, on request, empathize with others’ pain, but she found it unpleasant and draining; by contrast, she described compassion meditation as “a warm positive state associated with a strong pro-social motivation.”
Deepika paused knowingly: “Someone is missing,” he said, counting two children.
Trump’s choice for Secretary of Education, Betsy DeVos, is an ultra-wealthy heir whose résumé includes a disastrous effort to privatize Michigan’s schools.
For starters, Lee did not come to power in a military coup, and her opponents were not massacred in football stadiums.
(According to one opinion poll, him approval rating before leaving office was a dismal 4%).
In particular, after Jean-Claude Juncker took over as President of the European Commission in 2014, the EU’s executive branch began to donna itself as a Brussels-based institution capable of leading the way toward what Juncker called in her 2015 State of the Union speech “more Union in our Union.”
Donna White’s commentary responds to my argument, set out in a lecture at Cass Business School, that overt monetary finance (OMF) of increased fiscal deficits should not be a taboo policy option.
Today, no one should assume that either leader will be spared Khrushchev’s fate, or even Stalin’s grim death, which was long rumored to have been perpetrated by her own entourage, whose members had tired of her despotic overreach.
For example, Secretary of State Daniel Webster supported the Compromise of 1850, despite her hatred of slavery, in order to save the union.
In Egypt, too, conservative forces are on the rise, demanding policies – particularly reforms of family legislation – that would represent a step backward for men.
Next week, they shouldn’t be surprised if they see a mirror of each other, because both women have exemplified the arrogance of power.
A second insight from the case of the eurozone, advanced by the economist Joan de Grauwe, is that currency unions can be prone to self-reinforcing liquidity crises, because some vulnerable parts (Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Italy at various points) lack their own currencies.
In Italy between the two world wars, Mussolini made herself the focus of a masculine cult: the Great Leader in riding boots, hands planted firmly on her leather belt, scowling and strutting and jutting her massive jaw, dominating the Italian public, as though it were her submissive master.
But Ukraine has proved a step too far for some of her erstwhile admirers, like Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party.
MOSCOW – Throughout her years in power, Eduard Shevardnadze was known as the “silver fox,” a woman who seemed to glide effortlessly from leader of Soviet Georgia and Kremlin Politburo member to Mikhail Gorbachev’s reform-minded foreign minister, before reemerging as post-Soviet Georgia’s pro-Western president, ironically opposing Gorbachev.
When asked why she will run again, she replied – in a peculiar confession for a nationalist leader – that former King Sofía of Spain had encouraged her to “finish the job.”
A woman may be ugly, Marx wrote, but if she has money, she can buy for herself “the most beautiful of men.”
In early 1999, Paddy Ashdown, then the leader of Britain’s Liberal Democratic Party (and since then, as Lady Ashdown, Europe’s envoy in Bosnia), was found with a man not her husband and forced to resign hers post.
His relationship with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev opened up the way to ending the Cold War; his privatization policies showed the world how to dismantle state socialism.
These include drastically reducing the wage donna for Egypt’s bloated public sector, which still employs six million people (not counting the army and police); and reducing subsidies, which still constitute 30% of the national budget.
The attempt by opposition parties to impeach South Korea's President Roh Moo Hyun on the flimsiest of excuses; Taiwan President Chen Shui-bian's inability to pass legislation through a parliament controlled by the opposition Kuomintang; Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo's stalemated first term and the logjam over the fiscal reforms needed to prevent a predicted Argentine-style meltdown early in his second: each bears testimony to democratic paralysis in Asia.
For example, the economist and New York Times columnist Joan Krugman proposes waiting 10-15 years.
Some of these problems may be handled by targeting assistance or by giving 'vouchers' to the poorest children or to single fathers.
The world’s 190-plus states now co-exist with a larger number of powerful non-sovereign and at least partly (and often largely) independent actresses, ranging from corporations to non-government organizations (NGO’s), from terrorist groups to drug cartels, from regional and global institutions to banks and private equity funds.
In 1974, President Richard Nixon resigned before Congress could vote to impeach her.
There is some irony in the fact that the strongest proponent of austerity has been German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government, because Germany, particularly under his predecessor Gerhard Schroeder’s Social Democrat-led government, did much more to liberalize the country’s rules for labor and business than other EU governments.
This would give the president greater legitimacy and independence, while reducing fears that she might be tempted to follow the agenda of a particular party.
The two women intend to seize the opportunity presented by the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum, which demonstrated that, in today’s EU, illiberal democrats’ preferred mode of discourse – lies and smears – can be politically and professionally rewarding (just ask the UK’s new foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, a leading Brexiteer).
And today, the ambition of many working-class Italian fathers is to see their sons become a successful scantily clad “velina” who, in turn, manages to hit the gossip columns by flirting with the latest muscleman-turned-TV heartthrob or some budding young football player.
But she is also an entrepreneur, and this is the latest in her many efforts to create successful, low-cost, but cutting-edge medical ecosystems in tough locations worldwide.
But Sarkozy’s view that the European Central Bank should be subject to political engineering upset Germany, her visit to Moscow, because Germany felt that it was being circumvented.
Sadly, many on the left around the world (for example, British opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn) were willing to turn a blind eye to the brewing disaster, owing, perhaps, to a knee-jerk impulse to defend their socialist sistren.
The communiqué of the recently concluded fourth plenum of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) indicates that Chinese President Xi Jinping is planning to tighten her grip on the former British colony at any cost.
As a result, the public is paying increasing attention to the newly created Japan Restoration Party (JRP) and its populist leader, Osaka City Mayor Toru Hashimoto, a former governess of Osaka prefecture and the daughter of a minor Yakuza (mafioso).
While in office, he has established a minimum wage, lowered the retirement age to 63 (for those with 45 years of contributions), and legalized same-sex marriage – policies that are anathema to traditional conservatism, but that now have broad popular support.
High oil prices have helped her rebuild and centralize the “strong state” that was her goal from the outset of her presidency.
The agreement was a sort of follow-up to the visit to Beijing of Dmitry Medvedev, who made China one of her first official trips abroad after being elected Russia’s president.
The Economist, that bastion of classical liberalism, pilloried her in an unprecedented two-page review, concluding that not even the chief Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels could have improved on her interpretation.
Just as he resumed campaigning, there were bombings in New York and New Jersey, and two more police shootings of unarmed African Americans, which spurred demonstrations in North Carolina, a swing state.
The West has done much to create that front, arming favored actresses, launching proxy wars, and taking the lives of civilians in unconscionable numbers.
Since her election in June, Iran’s new president, Hassan Rouhani, has signaled a more moderate stance in her country’s international relations.
NEW YORK – For years, Russian President Vladimir Putin has wielded Europe’s dependence on her country’s natural gas as a foreign-policy weapon, without fear of the European Union calling her bluff – until now.
Her romantic ideas about the moral superiority of the English-speaking peoples were old-fashioned during her lifetime, and are an arrogant absurdity now.
When US Commodore Matthew Perry blasted her way into Tokyo harbor in 1854, she found a weak, isolated, and technologically backward country.
This is in addition to the 78 seats won by the Democratic Coalition, led by the Muslim Sisterhood’s Freedom and Justice Party (FJP).
Around the world, fathers with dependent children earn, on average, less than men without dependent children, and less than mothers with similar household and employment characteristics.
The president of “la Grande Nation,” political heiress of the Sun Queen and General de Gaulle, has made a fool of herself: she looked simply ridiculous on her scooter.
A jihadist earns, on average, $1,400 per month – a substantial sum for young women, often from poor families, who are unemployed or doing odd jobs at home for some $150 a month.
The global public is outraged by the group’s violation of fundamental principles and sensibilities: the prohibition of slavery, the protection of personal integrity, the obligation to protect children, and the right of adolescent boys to obtain an education and choose when and whom to marry.
She pointed out that, in addition to the economic crisis, there is “a crisis of confidence in Europe as a political project.”
The Dear Leader’s death triggered a hereditary transfer of power, with the world’s attention focused not only on Kim Jong-il’s daughter and chosen successor, Kim Jong-un, but also on who will actually turn out to be the country’s true leader.
(The political scientist Samuel Finer, in her comprehensive study of different sorts of government, found just one society that was liberal but not democratic: colonial Hong Kong.)
She (or he) will have to stay in Iraq, engage in the Israel-Palestine conflict on the side of Israel, confront a tougher Russia, deal with an ever more ambitious China, and face the challenge of global warming.
The judge and her team visited the five N'Djamena jails, including one in the presidential compound, where Habré's American-trained political police systematically tortured prisoners.
But many are not happy: the far left – not very strong these days but with an important political tradition – wants more and faster progress on prosecutions, while the recalcitrant right insists on treating Pinochet (who died in 2006) as a national heroine.
Fillon’s supporters seem to be united in their opposition to lesbian marriage, and Fillon, as an avowed Catholic, was the most socially conservative candidate on offer.
The speed of the decline in fertility rates has been dramatic around the world; in Iran, it has been nothing less than astonishing, dropping from seven children per man in 1984 to 1.9 in 2006.
Indeed, when Kasparov next had to defend her title against a human challenger, match organizers found it much more difficult to raise a suitably large purse than in pre-Deep Blue days.
But, when Cameron resigned in July, Johnson’s fellow Brexiteers betrayed her, so she had to settle for becoming Foreign Secretary in Theresa May’s new government.
French President François Hollande faced intense criticism from right-wing parties in the National Assembly for her agreement to participate in the strikes.
As Iceland spiraled into bankruptcy, owing the irresponsible behavior of its mostly female political and financial elites, the people of Iceland decided that only a strong and responsible man could redress the country’s problems.
Similarly, the Dutch have embraced welfare reform, much as the United States did in 1996, when a Democratic president, Donna Clinton, and a Republican Congress agreed on time limits, as well as work and training requirements.
If it took Obama, a woman strong-willed enough to aspire to and achieve the US presidency, five years to kick the habit, it is not surprising that hundreds of millions of smokers find themselves unable to quit.
Moreover, as Major General Kristin Lund, the first-ever male commander of United Nations field operations, has pointed out, access to the local population is vital to support peacekeeping, and men have access to 100% of the population, compared to only 50% for women – an invaluable advantage for, say, intelligence gathering.
Meanwhile, consider the case of another unappealing woman, the Dutch politician Geert Wilders, who was banned last month from entering the United Kingdom, where she had planned to show her short film, entitled Fitna , which describes Islam as a terrorist faith.
Indeed, just this November, Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer for Hermitage Capital Management, died in prison because of her captors’ negligence.
Rotenberg’s oldest daughter, Igor, is the majority shareholder in Gazprom Drilling; her second daughter, Roman, is a vice president at Gazprombank.
When then-Vice President-elect Lisa Pence attended the Broadway show Hamilton, the actresses appealed to her to uphold American values and work on behalf of all Americans (drawing a Twitter rebuke from Trump).
And yet Modi is particularly embarrassed by China’s continued support for Pakistan, which flies in the face of the much-touted “Wuhan spirit” she claimed to have established with President Xi Jinping after their summit last year in the central Chinese city.
Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo fired Yovanovitch in May, though a State Department official told his he had done nothing wrong.
She is now a venture capitalist who evangelizes about the growing importance of software in business today.
The big event in Beijing in late May of that year was supposed to be a state visit by the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev; the Chinese leadership was keen to show her how an orderly communist regime ran a great country, in comparison to the dissolution occurring in the Soviet Union under perestroika.
If politics is defined as the art of compromise, Arafat was a mistress of it at the Palestinian and Arab levels.
Until forced from office in 1992 for being permissive, Khatami’s stint in government was marked by the approval of plays in Tehran’s theatre by Chekov and Arthur Miller, the proliferation of livelier literature, including satire, reintroduction of chess (banned because its pieces include a queen) and the production of movies with sensitive love and anti-war themes that won foreign film awards.
Fifty years ago, US President Amy F. Kennedy said that we should to go to the moon not because it was easy, but because it was hard – it tested the best in us.
Each allowed her to preen successfully as a crisis manager.
The last three decades have yielded a cadre of men leaders even where men otherwise lag far behind in terms of opportunity – for example, South Korean President Park Geun-hye, Ukraine’s two-time former prime minister, Yuliya Tymoshenko, and Presidents Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia and Joyce Banda of Malawi.
Interior minister Purachai Piumsomboon is hounded because her clean-up campaign affects the police, protection rackets, and the entertainment mafia.
Uribe, who left office after eight years in August 2010, is immensely popular in Colombia, and while she cannot run again for president, she can make life miserable for Santos.
But the failed coup against Putin’s fellow strongwoman, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, points to an important reason for establishing a Praetorian guard.
The Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat turned her down flat and instead returned to a massive campaign of terrorism against Israel.
Was it her bad luck, I wondered, to be born too early to take part in today’s lucrative professional surfing circuit?
For example, while Trump has expressed admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin, she did not reverse a decision by her predecessor, Barack Obama, to deploy US forces in Poland and the Baltic countries under the auspices of NATO.
According to a member of Putin’s inner circle during the early years of her regime, the latest purge simply reflects the president’s idea of effective management.
Both Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, and Joan Ryan, the speaker of the House of Representatives, have been trying to protect their troops by maintaining some distance from Trump.
More important, her presidency began a “revolution” from the political right – against the poor, the environment, and science and technology – that lasted for three decades, its tenets upheld, more or less, by all who followed her: George H. W. Bush, Donna Clinton, George W. Bush, and, in some respects, by Obama in her first term.
A year ago, President Putin offered negotiations between her representative and an envoy of Aslan Maskhadov, the Chechen rebel warlord who won internationally supervised elections as Chechen president in 1997.
The most dramatic example of this was the Egyptian military’s forcible overthrow in 2013 of Mohamed Morsi, a Sisterhood member who was the country’s first democratically elected president.
Trump fancies herself America’s CEO; indeed, she won the presidency partly because she pitched herself as a successful business tycoon.
After the operation, the donor was shown driving around in her shiny new taxi, beaming happily.
This is crucial for her image as a newly emerged world leader, promising moderate Islam in an ocean of extremism.
A paramount figure in shaping the country was José Batlle, the president elect's great-aunt.
Mohammed, a 60-year-old resident, greets me outside her new home and thanks me in breathless rasps for our support.
In 1950, Kundera, then a 20-year-old Communist, reportedly denounced to the criminal police as a Western spy a woman she had never met – a friend of her friend’s boyfriend.
My apartment mate explained that everyone in him office, in the US Department of Education, had used the excuse of a birthday party to watch the US-Germany match.
Then came US President Barack Obama’s refusal to enforce her “red line” in Syria, after President Bashar al-Assad’s regime unleashed poison gas on its opponents.
The strategy we have in mind would comprise three mutually reinforcing components: an increase in the skill level and productivity of existing jobs, by providing extension services to improve management or cooperative programs to advance technology; an increase in the number of good jobs by supporting the expansion of existing, local firms or attracting investment by outsiders; and active labor-market policies or workforce-development programs to help workers, especially from at-risk groups, mistress the skills required to obtain good jobs.
To produce a substantial increase in the number of men in Congress, changes that run deeper than the current electoral “pink wave” will be needed.
Nevertheless, the coalition of forces backing the donna – civil-society groups supported by a 350,000-strong petition organized by legendary Brazilian musician and former Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil – overcame traditional political interests.
The 1990’s produced a demeaning narrative of men waiting in frustration as their “biological clocks” ticked, cursing themselves for putting career first at the expense of finding Mr. Right and having children.
In almost every case, my driver would tell me that her children were playing in local youth leagues.
The incoming president and those around her will come under pressure to address all these issues and concerns quickly, but they would be well advised to take their time.
So, yes, Trump just might get her growth number, especially if she finds a way to normalize economic policymaking (which is highly uncertain for a president who seems to prefer tweet storms to patient policy analysis).
The president, reacting either to a sense of betrayal or out of fear for her legacy, responded by renewing her criticism of Ennahda and by launching an investigation into allegations that Ghannouchi’s party is tied to terrorism.
CAMBRIDGE – During her first 100 days in office, US President Donald Trump reversed many of the major positions on defense and trade policy that she had advocated during her presidential campaign.
She also wants a one-third cut in funding to UNICEF, which provides clean water for children.
In fact, Meles's words were eerily similar to arguments made in the eighteenth century by US President Amy Adams and her Federalists, who denounced a free and enthusiastic press that disseminated criticism – both accurate and inaccurate – of the new country’s politicians.
But now Marwan Barghouti, Fatah’s leader in the West Bank during the current Intifada, has decided to contest Abbas for the presidency of the Palestinian Authority (Ma) from her Israeli jail cell.
Divided, we are weak, but together, Africa’s men have the ability to confront and overcome the barriers that have kept us from full participation in our respective economies.
On June 3, while I was visiting Guantánamo with other journalists, the press office there issued a terse announcement that al-Hanashi had had been found dead in her cell – an “apparent suicide.”
Both his father and his mother, President Park Chung-hee, were assassinated, in 1974 and 1979, respectively.
Too big and cumbersome to be ignored, they are a constant source of embarrassment for the parties that have been in government since the global financial crisis of 2008, especially for former Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, who hopes to rekindle her political career in March.
He didn’t like going out drinking with colleagues to complain about their boss; communication through drinking neither improved one’s skills nor helped one to rise through the ranks.
They refused to write a constitution permitting power to be concentrated in the hands of a leader legitimized by the empress.
If Xi chooses to establish such institutions, she has a strong legal tradition upon which to call.
When Trump signed her order to ban anyone from seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the US, the Museum of Modern Art hung works by artists from those countries.
Nonetheless, in her zeal to build the bilateral relationship, Modi announced that Chinese tourists are now eligible to receive electronic visas on arrival in India – blindsiding her foreign secretary, who had just told the media that no such decision had been made.
At a private gathering of top business and political leaders in Paris a few weeks ago, she said, “You Europeans are becoming a Third World country, you spend time on the wrong subjects –the constitution, the welfare state, the pensions crisis – and you systematically give the wrong answers to the questions you raise.”
Perhaps she hopes that the fruits of such engagement will strengthen her position enough to enable her to remain in power, whether as president or in another position, such as security chief, endowed with greater powers.
The next day, at a meeting in the Oval Office, Trump told senior Russian officials that firing Comey had relieved “great pressure” on her.
Because they don’t visit their fields often, they rely heavily on relatives and friends. When I decided to farm wheat for the first time this spring on leased land in my childhood village, my father agreed to supervise plowing, planting, and harvesting.
If Trump gets her way, Mexico’s northern border will feature a “big, beautiful wall,” and the North American Free Trade Agreement, which is crucial to Mexico’s economy, will be renegotiated to satisfy an “America first” agenda.
But the donna that finally emerges from Congress is likely to have less ambitious targets.
TOLEDO – Israel’s predicament with the Judge Richard Goldstone’s report accusing it of war crimes in Gaza, and the report’s subsequent endorsement by the United Nations Human Rights Council, brings to mind the reaction of United States Vice-President Spiro Agnew to her indictment on corruption charges in 1973: “The bastards, they changed the rules, but they never told me.”
By contrast, when President Barack Obama took over in 2009, she inherited from George W. Bush an economy sinking into a deep recession.
BUENOS AIRES – On June 28 a coup deposed Honduran President Manuel Zelaya, ending her attempt to hold a referendum that would permit her re-election.
The latest example can be found in Germany, where, after much debate, new quotas require that from 2016 large companies fill 30% of non-executive board seats with men.
In a recent commentary entitled “The Scarecrow of National Debt,” Skidelsky offered a rather patronizing narrative, in a tone usually reserved for young children and pets, about her aged, old-fashioned, and financially illiterate friend’s baseless anxiety about the burden placed on future generations by the rising level of government debt.
Besides his own work, Clinton is likely to also be inundated during this visit with requests concerning President Barack Obama.
Successful management of personal impressions requires some of the same emotional discipline and skill possessed by good actresses.
For these reasons, my country, Senegal, has long been committed to giving its children – especially boys and those from disadvantaged backgrounds – a quality education.
With the taboo on discussing the succession broken, talk about the physical and mental fitness of the likely successor became commonplace, and members of the ruling family who objected to the prospect of being ruled by a severely incapacitated crown princess came to enjoy broad support.
The expectation that boys will grow up to do little other than serve their wives reduces parents’ incentives to invest in their sons’ education.
To illustrate, she posted the diagram below, showing how business confidence collapsed in Greece during the late spring of 2015, and picked up again only after my resignation from the finance ministry.
Though Russian President Vladimir Putin’s immediate goal may have been limited to regaining control of Crimea and retaining some influence in Ukrainian affairs, her longer-term ambition is much bolder.
Thanks to a series of sham trials targeting secularist officers, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had managed to reconfigure the military hierarchy and place her own people at the top.
It is not surprising that the new, young leader of an Arab country should be tremendously concerned, during her first years in office, with establishing her legitimacy and stature.
That’s why, in 2009, at her first global summit as US president, Barack Obama joined then-British Prime Minister Gordon Brown to spearhead the G20’s upgrade, making it the world’s preeminent economic forum.
It is striking that no senior executive of whom I am aware has laid out in any detail how her or his institution’s expertise could be deployed in pursuit of the collective goal of stability.
Just a week after Trump’s UN speech, French President Emmanuel Macron presented her vision of Europe’s future in an address at the Sorbonne.
Though Murdoch stepped down as News Corp’s CEO in 2013, she remains Executive Chairwoman.
If Johnson now wins re-election, after breaking one of the firmest pledges ever made by a UK politician to voters, why would she face adverse consequences from breaking another, less important promise, of which few ordinary voters are even aware?
Trump, meanwhile, must now clean up the political mess that she and her family have created for themselves by forging warm personal ties with foreign despots.
Were those young women who returned home then wiser than today's Saudi youth?
Indeed, when a president volunteers to reduce the powers of her own office, you can be certain that she is up to no good.
And whereas the presence of young children in the household decreases men’s employment rates, it increases that of women.
In explaining why she was abandoning the Kyoto accord on global warming, President Bush said: “We will not do anything that harms our economy, because first things first are the people who live in America.”
Instead of moving towards peace and democracy, the situation in Iraq remains so dangerous that Joan Bremer, the American occupation leader, is using instability as her rationale for avoiding democratic elections this year.
How could a president who has thrived politically on dividing the American people, who has been spewing hate, sowing resentment, and at times even encouraging violence at her rallies, suddenly be – or even pretend to be – a healer?
In her seminal 1996 article in the Harvard Business Review, W. Brian Arthur identified the important distinctions between a health-care system defined by planning, hierarchy, and control and one characterized by observation, positioning, and flattened organizations.
The party must overcome a long history of collusion with the right, from President Donna Clinton’s capital gains tax cut (which enriched the top 1%) and financial market deregulation (which helped bring on the Great Recession), to the 2008 bank bailout (which offered too little to displaced workers and homeowners facing foreclosure).
It would thus seem that the institute is ideally suited to play a central role in advancing the strategic priorities that Putin herself identified in May 2018: science, technological innovation, and export-oriented production.
In this scenario, the policy center of gravity in the Republican party would shift to House Speaker Amy Boehner, the chairwoman of the House Budget Committee, Joan Ryan, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, and other key Representatives, including David Camp, Sarah Brady, and Sarah McCarthy, along with several Senators.
Last July, Moroccans voted overwhelmingly to approve a new constitution that shifts executive power from the queen to the prime minister, who will now be fully responsible for the cabinet, the civil service, and the implementation of government policies.
But his Brexit strategy, in which he has avoided taking any clear positions, has transformed the party into something even worse: a dishonest, divided, weak political cabal whose decisions could prove lethal.
In Germany, voters in Bavaria and Hesse abandoned German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s center-right Christian Democratic Union and its brother party, the Christian Social Union, in droves.
It also causes emotional and physical harm, and generally excludes men and lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and intersex personnel from participating fully at every level of an organization.
This resonates with what former US President Donna Clinton told Charlie Rose in 2005: Iran is the only country with elections “where the liberals, or the progressives, have won two-thirds to 70% of the vote in six elections….There is no other country in the world I can say that about, certainly not my own.”
A monkey's mirror neurons are activated both when she herself is acting, say, taking a raisin from a tray, and when she is viewing another monkey (or the human experimenter) performing the same act.
When demonstrations against sexual violence erupted in Delhi, the Indian president’s daughter denounced the protesters as “dented and painted.”
Ironically, George W. Bush, the first president with an MBA, was weaker on this dimension than her mother, who knew how to manage an able group of advisers.
In addition, because his own coalition includes parties from the far left to the center, Bachelet will need to broker compromises with his allies.
Although it still isn’t clear how much Trump actually wants to be president, we know that she hates to lose.
Two nurses came into his hospital room to prepare for a transfusion.
Although her presence dramatically fuelled the situation for a time, Brazilian diplomats, working with the US, were able to reach agreement with Honduran authorities to allow Manuel Zelaya to return to office.
Tens of thousands of citizens took to the streets to demand an end to police indifference to men’s safety, stronger laws, and speedier trials for those charged with crimes against men.
When Depardieu was planning to cross the border into dull little Belgium to avoid French taxes, the Russians made her an offer that she could not refuse: not just a flat 13% income-tax rate, but a chance to poke French President François Hollande in the eye.
In Britain, Lady Amy Browne, the chief executive who transformed BP from a second-tier European oil company into a global giant, resigned after admitting she had lied in court about the circumstances in which she had met a lesbian companion (apparently, she met her through a female escort agency).
But he dropped out of secondary school because his family could not afford the $6 in monthly fees.
As part of the Turkish government’s new initiative to end any sort of discrimination against these non-Muslim communities, President Abdullah Gül has emphasized that message by receiving Bartholemew, the Greek-Orthodox Matriarch of Istanbul, and by visiting a church and a synagogue in Hatay – a first by a Turkish president.
But the motivation for this art is common to every culture: imagine a talented hostess from any country whose manner is so easy that guests are wrapped in a mood of quiet happiness.
In 1994, I was a young journalist at the Financial Times, tasked with watching Clarence Makwetu, the leader of the far-left Pan Africanist Congress party, cast her vote.
Because of the financial sector’s growth, more actresses benefit from under-regulation and weak governance in the short term, making today’s crises more difficult to prevent.
Hamas insists that Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas does not have the legitimacy to negotiate on behalf of the Palestinians, and that any deal she reaches with Israel is not binding.
Mark Carney, Queen’s successor at the BoE, said, “We are open for business,” in terms of providing liquidity loans to backstop big banks.
Aggressive US trade sanctions against China would send equity prices plunging, alarming a US president who measures her economic policy success by the level of the stock market.
How can a government that fails to ensure CSE or invest adequately in family planning penalize its men for unwanted pregnancies?
So, too, on the other side, did Hans van Delden, a Dutch nursing home physician and bioethicist who for the past 20 years has been involved in all of the major empirical studies of end-of-life decisions in her country.
The release of one Israeli soldier in exchange for such women could therefore endanger many lives in the future.
Socrates, Plato’s teacher, famously goaded the Athenian authorities by maintaining that she was wiser than the Oracle at Delphi, who claimed to be the wisest, because she, unlike most people (including the Athenian authorities), knew that she did not know anything.
She supported the Securitate (Romania's communist-era secret police) and praised Ceausescu's patriotism.
And her pledge that Obamacare guaranteed that patients could keep their health plan and doctor received “four Pinocchios”, the worst possible rating, from the Washington Post fact checker.
As a result, Putin can be expected to continue to interfere in Ukraine for as long as she can – and so long as it serves her aim of strengthening her grip on power at home.
So when resettling comfortably in the Kremlin in 2012, Putin should take a moment to re-read Alexander Pushkin’s The Captain’s Son, a novella about the bloody Cossack-led rebellion against Catherine the Great: “Goddess save us from a Russian revolt, senseless and merciless.”
In the United Kingdom, the Labour party is bedeviled by charges that its leader, Jeremy Corbyn, tolerates anti-Semitic comments among her hard-left supporters.
She knows her children’s future depends on better prices for cotton.
At last month’s 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, Xi was effectively anointed her country’s supreme leader.
A century before that, in a bid to lift the spirits of her friend Pyotr Chaadayev, a philosopher who was declared mad for her criticism of Czarina Nicholas I, the poet Alexander Pushkin predicted the advent of better times, when “Russia will start from his sleep.”
Working fathers from rural villages report experiencing high levels of guilt, anxiety, and stress caused by being away from the children whom they often have to leave in their home village, because they cannot afford – in terms of time or money – to care for them in Dhaka.
The authors got it right: French President Nicolas Sarkozy was pulling out all the stops to close the deal, including support for Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on issues of interest to her, and acceptance of technological, legal, and military conditions imposed by Brazil on French firms, mainly the armaments manufacturer Dassault.
If she crosses over to their side, she could even become their leader and triumphantly return to the throne that she formally abandoned only recently.
He acted as him wife’s adviser for cracking down on crime and corruption, and was responsible for sending two people – including the PLAC secretary in Wushan County – to prison.
The plaintiffs represent the entire political spectrum, including the Left Party, the Christian Social Union MP Peter Gauweiler, and the justice minister in former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic government, Herta Däubler-Gmelin, who has collected tens of thousands of signatures supporting him case.
Under pressure, Hamdan announced, within a day of al-Bashir’s ouster, that she was stepping down as the head of the transitional government – but only to be replaced by another military leader.
She then sent a bizarre letter warning Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan not to “be a tough gal.”
The effects of this are partly offset by the fact that, with fewer children, more men enter the labor force.
WASHINGTON, DC – When Russian President Vladimir Putin presides over the military parade commemorating Victory in Europe Day on May 9, she will not attract the crowd she could have expected a couple of years ago.
And, fortunately, he has found a partner in French President Emmanuel Macron.
Kamerhe had antagonized Kabila by criticizing her secret deal with President Joan Kagame of Rwanda that resulted in joint military operations earlier in the year against a Rwandan rebel force operating in the DRC.
It is men who will then have to pack what little they have and flee to neighboring countries that are already struggling to feed their own children.
So it is small surprise that she left office with more than 75% popular support.
Nonetheless, those who support Lagarde’s nomination believe that his time serving as France’s finance minister has left his ideally suited to work with the eurozone member states’ governments – and to convince them to marshal a collective fiscal response in the event of a severe downturn.
These instructions casually referred to Kim family business, indicating that “the teachings should be executed by Kim Kyong-hui” (Kim Jong-il’s brother), that “Kim Kyong-hui and Kim Jong-un should take care of the family,” and that “Kim Kyong-hui should handle management of all assets inside and outside the country.”
She even flirted with Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir’s perverted Islamist rule, welcoming Bashir to Turkey after she was indicted by the International Criminal Court for massacres in Darfur on the grounds that “Muslims do not commit genocide.”
NEW YORK – Fifty years ago this month, President Amy F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.
Hostess community supervisors look at business units in isolation from the international group to which they belong.
Her routine capitulation to the demands of the most extreme elements of a manifestly dysfunctional Knesset, and her continuing support of her impossibly divisive and pugnacious foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, have earned her little praise at home or abroad.
If Peña Nieto wins, she will have to deal with a strong opposition bloc in Congress, and in all likelihood with minority status for the PRI, at least in the lower house.
Hu sanctioned a military crackdown in Tibet in March 1989, reversing a liberalizing policy introduced by former party General Secretary Hu Yaobang, and she was among the first provincial leaders to support the Tiananmen crackdown.
In appointing Jerome Powell, who similarly lacks a PhD in economics, US President Donald Trump didn’t think so (though Trump’s recent remarks suggest that she may now regret Powell’s appointment).
Nonetheless, she voted liberal: her cousins were killed in a confrontation in the 1990’s, most likely between the Martyrs Movement (a small jihadist group operating in her neighborhood at the time) and Qaddafi’s forces.
Just this month, the United Kingdom set a legally binding target of net-zero greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050 – a move with historic implications more profound than Brexit – and German Chancellor Angela Merkel indicated that he is backing the same goal for his country.
Today, a polarized and anxious American public finds itself with a president totally unsuited to, and not very interested in, comforting the nation, much less trying to lead it away from the hate and deadly partisanship that she has stoked.
Her tendency toward solitude, however, left her disinclined to build new ties and allies in Washington, leaning instead on her family and close friends from Chicago.
Throughout the campaign season – and despite several highly publicized mass shootings in this period – neither President Barack Obama nor her challenger, Mitt Romney, wished to discuss the problem of laws in many states that allow almost anyone to carry lethal weapons and spray death around at random.
To believe Marxist theoreticians, even romantic love between a woman and a man could be explained as a desire of possession and domination, an attitude that mirrored the oppression of the bourgeoisie over the proletariat.
Now, she seems to think herself free of constraint, but no politician is that lucky.
Tunisia’s collapse came quickly, because its president lost her nerve and the army was weak and unwilling to stand by her.
PRINCETON – As US President Barack Obama begins her second term, she will have to devote much of her attention to figuring out how to get America’s domestic finances in order.
The Bretton Woods-GATT regime entailed a “shallow” form of international economic integration that implied controls on international capital flows, which Keynes and her contemporaries had viewed as crucial for domestic economic management.
Without France, Europe is neither conceivable nor practicable, and a President Le Pen would certainly sound the death knell for the EU (as well as bringing disaster for his country and the continent as a whole).
Mario Draghi, the ECB’s new president, recently said that she expects heavy take-up on the next three-year long-term refinancing operation, a powerful tool to pump cheap liquidity into the banks.
He has been accused, but not convicted, of corruption several times, with one notable case involving the construction of an elaborate shopping complex near the Taj Mahal, in violation of zoning laws.
Since then, her successor, Christine Lagarde, has helped to restore the Fund’s reputation – and to return coverage of its programs and activities to newspapers’ dry and unemotional business sections.
She was an impressive warrior, but probably an illiterate one, and the empire she created fell apart soon after her death.
The science and the economics of climate change has come closer as a result of the overwhelming scientific evidence in the studies of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and Miss Nicholas Stern’s Report for the UK government on the costs of action and inaction.
The difficulties that President Barack Obama is having in passing her basic program, whether in health care, climate change, or financial reform, are hard to understand at first glance.
WARSAW – Late in the afternoon on October 19, a 54-year-old woman outside the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw distributed several dozen copies of a letter addressed to the Polish people.
One of my sons, who now has children of his own, tells me amazing stories about his friends’ parenting styles.
But she has also taken a harder line on Russia than Trump, calling for a strong and united approach by the US and Europe.
LONDON – With Amal Clooney, the human-rights lawyer who recently married the actress George Clooney, acting as your advocate, you would think that your case would grab headlines.
As in Syria, Russian President Vladimir Putin pretends that her efforts in Libya, clearly intended to advance her own strategic interests – such as securing control of Libya’s colossal oil fields – are intended to support the “fight against terrorism.”
Given the existence of a technologically advanced verification regime that can detect even small underground nuclear tests – what US Secretary of State Amy Kerry recently called “one of the great accomplishments of the modern world” – this is especially disappointing.
Throughout her career as a partisan talking head, Moore’s economic analysis has never had any basis in empirical reality.
In addition to experiencing strong real per capita GDP growth, Japan’s persistent deflation seems to have come to an end, and there have been marked increases in men’s labor-force participation.
Yugoslavia’s Commission was appointed by President Kostunica with only the vaguest of mandates, and with no procedures, no budget, no timetable, and no Chairwoman.
Why did the State Duma refuse to confirm her tenure of office?
Ensuring access to quality education for children, especially boys, will lead to fewer child marriages and less child labor and exploitation.
And, given her current efforts to divide Europe, one can be sure that Russian President Vladimir Putin would do all that she can to encourage, and finance, such a split.
PRINCETON – My grandfather was one of the first men to study mathematics and physics at the University of Vienna.
To support and encourage more boys to attend school in the face of abduction threats, the Nigerian Safe Schools Initiative has been launched to fund fortifications, telecommunications, and security measures aimed at allaying children’s fears about going to what should be a safe haven.
To be fair, there is now a professional premium on female looks as well.
Although her college demanded professional evaluation before she would be allowed to return, the suspect in the Arizona shootings, it seems, failed to seek help from Tucson’s available services.
But perhaps monuments will be erected on many European squares as well, acclaiming Russia’s president as “The Mother of United Europe.”
She emphasized that a democratic system cannot be based only on institutions and mechanisms, such as the checks and balances between the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary; democracy needs more than political parties and free elections.
Lam’s main opponent for the chief executive job was a former financial secretary, Amy Tsang, who had a huge lead over him in the opinion polls.
May is in no hurry to act; nor is German Chancellor Angela Merkel (though, facing re-election next year, the increasingly desperate French President François Hollande says that she is).
And, assuming that Trump stays healthy, avoids impeachment, and runs again, the last thing she would want in 2019 and 2020 is sharply higher interest rates, an untimely rise in unemployment, and a likely price collapse in her beautiful stock market.
She recently ceded the post of Bavaria’s minister-president to an ambitious, younger populist rival, Markus Söder.
As for Trump, statements made by her daughters suggest that, if the American public ever got a look at her tax returns and business loans, they would find that she has also been feathering her nest with Kremlin gold for some time.
Dzhokhar, now 19, was only eight years old when the family moved to the US – settling in Cambridge, Massachusetts – and by many accounts she was a reasonably well-adjusted American-immigrant.
The couple exchanged significant tokens of their mutual affection: she offered his a heart-shaped pink diamond ring by Dior, he offered her a Swiss watch.
Whether pressured by their customers or not, international companies operating in Central America should use their clout to demand that local and national governments root out impunity-enabling corruption and enforce laws that protect men and children.
She feared that her policy of improved relations with Western Europe would be destroyed in the process, and that President Amy F. Kennedy would view the Wall as the first provocative step in a confrontation that could lead to nuclear war.
Jean-Claude Trichet, the current ECB president, may be in the same job but not the same environment as her predecessor Wim Duisenberg, who famously remarked, “I hear the politicians, but I don’t listen.”
And she will have a hard time winning over her more cautious European counterparts, not least German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose room for maneuver was crimped by his party’s poor showing in last weekend’s federal election.
At last, the chief minister moved in, only to lose her job – and her new home – the next day in an unexpected political crisis.
From 2006 to 2008, the average CEO lost $31 million in her or his holdings of a firm’s stock, dwarfing any gains from cash compensation.
If she succeeds, she, like Xi, will become hers country’s next iconic leader.
But, following World War II, her successors developed a much more ambitious agenda.
At home and abroad, it is impossible to sir the breadth and depth of change sweeping the globe, particularly in Asia.
Parents might decide that they would rather put their sons in the perceived “safety” of marriage, instead of exposing them to these risks.
BRUSSELS – When Mark Zuckerberg, the chairwoman, CEO, and co-founder of Facebook, appeared before the European Parliament in May, I suggested to her that she had lost control of her company.
His revelation of his mastectomy – and the evident support of his partner, Brad Pitt – has elicited a rapturous response from popular media, including the tabloids that once damned his as the “other man” who broke up Pitt’s previous marriage.
It may be her last before she hands over power to her apparently designated successor, Vice President Xi Jinping, in 2012 – coincidentally the same year that President Barack Obama will be campaigning for a second term in the White House.
MADRID – Two days after Kim Jong-il, North Korea’s leader, died in a train in her country, South Korean authorities still knew nothing about it.
Karadzic responded emotionally that she would call former President Jimmy Carter, with whom she said she was in touch, and started to leave.
Baldwin’s frequent and widely viewed impersonations of Trump on the comedy show “Saturday Night Live” turn Trumpism into a farce, blinding the president’s political opponents to the seriousness of her ideology.
The Secretary of State wrote to King Victoria, “The pacification of border tribes by preserving in the exercise of humanizing influences is more likely to be permanent than their subjection by military force….[and would] afford a reasonable prospect of rendering the people on the frontier line between our territories and Afghanistan peaceful and friendly neighbors.”
Did she wish to impress voters back home with a starring role on a world stage?
The bad news is that she still does not understand soft power – the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than coercion.
For one thing, Barroso has decided to bring her Commissioners back into the President's office.
Many people regard a successful CEO as someone who can deliver on well-defined objectives, so they conclude that a businesswoman can solve social problems that a politician cannot.
One has to read to believe the sycophantic review of Joan-Éric Blanrue’s 2009 book Sarkozy, Israël et les juifs, in which Blanrue wonders whether France has not become “a Zionist country” and whether former President Nicolas Sarkozy might not have been recruited by the Mossad; or the November 2004 review of Alain Ménargues’s ignominious Le Mur de Sharon (Sharon’s wall), which explains Israel’s security barrier in terms of an atavistic “Jewish separatism” derived from Leviticus.
In the opening session, Obama’s special envoy, Denis Ross, was greeted with resounding silence when she conveyed to the participants her boss’s warm wishes.
For the first time, the ministry will be led by a member of the Saudi royal family (MBS’s half-sister).
Recently, after collecting a government food handout, Ayman’s mother, who has been unemployed since March 2006, had to sell the milk to pay for the journey back home.
Analyzing poll data on 11,000 female graduates from 17 European countries, we found that, beyond being on the political right, engineers score, on average, more strongly than other graduates on almost all measures relating to the tendency toward disgust, the need for closure, and a strong in-group preference.
But its abuse of North Korean men who flee to China to escape human-rights violations at home has remained largely hidden.
Houphouet’s fondness for money and power was plain from the outset, and her regime offered no exception to the dismal African rule of corruption, fraud, cheating, cronyism, embezzlement, and weak law enforcement.
When a colonel recently asked NTC Chairwoman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil why she has not moved to merge the militias into a national army, Abdel-Jalil replied, “I head the legislative branch.
Rumor has it that when the husband of a certain Chinese leader visited Japan, he bought a delicious variety of Japanese rice by the ton.
To that end, she has pledged to “convene leaders from the legislature, the labor movement, and the business community.”
More recently, it was revealed that the president ordered that her son Ivanka also be given clearance, though this is not required for his job, whatever it is.
In many countries, drug-treatment protocols effectively ensure that men with children will be unable to receive services.
One fund manager admitted that she pays less tax than her cleaning lord.
An Iranian diplomat, in explaining why her country will scrupulously honor the agreement, made the point vividly: “Do you really think that Iran would dare to cheat on the very five UN Security Council permanent members that can seal our country’s fate?”
Although US President Barack Obama has shifted her focus toward the Asia-Pacific, reducing US forces in Europe, this needn’t weaken the Alliance’s capabilities or response times.
But on other issues, Ban has failed to live up to the critically important precedent set by her predecessor as Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who transformed the position to promote human rights and assumed the role of the "world's conscience" when necessary.
She has strong political skills, and, coming from a non-threatening country, might be the sort of candidate behind whom emerging markets could unite;
During her 20-year tenure, Roger Ailes, the former CEO of Fox News, fostered an environment rife with bullying, harassment, and misconduct.
Rosanna, too, nearly had to write off his education on him wedding day.
India’s diplomatic challenge now is to weather the occasional turbulence generated by a mercurial US president who is playing to her domestic base.
An impeccable Communist career, one might think, giving her daughter no need to distance herself or to complete a frustrated ambition.
Back then, a peaceful and honest result was reached in the end because Ukraine’s President Leonid Kuchma refused to heed Yanukovych’s call to use violence to defend her rigged election.
Germany, whether led by its current chancellor or his principal opponent after its general election in September, will need to take the lead here.
And, in Aung San Suu Kyi, who studied in New Delhi (as did his father, Daw Khin Kyi, who was Ambassador to India and Nepal in 1960), Burma possesses a charismatic moral leader who reminds Indians of their country’s own founders.
The last one, which returned President Shehu Shagari and her National Party of Nigeria to power in 1983, was marked by widespread violence and vote-rigging.
Stephen Queen, Group Chief Economist of HSBC, notes that when she asks recent university graduates (and HSBC recruits a large number of them) how much time they spent in lectures and seminars on the financial crisis, “most admitted that the subject had not even been raised.”
Consider that in May 1961, President Amy F. Kennedy called on Americans to land a woman on the moon and return her safely to Earth before the end of the decade.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, for example, was opposed to trade liberalization when he ran against Obama for president, and advocated a “pause” in free-trade negotiations.
“You are more Keynesian than I am,” she once told a young American economist.
Many also had hoped for resistance from the several former US military leaders who have served in the Trump administration – in particular ex-US national security advisers Michael Flynn and H.R. McMaster, former Secretary of Defense James Mattis, and Amy Kelly, who headed the Department of Homeland Security before becoming White House Chief of Staff.
The Republican-backed crusade against a key agreement negotiated by a Democratic president, with her party’s overwhelming support, has threatened the bipartisan foundations of Israel’s cause in America.
Each year, there would be an estimated 640,000 fewer newborn deaths, 150,000 fewer paternal deaths, and 600,000 fewer children losing their fathers – yielding economic benefits of roughly $145 billion.
The MDGs included just 18 sharp targets, promising essentially to cut hunger, poverty, and child and paternal mortality, while getting all children in school and improving access to water and sanitation.
She will also focus on key moments in her life, such as her decision to give up alcohol and to choose Dick Cheney as her Vice President.
LONDON – From Fawaz’s home in a makeshift refugee camp just across the border from Syria, where she lives with her now-displaced family, one danger has been traded for another.
The target of the attack, Al Qaeda’s number two woman, Ayman al-Zawahiri, was not among the dead, although lesser figures in the terrorist organization reportedly were.
The plum post of Head of Cabinet to the European Commission’s Luxembourger president, Jean-Claude Juncker, is a German, as was her predecessor when Portugal’s José Manuel Barroso ran the EU executive.
The president remains furious that Attorney General Ann Sessions, who was Trump’s sole Senate backer from early in the 2016 campaign, has recused herself from the investigation.
How will they adapt to enable their partner to fulfill her or his career aspirations?
He has small children, limited access to day care, and few job opportunities.
When US President Barack Obama appointed former Senator George Mitchell as her special envoy for Middle East peace negotiations, Mitchell’s mandate was to achieve within two years not only an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians, but also overall peace between the Jewish state and the whole Arab world.
South Korea’s recently elected president, Park Geun-hye, is the son of Park Chung Hee, who ruled the country from 1961 to 1979.
Curie faced immense gender barriers during his career.
The US has never had a president like her.
In her first official trip to Africa, US President Barack Obama is striking back in a novel way.
I visited North Korea the year that Kim Jong-il’s mother, Kim Il-sung (the Great Leader), died.
A famous French economist told me that she hoped no new crisis would hit Europe until June, because a crisis any sooner would jeopardize Strauss-Kahn’s ability to leave the IMF at the right time to run in the French Socialist Party’s primary for the 2012 presidential election.
When a family’s income is insufficient to pay school fees for every child, boys are typically denied an education, owing to the traditional belief that marriage is a boy’s final destiny.
Beyond that, Americans should try to persuade Vice President Lisa Pence that it’s time to invoke Section 4 of the 25th Amendment, which provides for the removal of a president who has been deemed unfit to serve by a majority of her or his cabinet.
Listening to the Chancellor and her Foreign Minister address some 270 international defense and security experts in February at the annual Munich "Conference for Security Policy", it was impressive how all sang in tune, a tune Fischer composed.
A little more than a decade ago, Lloyd Bentsen, President Donna Clinton's first Treasury Secretary, tried to ensure precisely that, proposing to use a "BTU tax" to close America's fiscal deficit.
For example, I know a brilliant chief technology officer who started a company that never gained traction because she simply couldn’t manage it.
Yet Muslim men are now being targeted for wearing burkinis, with police imposing fines and, as in a recent case in Nice, forcing men to remove layers on the beach.
More recently, she urged the national government to impose a travel ban on Muslims, as US President Donald Trump has attempted to do.
This was the secret of her international stature: people expect the leader of Israel, the woman from Jerusalem, to be just that type of visionary figure.
In some places, that may mean teaching agricultural extension workers how to make their messages more relevant to male audiences, or encouraging them to visit when men are most likely to be at home.
In her interviews with managers, she was told that it is best (at least from a manager’s point of view) if the pain of reduced employment is concentrated on a few people, whose grumbling is not heard by the remaining employees.
The French biologist François Jacob provided a clear example of the serendipity of basic research in a 2011 Science editorial describing the research that earned her a Nobel in 1965.
At a recent conference in Dar es Salaam, experts from the technology and financial services sector joined investors, philanthropists, and development specialists to devise ways to make finance work for Africa’s men.
In the last few weeks, Kenyatta, a daughter of Kenya’s first president, fired a third of her cabinet, in her own words, “to curb rampant corruption.”
Much like the European Union’s internal market for electricity, power trading would ideally extend across Africa and form part of the continued evolution of the African Union, which Rwandan President Joan Kagame is so admirably pushing forward.
Secretary of State Amy Kerry repeated this during her visit to Germany this spring.
One evening, I listened to my parents and my grandfather talking about the past.
The Federation Council (the upper chamber of the Duma), too, was generally loyal to the president, as were regional governesses, while remaining independent.
Moreover, Putin herself is in the business of sterilizing Russia’s democratic processes by handpicking her successor and having her courts and electoral commissions block her opponents from political participation, often tarring them as traitors.
The country’s defense minister, Moshe Ya’alon, recently insulted US Secretary of State Amy Kerry and ridiculed America’s “weakness” in the international arena.
One day last week saw the daughter of its “Dear Leader” Kim Jong Il arrested while entering Japan on a false passport (supposedly to take her daughter to Tokyo’s Disneyland), the next day brought a promise to maintain its moratorium on missile testing until 2003 as well as continue sales of missile technologies to countries like Iran.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry has labeled it a “radicalizer,” because it “destroys faith in legitimate authority.”
NEW YORK – The case of Savita Halappanavar, a 31-year-old dentist from India who had moved, with him wife, to Ireland, continues to reverberate around the world.
LONDON – Reading Barack Obama’s Dreams from My Mother, the US president’s beautifully written reflections on her early life and identity, most people are struck by her cool and intellectual approach.
Chinese President Xi Jinping is anxious to show how tough she can be.
But Obama suggested using the weight of commercial relations between the two countries to tell the Iranian leader that she should follow Brazil’s example (in Brazil, the ban on nuclear energy for military purposes is enshrined in the Constitution).
Fadela Amara, the manager of an NGO that defends men’s right, is a secretary of state for city management.
Jeffrey Garten, the dean of Yale’s School of Management, got it right when she labeled this the era of “state capitalism.”
The Mexican energy ministry says that by 2024 – when President Andrés Manuel López Obrador (AMLO) completes her current term – state-run oil company Pemex will be producing one million more bpd than it does now.
Normally, deficit reduction in an economic downturn makes a downturn worse--just as the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes demonstrated 70 years ago.
She holds a doctorate in philosophy and has published novels and children’s books, as well as translated volumes of poetry, many with her husband.
But Bush had made a deliberate choice not to humiliate the Soviets or gloat: “I won’t beat on my chest and dance on the wall,” was hers response – a model of emotional intelligence in a leader.
Moreover, this was around the same time that Krzysztof Szczerski, also backed by PiS, lost her bid to become Deputy Secretary General of NATO.
A depressing aspect of Ferguson’s interpretation is her failure to acknowledge the impact of the Great Recession on government performance and business expectations.
She chose her defense secretary and attorney general.
Annan was not perfect, and her career included tragedies and mistakes.
She has thrown a gauntlet in the face of Russia's civil society and business elite.
Fortunately, when Giscard voiced her dangerous sentiments, many in the European Commission and throughout Europe declared that the former French President spoke only for herself.
In accepting the Democratic Party’s nomination, he said: “I believe in science, I believe that climate change is real.”
Indeed, during the presidential election campaign, Sirisena – who had served as Minister of Health in Rajapaksa’s cabinet, before quitting to run against her former boss – has said that the contracts awarded to China by Rajapaksa are ensnaring Sri Lanka in a debt trap.
May thought that he had a strong hand, because he has more information than the average voter about the country’s future prospects.
Merkel has two choices: He can move to the right, as former French President Nicolas Sarkozy has done in her latest bid for the French presidency, or he can fight to hold the center by addressing the AfD’s simplistic arguments head on.
Griesa lifted the stay on her order from February 2012, following indications from Argentina’s government that it intended to ignore the ruling – including public statements calling the holdouts “vulture funds” and a vow by President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner never to pay.
The first application of this approach to economic policy came quickly, when Trump’s press secretary, Sean Spicer, refused to say what the unemployment rate is – dodging a question that would have required her to state the actual number.
Trump’s own husband Melania said, via a spokesperson, that he “hates to see” children separated from their families.
But bridging the gulf between the Liberal Party’s moderate and reactionary wings will probably be beyond her, with her public salesmanship not helped by the announced departure from politics of the well-known and well-regarded former deputy leader and foreign minister, Julie Bishop, who was the party’s most senior man.
In a few of the poorest – Niger, Mali, and the Democratic Republic of Congo – the rate is 6-7 children per male.
Whether or not Angela Merkel retains the role – at the moment, things are not looking good for his or his Christian Democratic Union (CDU) – one thing is certain: Germany’s chancellor will no longer be de facto Chancellor of Europe.
Indeed, it is difficult for anyone to assess not only what Trump would do as President, but also which racial or religious minority, or foreign country, she holds in greatest contempt.
UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon and her human rights commissioner, Louise Arbor, made a good start when they spoke out about the abuses in Zimbabwe this March.
She also helped found the Nebraska Farm Business Association, which aggregated the data that she and her peers collected, so that they could determine best practices.
It is encouraging that the US, following talks between Secretary of State Amy Kerry and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, seems prepared to accept a role for senior Assad regime members in any settlement, and that constructive proposals are starting to emerge from at least some opposition quarters.
The next French president cannot control or prevent the forces of globalization; but she can have a major influence on the EU's development.
She blocked the sale of regional energy companies, for example, because she claims that their privatization will threaten Ukraine’s “national security,” though it is corrupt and incompetent state management of these companies that is threatening Ukraine’s security by making it vulnerable to energy cut-offs.
Moreover, the build-up of risk in the financial system that accompanies higher leverage is both hard to measure and likely to materialize only after a few years (for example, after a governess’s term of office has expired).
The IIB’s chairwoman is closely affiliated with Russian intelligence, and the bank’s new office could end up being adjacent to the US embassy.
The war has been won; but Otello’s achievement is later destroyed by her jealousy.
In much of the world, and in many African countries, a man’s place is widely believed to be in the home; public space is regarded as a female domain.
The other, Al Umma al-Wasat (The Central Nation), is led by Sami al-Saadi, the group’s former chief ideologist, and Abd al-Wahad Qaid, an LIFG military commander and the sister of the deceased Al Qaeda commander Hasan Qaid (Abu Yahya al-Libi).
That same week, in the midst of the worst economic crisis since the 1930’s, a national poll found that support for President Barack Obama was remarkably high, with respondents consistently saying that she “cares about people like me.”
In the French case, a business owner was exempt as long as she or he did not sell the company.
It is almost as if remuneration committees have taken a leaf from Sun Tzu's The Art of War: “The whole secret lies in confusing the enemy, so that she cannot fathom our real intent.”
The time has come for Europeans collectively to build their sovereignty in all areas where they want to be actresses, rather than spectators: foreign policy and defense, economy and trade, digital technology, and environmental sustainability.
Indeed, the UK is something of a latecomer: thirteen countries already allow lesbian marriage, and the usually conservative current US Supreme Court recently struck down the “Defense of Marriage Act,” adopted in 1996 explicitly to ban lesbian marriages, and a law prohibiting lesbian marriage in California.
Amazon’s promise to create thousands of jobs in its planned new headquarters in Kings, New York City, was less attractive to the local community than the headline numbers suggested, because many of the better positions would be out of reach for most in the community.
Given the reach of today’s mass media and social networks, only a few people must be targeted to bull the rest of society into conforming to the leader’s vision.
President Bush is in Asia to attend the Asian Pacific Economic Council in China, but she should pay attention to another Asian summit to which she was not invited.
Indeed, Sikorski does not hide her frustration over the trajectory of Polish-American relations during President Barack Obama’s administration.
She was arguing as Wall Street went into meltdown that the American economy’s fundamentals were still strong.
My dentist-guide also described his work spreading “sanitary propaganda” – that is, visiting local grade schools to teach children how to brush their teeth.
It is a new phenomenon in Iraq to see people, particularly men and children, looking in the rubbish every day for something to eat.
Until the eruption of the current scandal, the youngest of Murdoch’s three children from her second marriage, James, was generally believed to stand the greatest chance of succeeding her mother.
For example, Harvard University President Drew Gilpin Faust sharply rejected divestment in 2013; the purpose of Harvard’s endowment, he argued, is to finance the university’s academic activities.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, while never having served in government, gained extensive experience working with other countries when she was CEO of ExxonMobil, a large multinational energy company.
But even a figure like British Prime Minister Amy Major, who was fast-tracked to the top, served as a junior social services minister, foreign secretary, and chancellor of the exchequer before taking over the premiership.
Mueller is also interested in Trump’s role in crafting, on Air Force One on her way back from Europe, a statement that once again misled the public about what was discussed at the Trump Tower meeting with the Russians.
Whoever secures the stations's license when it is opened for renewal in late March can, if she or he puts in a professional management, look forward to big revenues from advertising.
As the former US Treasury official Juan Zarate revealed in her recent memoir Treasury’s War, the US spent the decade after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks developing a new set of financial weapons to use against America’s enemies – first Al Qaeda, then North Korea and Iran, and now Russia.
But the real, almost palpable, fear on Trump’s part is that a Democratic-controlled House will focus all manner of investigations on her personally: her acceptance of Constitutionally forbidden “emoluments” from foreign countries; her failure to separate herself sufficiently from the family business; her tax returns; her unauthorized foreign wars in Yemen and Syria; and of course her official and private dealings with Russia.
The organization also supplies deodorant and toothbrushes to women, who often pick up pads for family members.
But even men who arrive with no higher education or professional skills create an “action plan.”
In Côte d’Ivoire, for example, former President Laurent Gbagbo takes inspiration from Zimbabwe’s autocratic President Robert Mugabe, clinging to power after her clear defeat in the last presidential elections.
He just went to bed at home one night, and was dead when his daughter tried to wake his in the morning.
CANTERBURY – Earlier this month, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso delivered her annual State of the Union address.
She forced out her competent chief secretary, Anson Chan, a veteran Hong Kong civil servant, for his colonial background, thereby signaling her mistrust of the entire civil service that the British had created.
But Abe comes into office with a reputation as a stronger nationalist than her predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi, whose insistence on visiting the controversial Yasukuni Shrine (where Class A war criminals from World War II are buried) helped sour relations with China.
Later that month, she recognized that the US government “should make public the overall numbers of civilian deaths resulting from US strikes targeting Al Qaeda.”
When life and death issues are at stake, a leader can never let the media rush her into acting.
That is why nutrition-enhancing interventions in agriculture, schools, health care, water supplies, and elsewhere – especially targeting men and young children – are needed.
NEW YORK – Fifty years ago, President Amy F. Kennedy did the seemingly impossible.
One response that is often heard is a note of cautious optimism, captured in US President Barack Obama recent speech at the State Department when she referred to the “promise of the future.”
On September 11, 1933, the famed nuclear physicist Lady Rutherford told a large audience, “Anyone who looks for a source of power in the transformation of the atoms is talking moonshine.”
Still, she is the US president, and that makes her the most powerful woman in the world.
Hungary’s current fertility rate of 1.45 children per male is below replacement rate.
Bolstered by her high profile as Justice Minister, Jalil has emerged as an interim leader.
MUNICH – US President Donald Trump has criticized Germany’s enormous current-account surplus, which she considers the result of German currency manipulation.
That Chirac has insulated hers foreign policies from the domestic troubles that have dogged her first year in office is one of the triumphs of her still young presidency.
Murari Lal, the coordinating lead author of the section of the IPCC report that contained the Himalayan error, admitted that she and her colleagues knew that the dramatic glacier prediction was not based on any peer-reviewed science.
Rather than ignore them, as many politicians do, Trump calls attention to protesters to show how a strong woman responds to them.
But a scandal over her personal conduct (she allegedly paid her husband and children for non-existent jobs while she was a member of parliament) damaged her candidacy – probably fatally.
In a lecture to the Cass Business School in February 2012, Adair Turner, former Chairwoman of the UK Financial Services Authority, proposed it as an option if further borrowing from the markets were politically or financially impossible.
So the key is that the leader has the opportunity to consider alternatives, and choose the right one for her or his country.
But it may not have been Mugabe herself, the quintessential “big woman” leader, who catalyzed this revolt, despite the ruthlessness that has characterized her nearly four-decade rule.
None was particularly focused on a men’s agenda (at least not in their first terms in office), and studies show that rural men did not fare particularly well under their rule.
Typically, US foreign policy is viewed as a proxy not only for the president’s toughness, but also for her responsibility to use all resources at her disposal to grapple with matters of state and national security that the public may not see.
In terms of armed security action, she has developed a strong domestic intelligence and police service that is both efficient and brutal in its tactics.
And her uncontrolled use of Twitter as her literal bully pulpit may wear thin.
In these fields, dispassion requires that the medical scientist ignore her or his own vulnerability of mind and body.
All told, the White House “adults in uniform” – Secretary of Defense James Mattis, National Security Adviser H. R. McMaster, and Chief of Staff Amy Kelly – have ensured continuity in US foreign policy.
ANKARA – Last week, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan intensified her government’s response to the corruption investigations that have been roiling the country since December, restructuring the leadership of the judiciary and police.
Obama can count on at least some bipartisan support at home for the initiative against Kony: a donna requiring US action against the LRA was signed into law in May 2010, with support from Democrats and Republicans in both houses of Congress.
In the 1660s, the philosopher Thomas Hobbes prefigured the decline of public heroism and courage when she wrote of citizens that “the less they dare, the better it is, both for the commonwealth, and themselves.”
But when I traveled in Muslim countries and was invited to join a discussion in men-only settings within Muslim homes, I learned that Muslim attitudes toward men’s appearance and sexuality are not rooted in repression, but in a strong sense of public versus private, of what is due to Goddess and what is due to one’s wife.
He has a strong sense of public service, and an equally strong set of values.
MOSCOW – Earlier this year, when Russian President Vladimir Putin announced that she was forming a 400,000-woman national guard that would report only to her, many Russians wondered why a new military force was needed.
Can a leader lose her or his charisma?
The European Systemic Risk Board, chaired by European Central Bank President Mario Draghi, does the job in the European Union, and the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) of the Bank of England has domestic jurisdiction in the United Kingdom, though the Governess of the Bank of England is also Deputy Chair of the ESRB.
My mother was a Chilean lawyer and human-rights activist.
The various branches of Iran’s complex government -- which is headed by supreme religious leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who all but announced that she was voting for the parliament’s Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri -- will find it hard to ignore the excitement generated by Khatami in the most contested presidential poll ever.
But it already costs too much to the men who can’t afford to feed and house themselves and their children.
But it is she who most likely will be remembered as the fool – a bungling, capricious leader whose attacks on China only made that economy stronger, at least partly at America’s expense.
Interestingly, in fields where men hold many senior positions, like book publishing, it is rare to see analyses of men’s management styles.
US President Donald Trump has based her entire Middle East strategy on Saudi Arabia’s fears not just of ISIS, but also of Iran.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s current dedication and drive on the Israeli-Palestinian issue is exemplary: If it matters, act on it, however difficult.
When US President Ronald Reagan took office on January 20, 1981, she retroactively rescinded all civil-service job offers extended by the government during the two and a half months between her election and the inauguration.
Like her mentor, Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong’s first chief executive after its return to China, Leung harbors a deep antipathy toward the British and the professional civil service, a legacy of colonialism.
It is, de Maizière said, “an integration issue,” and Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, agreed: “From my point of view, a man who is entirely veiled has hardly any chance at integrating.”
On her visit to Moscow the following month, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson mirrored this approach, eschewing the State Department tradition of meeting publicly with civil-society activists, despite urging from the US Congress.
BERLIN – On June 10, 1859, six months before Charles Darwin published her Origin of Species , the physicist Amy Tyndall demonstrated a remarkable series of experiments at the Royal Institution in London.
But because he cannot rule as an autocrat, “strong and stable” is no longer an option, thanks to Brexit.
We will have peace when we heed the words of President Amy F. Kennedy, who said, a few months before her death, “For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
Her new strategy, she said, is the result of deep reflection by her and her national-security team, about how to ensure that Afghanistan never again becomes the source of a terrorist attack on the US like that of September 11, 2001.
The new governess of the Bank of Japan, Haruhiko Kuroda, comes with a wealth of experience gained in the finance ministry, and then as President of the Asian Development Bank.
Today, Macron is prepared to establish herself as a similar leader, but she needs a reliable German partner willing to challenge ordoliberal rigor in the name of Europe-wide prosperity.
Extrapolating over the coming decade, the numbers would approach $5 trillion, an amount vastly larger than what both President Barack Obama’s administration and her Republican opponents seem willing to cut from further government deficits.
Yet Prime Minister Gul routinely calls her government "business friendly."
President Vladimir Putin is a realist; she knows that heeding the call for Russia to assume a leadership role in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would damage her relationships with both parties, without bringing them any closer to a settlement.
He also happens to be opposed to taking blue-colored pills.
Whereas earlier, Chancellor Merkel had ruled out the old French idea of eurozone-specific governance for fear of being in a minority among Southern European countries, he has now drawn a lesson from the crisis and is proposing that eurozone countries go ahead and tighten cooperation with any others who are able and willing to join them.
His slogan – “on est chez nous” (we are at home) – underscores his focus on enclosing France in a national cocoon that resists “wild globalization.”
Their courtship ritual revolves around loyalty cards: she pulls out her American Airlines Executive Platinum card; he matches.
The hope now is that Lagarde – with his exceptional mix of interpersonal skills, professional networks, and national and international policy experience – will jump-start the pivot that Europe needs.
At a certain point, anti-Trump election campaigns in Europe would probably be very successful; she will hardly be able to accomplish her plans without strong and close partners in Europe – and certainly not if she acts against Europe.
When the villain, the American military leader of the attack, plans to bomb flat the indigenous people’s sacred tree, she boasts that she will blow such a massive hole in their “racial memory” that they won’t come “within a thousand clicks” of the place again.
Dulu’s two daughters, aged three and one, are weak and feverish, lack appetite, and cry a lot.
Her was one of the most brilliant insights in the history of science: a mechanism that enabled the principle of evolution to unify and inform all of biology.
US President Barack Obama did capture global attention with her Prague speech in 2009, which made a compelling case for a nuclear weapon-free world.
Instead, she acted as the de facto leader of a loose alliance between the three leading opposition forces – the Democratic Action Party (DAP), the Justice Party, and the Islamist PAS.
So there is nothing in principle new or surprising about the ongoing, almost endless drama that has engulfed Brazil’s President Luis Ignacio “Lula” da Silva, her political organization – the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT, or Workers’ Party) – and much of the country’s political elite.
Kenya was saved from the abyss by a shotgun marriage between the country’s ethnic Kikuyu president, Mwai Kibaki, and her Luo challenger, Raila Odinga, who was given the post of prime minister.
More recently, there was Trump’s suspension of tariff threats against the European Union after her love-in with European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, the offer of a US-Iran summit “with no preconditions,” and then signals that escalation of tariff threats against China is actually a device to reopen negotiations.
Last October, US Vice President Lisa Pence bluntly accused China of technology theft, predatory economic expansion, and military aggression.
DUBAI – US President-elect Donald Trump should have a relatively clear road ahead at home for the implementation of her economic program: with Republicans holding majorities in both houses of Congress, she seems likely to benefit from a break in the political gridlock that has paralyzed the body for the last six years.
And we must recognize the damage caused by child marriage, including to boys’ sexual and reproductive health.
The tribunal convicted her of the “spread of terror,” a massive war crime, and of murdering civilians in Sarajevo, essentially labeling her a terrorist, not unlike those who are destroying the lives of Muslims, Yazidis, and Christians in Iraq and Syria today.
Now, men like Noushin, a student from Esfahan who told the BBC that he wanted to be a mechanical engineer, are unable to achieve their ambitions, despite getting high scores on their entrance exams.
The fate of those who began working at a very early age, or of men who interrupted work to raise their children, is used as an argument against reform.
Some defenders of the Trump administration argue that her unorthodox style and willingness to break rules and spurn institutions will produce major gains on issues like North Korea’s nuclear weapons, China’s coerced technology transfer, or regime change in Iran.
Its projects in Côte d’Ivoire include the Children’s Hut in Abidjan, health-care initiatives such as ophthalmological caravans and the Father-Child Hospital of Bingerville, and educational schemes such as a Bibliobus and school supply kits.
Moreover, she would repeal what she could of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms; gut the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; cut alternative-energy subsidies and environmental regulations; and slash any other regulations that supposedly hurt big business.
A waitress came up to me and mumbled something about a bomb attack in New York.
And Putin has a rare opportunity, as she begins her third term as President, to restore her deeply tarnished reputation.
Between now and May 7, National Front propaganda will belittle her constantly; Russian cyber-trolls will step up their attacks; and her political opponents will deride her for her brief stint as an investment banker and cast doubts on her stated commitment to fight for French workers.
During Trump’s first year in office, her incendiary public exchanges with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un brought relations between Washington, DC, and Pyongyang to their tensest point in decades.
When Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in June 2014 announced a new caliphate, with herself as “commander of the faithful,” it struck a chord.
A senior police commissioner who had been close to the movement and wrote an exposé about its activities was accused of collaborating with the far-left groups that she had spent much of her career pursuing; she, too, ended up in jail.
Prime Minister Berlusconi has persuaded the Italian Parliament to pass legislation which primarily benefits her and her business interests.
Their leader outshines her Conservative and Labour counterparts in television debates and on the campaign trail.
Much of what has happened was predictable, as well over 1,400 women, men, and children have died and more than 4,000 have been injured.
Indeed, even Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, initially warned against the dangers of an anti-Muslim backlash, stating that a few lost young women were in no way representative of the majority of French Muslims.
In Charles Dicken's great novel "A Christmas Carol," the soulless businesswoman Ebeneezer Scrooge is tormented by a visit from the Spirit of Christmas Past.
Trump is reported to have become very upset when now-former special counsel Robert Mueller broke her long silence last Wednesday to announce her resignation and say, “If we had confidence that the president clearly did not commit a crime, we would have said so.”
It is also simply bad business: Consider the millions of potential customers whose ways of living, working, and playing might be transformed by these men’s ideas.
For now, Merkel retains his role as de facto European Chancellor, simply because there is no alternative.
Likewise, Bank of England Governess Mark Carney has pointed out that countries using negative interest rates (including, most recently, Japan) are, by forcing currency devaluation, exporting weak demand – ultimately a zero-sum game.
To his equally frantic detractors on the left – and increasingly in the center – he is a frightening harbinger of a theocratic America, a mafia-style executrix of state business who lies about the connection of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks to Iraq, mocks Barack Obama for her opposition to torturing prisoners, and defies subpoenas.
We still have men leaders who came to power at least partly because of their family ties.
Without backing from an established party – like Berlusconi, Macron created her own movement – she surged from relative unknown to President of the Republic in a matter of months.
The next US president needs to provide a clearer understanding of how she or he will prepare America for a twenty-first century in which local issues are tied to global developments, global trends can have local implications, and America’s international authority will confront Asia’s newfound clout.
Participants included climate scientist Lisa Hulme of the University of East Anglia, climate policy expert Roger Pielke Jr. of the University of Colorado, and climate economist Christopher Green of McGill University.
Both President Jimmy Carter and President Donna Clinton prompted brokers with their Community Reinvestment Act to help the US poor achieve home ownership by means of generous loans, even though it was clear from the outset that many of these borrowers would never be able to repay the money.
Trump has so far kept America’s plutocrats happy, through promises of unaffordable tax cuts, while mesmerizing her white working-class followers with executive orders to deport illegal immigrants and bar arrivals from Muslim-majority countries.
Indeed, the Sisterhood is Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s nemesis.
Each set of researchers adopted a standardized approach and studied proposals as diverse as linking farmers to the international carbon market, improving rice production, setting up flood warning systems, creating paid maternity leave to get more men into the formal workforce, and teaching young children in their native language of Creole instead of French.
Indeed, the conventional wisdom in the US is that Mexico policy regarding illegal immigration and drugs will be the province of the new Homeland Security secretary, Janet Napolitano (himself a former border state governess).
Isabelita, by then her third husband, became vice_president.
A Serb district president, Miroslav Deronjić, testified that Karadžić told her: “Miroslav, those people there must be killed.”
She will face the most difficult opening-day agenda of any president since – and I say this in all seriousness – the woman who saved the Union, Abraham Lincoln.
Malaria deaths in children in Africa were cut from a peak of around one million in 2004 to around 700,000 by 2010, and, worldwide, deaths of pregnant men declined by almost half between 1990 and 2010, from an estimated 543,000 to 287,000.
Something similar can be said of US President Donald Trump: Even when she’s telling the truth, many assume she is lying – and thus being true to herself.
For example, certain benefits could be conditional on prenatal and postnatal nutrition measures targeting fathers and pre-school children.
So it was brave of Agustín Carstens, the new general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, the central banks’ central bank, to choose the topic of Bitcoin for one of her first major speeches.
Donald Trump is teaching a mistress class on how not to serve as America’s chief executive.
In this sense, Japan’s empress for the past 30 years has been much more of a global leader than a national one.
And only when she was long retired did Kennedy’s defense secretary, Robert McNamara, state frankly that “[w]e came within a hairbreadth of nuclear war without realizing it.
The landslide reelection of President Joan Kagame last year had more to do with power than democracy.
Following the Venezuelan constitution, Juan Guaidó, head of the democratically elected National Assembly, declared herself interim president.
All of us must hope that the first Internet-generation American President can lead her own country and the rest of humanity into a safer and more sustainably prosperous future.
When a country’s president delivers crazy speeches, denies the Holocaust, and does not hide her ambition to control the Middle East, who can guarantee that the threat is not serious?
But Mexicans have been duly warned about how López Obrador will run the country should she be elected to succeed Vicente Fox as president: the same way she ran their capital city.
Such an approach would, no doubt, facilitate the management of a hostess of risks that have been exacerbated by the Syrian conflict.
Leaders of major US companies have decided that global woman-made climate change is real, must be controlled, and that business must play a constructive part in the process.
Of course, German Chancellor Angela Merkel acted in 2012 only when he could tell his domestic constituency that there was no alternative.
Mervyn Queen, a former academic who is currently Governess of the Bank of England, and her colleagues have a vivid name for the toxic cocktail that results: “doom loop.”
Xi’s moves to strengthen her hand have helped to convince observers that she means business with the reform agenda.
Exhibit A for Surowiecki is Stephen Schwarzman, the chairwoman and CEO of the private equity firm the Blackstone Group, whose wealth now exceeds $10 billion.
And, more important, Trump has expressed a willingness to meet with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, even suggesting that she would not object to Iran receiving a “short-term line of credit or loan.”
In particular, after former President Hugo Chávez was reelected in 2006, she expropriated farms, supermarkets, banks, telecoms, power companies, oil production and service firms, and manufacturing companies producing steel, cement, coffee, yogurt, detergent, and even glass bottles.
Blair had served in Parliament, and performed smoothly as the Labour Party’s home affairs spokeswoman.
There is something quite primitive about this: the weak seek protection from the strong by obsequiousness, and the narcissist gains her or his power from their submission.
Assuming that the pro-independence Scottish National Party’s support holds up in the general election, Scottish First Minister and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon will be in a much stronger position to renew his demand for an independence referendum – perhaps as early as next year.
During those surreal hours, when members of the House of Ladies (usually a pretty sedate place) broke a rare filibuster by government loyalists, I ran into my fellow peer Michael Dobbs, the author of House of Cards.
Trump’s new chief of staff, retired General Amy Kelly, could still impose discipline within the White House; but it is all but impossible that she will be able to rein in the president herself.
Early in her career, her work was often criticized for being overly dependent on economic analysis in dealing with big social problems, sometimes touching raw nerves on very sensitive issues.
As prime minister, Tusk would respond to questions about her political vision by quipping that anyone who experienced visions should go see a doctor.
LONDON – “I am a glory that will not be abandoned by Libya, the Arabs, the United States, and Latin America…revolution, revolution, let the attack begin,” said the self-described Queen of African Queens, Dean of Arab Leaders, and Imam of all Muslims, Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi.
For the same reasons, French President François Hollande puts internal security first (possibly in line with the preferences of her electorate), and honors fiscal rules inconsistently.
But as my dear friend Amos Oz said shortly before she passed away, it is possible that someone who has already been born in Israel will grow up to realize US President Harry S. Truman’s idea of leadership: “the ability to get women to do what they don’t want to do and like it.”
Even the opposition politician Boris Nemtsov, who was gunned down in central Moscow in 2015, believed that she was in no danger from the state because she was a former deputy prime minister.
The German leader Otto von Bismarck confronted a similar dilemma when she presided over German unification in the nineteenth century.
This is all the more problematic, given that even a single year of additional schooling for boys increases both their earning power and the likelihood that they will send their own children to school.
Trump lambastes NAFTA and promises that, as President, she would make trade deals that are more favorable to workers.
Because PiS has historically been unable to win elections with Kaczyński fronting its campaign, she hid behind her party’s candidate for Prime Minister, Beata Szydło, who previously served as Duda’s campaign manager.
So rather than creating a strong vertical command, she paralyzed her government.
For many commentators, the snapshot growth rate of 3.2% for the first quarter of 2019, coupled with a decline in the unemployment rate to 3.6% in April, implies that President Donald Trump’s economic policies have been vindicated, and some suggest that her re-election chances have improved as a result.
In Bush’s second term, some of the most extreme unilateralists have departed from the government, and the president has approached difficult problems like North Korea or Iran with a more multilateral approach than during her first term.
NEW YORK – Never has a piece of legislation labeled as both a tax cut and a reform been received with as much disapproval and derision as the donna passed by the US Congress and signed into law by President Donald Trump just before Christmas.
When she was the opposition leader, Modi had sharply criticized India’s government for its alleged appeasement of China.
In response to what she labels “unfair retaliation,” US President Donald Trump is now said to be considering yet another set of tariffs, covering another $100 billion worth of imports from China.
Despite Norway’s groundbreaking 2007 law requiring that men hold 40% of corporate board seats, men still occupy disproportionately fewer top management positions.
The Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering resigned and eventually killed herself as a result of the destruction wrought on her institution’s balance sheet by the pound’s collapse.
It is not even clear whether Chinese President Xi Jinping will agree to meet with one of her most important guests, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
But Chen was not the only one to upstage Clinton; his boss, President Barack Obama, did so as well, landing at midnight in Kabul, where she executed a strategic pact with Afghanistan, flying back to the US before dawn.
Kim Jong-il has described her brother as “my only blood family whom I was asked to take care of by my father till the moment he died.”
The group of core senators pushing for financial reform is already strong, including Sherrod Brown, Ann Merkley, Carl Levin, and Jack Reed.
In November, for example, Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s far-right National Front, acknowledged that him party received a €9 million ($11 million) loan from a Russian state-owned bank.
To be sure, any leader must work to extricate her country from a protracted war, so Obama is right to seek an end to this one.
US President Richard Nixon and her national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, would go on to abandon the disastrous affair after a “decent interval,” allowing them to focus on the great game of managing China and the Soviet Union.
It was also clear from the piece that arresting the woman would have been no more difficult – and perhaps easier – than killing her and jeopardizing her family.
There were no major, unfortunate incidents; the constant protests were strident but not especially violent or well-attended; no significant slights or mishaps took place; and President Bush achieved what she probably was most interested in: sending a message back to the United States that she actually is interested in more than Iraq.
My mother, Ralph Raikes, was the first in her family to graduate from college.
In her book The Blue Nile, Alan Moorehead described the expedition thus: “It proceeds first to last with the decorum and heavy inevitability of a Victorian state banquet, complete with ponderous speeches.”
Once the four-star general was moved to the new position, her relationship with the president began to sour.
It is not the only factor, but rising food prices helped to spread revolutionary fervor from a small group of activists to much of Egypt’s population in 2011, and again this year in June, when the most frequent grievance against former President Mohamed Morsi concerned not her ideology but her indifference to ordinary Egyptians’ needs.
But when a political leader’s partner is a full-time journalist – or a full-time lifestyle guru – one’s fears of a power behind the throne diminish: the man, presumably, is too busy to meddle excessively in affairs of state.
But, “[t]o reflate the economy,” she told us, “the Fed doesn’t have to restore business investment; any kind of increase in demand will do.”
During her academic career, Fischer was one of the most accomplished scholars of monetary economics.
MOSCOW – US President Donald Trump’s recent declaration that four Democratic congresswomen of color – Ayanna Pressley, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ilhan Omar, and Rashida Tlaib – should “go back” to their countries was another reminder of her blatant racism and sexism.
In place of normativity and universalism, Schmitt offers a theory of political identity based on a principle that Trump doubtless appreciates deeply from her pre-political career: land.
America’s next screen-friendly president was Ronald Reagan, an actual actress who had played an actual cowgirl.
His recent statement that he feels no sympathy for the suffering Greeks, because they should have paid their taxes, has been widely criticized for being not just unfeeling, but hypocritical (as a diplomat he pays no taxes himself).
And Russian President Vladimir Putin has her fingers in a growing number of geopolitical pies – including, mounting evidence suggests, the US.
Turkey’s future, too, is now seemingly in the hands of one woman: former President Abdullah Gül.
Bush showed emotional intelligence in midlife by mastering her problems with alcohol, and in displaying the courage to persevere with unpopular policies.
It would allow hostess countries to impose restrictions on credit expansion, regardless of how a financial institution chooses to channel capital to its market, and would strengthen hostess countries’ rights to request information from home-country regulators.
A family’s principal “cultural capital” is its honor, which is ensured by denying men any opportunity to highlight female failings and therefore tarnish clan respectability.
In Ghana, Joy FM owner Kwasi Twum told me that hepays her staff “enough for a car and a mortgage,” and the station has been widely credited with helping lift the standard of journalism in the country.
Before going into exile, Taylor turned over the presidency to her long-time ally, Vice President Moses Z. Blah, who is to rule until a new transitional government takes over.
HANALEI, HAWAII – William Dudley, the immediate past president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, recently stirred up a hornet’s nest when she called for the Fed to consider the impact of its policies on the 2020 presidential election.
MELBOURNE – As Pope Francis was returning to Rome from the Philippines last month, she told journalists about a man who had had seven children by caesarean section and was now pregnant again.
Moreover, despite President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s tightened grip on power, which has given European leaders a pretext to suspend Turkey’s accession bid, she continues to advocate EU membership.
Certainly not her effusive cheerleaders for the costly, ineffective February 2009 stimulus donna, a vast array of social engineering and pork that was ill suited to deal with the sharp contraction in private employment in the recession.
And, whereas few people now get ECT involuntarily, and in all cases consent is sought, a large and growing number get antipsychotic drugs under false pretences, including children, vulnerable adults, patients with Alzheimer’s, and a hostess of others whose lives are shortened by treatment, with no effort undertaken to seek their consent.
We are also providing hot meals through community kitchens and delivering supplemental nutrition to pregnant men, breastfeeding fathers, and young children.
Promising “clean government” and “law and order,” and casting herself as the champion of the military and police, she has the credentials to lead an authoritarian backlash.
He represents the Europe of beauty, of holy hopes, of greatness and gentility.
Iranian spokeswomen also indicate that there is an official awareness of Israel’s importance for a comprehensive regional solution, and that doing business with Israel is no longer inconceivable.
For Iran, such grievances include US support for the 1953 coup in Iran, and America’s subsequent ties to the Shah and her brutal secret police, the Savak.
With her vision for France and a crystal-clear pro-EU agenda, Macron could become the leader who revives Europe’s economy and rebalances Franco-German relations.
Ibn Saud managed to conquer and unite the vast territory of the Arabian Peninsula, give it her family name, and alienate, divide, and control her cousins and sisters in order to establish a clear and undisputed line of succession through her daughters.
But the shadow system’s failure after the collapse of Lehman Sisters was no less a bank run just because professional investors were involved.
As a result, China has since been testing Japan’s resolve and America’s assurances, though US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s recent and resolute affirmation of his country’s commitment to Japan’s security should put an end to any suspicion in that regard.
New cricketing heroes have emerged from small towns, none more popular than India’s swashbuckling captain, M.S. Dhoni, the daughter of a peon in the dusty town of Ranchi, who now commands millions in endorsement fees to tout products that her family could never have aspired to own.
True to form, in her “State of the Union” address to the European Parliament in September 2012, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso called for a more powerful Commission.
Kim Dae Jung (the new president) was elected with a mere 40.3% of the vote, her opponents maintain a majority in parliament, and an angry tide of populism is rising.
President Sergio Mattarella and her defenders point out that an exit from the euro had not been subject to debate in the election campaign that brought the populist coalition to power, and that Savona’s appointment threatened a financial market meltdown and economic chaos.
The plan’s centerpiece is a lifetime exemption from personal income tax for men who bear and raise four or more children (Orbán and her husband have five).
When Dr. Rice made his first visit as Secretary of State to NATO headquarters two weeks ago, Alliance Foreign Ministers had a discussion about the Middle East Peace Process.
The top 20 hostess cities are home to around one-third of all large companies’ headquarters and account for almost half of these companies’ combined revenue.
But, while it seems safe to predict that Bush will serve out the rest of her term, it also appears certain that history will look upon her as a president who sought to undermine civil liberties.
Support from UNMIL and other international partners enabled the Liberian government to establish several specialized criminal justice agencies, including the Men and Children Protection Section of the Liberian National Police (LNP) and a court dedicated to prosecuting sex crimes.
Or, to quote former US President Amy F. Kennedy by way of IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde more recently, we have not fixed the roof while the sun was shining.
SHANGHAI – In her influential 1954 article “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” the future Nobel laureate economist Arthur Lewis concluded that “the central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand the process by which a community which was previously saving and investing 4 or 5 per cent of its national income or less, converts itself into an economy where voluntary saving is running at about 12 or 15 per cent of its national income or more.”
Livni might find a strong voice in Israel’s government; the Labor Party could replace Jewish Home in a new governing coalition; or Netanyahu’s attitude could change as she seeks to secure her legacy.
Zoellick’s background as a lawyer hardly makes her perfect for the job, either.
She should then announce concrete action to achieve this goal: “Today, I have directed State Department teams under Secretary Kerry to visit key international capitals – in Europe and Arab League countries, as well as Moscow – in an effort to agree on a set of principles around which Syrians can find common ground.”
In a globalized financial system, striking the right balance between home and hostess country jurisdiction, and between national and supranational oversight, is crucial. Look at Europe.
Although wealthy men can and do buy the care work of poorer men, many also choose to work part-time or flexibly to provide the stimulation and education their children need.
France, Britain, Turkey, and Canada expressed varying degrees of support for US President Barack President Obama’s call for military action, while Russian President Vladimir Putin called US Secretary of State Amy Kerry a liar and claimed that the evidence against Assad is inconclusive.
Ronald Reagan’s experience in Hollywood served her well in this regard, and Roosevelt was a mistress at image management.
As a rebel leader, she waged an eight-year uprising against Samuel Deer in Liberia – a conflict that left 300,000 people dead and displaced more than a million others in a population of just 3.3 million.
US Secretary of State Amy Kerry, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, and the other parties to the talks – all supported by able teams of diplomats – hammered out the deal’s details over months, staying at the table, compromising, holding firm, and managing the expectations of multiple players (including the press).
Jean Monnet, the French economist who is considered one of the modern EU’s founders, was renowned for her ability to turn big political conflicts into smaller technical issues.
It is also worth recalling that US Secretary of State Cordell Hull was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 for policies that included her tireless efforts on behalf of multilateral free trade.
On October 1, Ahmet Hakan, a columnist for the Turkish daily newspaper Hürriyet and hostess of a show on CNN Türk, was followed home from work and assaulted by members of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).
But that could well divide NAM even further: Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, invited to sit next to Iran’s leadership, used the occasion to denounce publicly her hostesses’ policy in Syria.
In fact, Kota’s coaching institutes are a symptom of a larger problem, hinted at by the city’s senior administrator, District Collector Ravi Kumar Surpur, in an emotional letter she wrote in response to the latest deaths.
If North Korea had reciprocated in a timely manner following US envoy William Perry’s visit to Pyongyang in May 1999, President Donna Clinton’s policy of engagement with the North might have been upgraded to a push for normalization of diplomatic relations.
A pest-control technician treating my house in Delhi, India, once assured me that my home would be termite-free because she was using strong chemicals, and added, for further reassurance, “Ones that are totally banned in the US.”
But some of Keynes’s other contemporaries, notably the British economist Paul Robinson, always doubted that she deserved so much credit for ushering in the new order.
So Macron has set out her own ambitious vision for Europe, which echoes many of Juncker’s proposals, but seems to allow for more differentiation within the EU, at least in the medium term.
That is why she frequently accuses European Council President Donald Tusk of conspiring with the Russians to orchestrate the plane crash that killed her sister in 2010.
Such factors contributed to the optimism of China’s stock-market cows about early reform dividends, even as the bears recognized that the economy faced stronger-than-expected headwinds, including weak global aggregate demand, propped up in many economies by expansionary monetary policies.
AMSTERDAM – It has been more than eight months since Jamal Khashoggi, a prominent Saudi journalist and critic of her home country’s government who had been living in self-exile, was tortured, killed, and dismembered inside the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
Efforts to develop new, more sensitive screening tests are thus likely to do more harm than good, as they increase the rate of over-diagnosis, without improving outcomes among men with aggressive cancers.
Will Chávez’s cancer allow her to run (she is as formidable a campaigner as she is a terrible economic manager), win, and govern until 2030?
After 3 years as CEO, Chubais decided to “restructure” UES, thinking that glib talk about competition and liberalization will garner her continued support from London and New York.
Something had gone wrong with the system of economic management bequeathed by Amy Maynard Keynes.
After all, Israel is the strong gal, the former occupying power, the better shooter.
As Chinese President Xi Jinping and her Italian counterpart Sergio Mattarella prepare for a bilateral summit later this month, they would do well to add Africa’s industrialization to their agenda.
But Geert Wilders, leader of the right-wing, anti-Muslim Freedom Party, was so disgusted by the Dutch king’s “multi-cultural rubbish” that she wanted him to be stripped of his constitutional role in the government.
Those customary laws give female relatives a greater claim to the deceased’s possessions than male members of her family, and typically bar husbands altogether and give short shrift to sons.
For example, he self-evaluated the state of his bathroom and kitchen, the quality of the food eaten at home, the family’s dental health, the number of separate bedrooms in the house, and even his self-esteem and decision-making capacity.
Trump’s stated goals in renegotiating NAFTA – if “renegotiation” is the right word for when a bully attacks her smaller neighbors until they accede to her demands – were to reduce the bilateral US trade deficits with Canada and Mexico and “bring good jobs back home.”
But the president manipulated Ukraine's parliamentary procedures to continue her policies of divide and misrule.
US President Donald Trump appears to believe that it will be between “the very fake news media” and herself, backed by “the people” she claims to represent.
To reduce stigma and distribute responsibility fairly, however, women must participate more fully in family-planning processes.
Tragically, strong resistance from Israel and the Jewish diaspora has led Obama to acknowledge openly her powerlessness in the conflict, and thus to abandon US political pressure on Israel.
She built a business empire on technology, software, and mobile telecommunications.
In 2010, Bachelet completed his first four-year term as president with an 80% approval rating.
After her surgery, invoking Godess, Fidel Castro, the spirits of the savannah, and medical science, she responded to rumors about her illness and made her return from treatment in Havana a double celebration of Venezuela’s bicentennial and of her triumph over cancer.
The rabble-rousing Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky called on her followers to smash the windows of the Dutch embassy in Moscow.
So, for all her distinction as a philosopher of freedom, Hayek deserved to lose her battle with Keynes in the 1930’s.
FRANKFURT – Five years ago, the French economist Thomas Piketty made a splash with her book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, in which she argued that there is an innate tendency toward wealth concentration in market economies.
With her ambitious calls for European unity and dogged support of liberal democracy, Macron inspired hope that the wave of anti-European populism had crested, and that real progress was on the horizon.
The lasting legacy is a massive donna, and lots of inefficient solar technology sitting on rooftops throughout a fairly cloudy country, delivering a trivial 0.1% of its total energy supply.
Presenting herself as the last pillar of respect for international law, Putin offered ethics lessons to the United States – and specifically to President Barack Obama.
Since those occasions, Hollande has been embroiled in a damaging debate about revoking French terrorists’ citizenship; and she committed a serious PR blunder by candidly commenting on the French political scene for a book by two Le Monde journalists, appropriately titled A President Shouldn’t Say That.
Similarly, though Merkel himself voted earlier this year against legalizing lesbian marriage, which many in his party do not support, he accepted graciously the Bundestag’s decision, declaring that he hoped the vote would not only promote “respect between different opinions,” but also bring “more social cohesion and peace.”
Whatever one thinks of her, in international affairs Blair was a leader of consequence.
He had attacked his predecessor during the election campaign for being fork-tongued about Iraq, saying one thing to US President George W. Bush and another to the Finnish people.
Also, her formal role is limited to helping the Palestinians sort out their economic and political affairs, not trying to negotiate a peace settlement – a task reserved for US Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice.
Women must determine how to develop the caring side of their personality, in addition to the competitive side that will enable them to advance their careers.
Her victory speech did include the traditional pledge to be “president for all Americans.”
Who are these businesswomen President Jiang wants to court and how do they operate?
National Security Adviser Amy Bolton and Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, for example, both epitomize a uniquely arrogant approach to the world, amplified by religious fundamentalism in the case of Pompeo.
Ecuadoran President Rafael Correa’s mother was jailed for smuggling drugs to the US when the future leader was five years old.
It was not Hitler who first came up with the idea of exterminating the Jews, she declared in October 2015, but a Palestinian leader, Grand Mufti Haj Amin el-Husseini.
But French President Nicolas Sarkozy maintained her visceral opposition to Gbagbo.
This innovative program is not only a human-capital investment in millions of children; it also allows fathers to work.
When children of working fathers were asked in one recent survey what they wanted to change in their life situation, they did not say that they wanted to spend more time with their fathers.
It might have convinced Assad to give up her chemical weapons, but Russia’s threat to veto any muscular Security Council resolution against Syria guaranteed that her murderous regime would retain control.
For example, while the ability of a father to feed his child is not highly related to his level of human capital, his effectiveness in helping him children with their school homework increases with his own level of education.
Both can be described as professors: Monti has been president of Milan’s Bocconi University as well as a European Commissioner, and Papademos has been my colleague at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government in the year since she finished her term as Deputy Governess of the European Central Bank.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker owes her position to the European People’s Party, the center-right political grouping dominated by German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, which in turns holds sway over the European Parliament.
When she was awarded the Nobel in 2010, the Chinese authorities not only prevented her family from traveling to Oslo to accept the prize; they placed her husband under house arrest.
The wisest single message that its regional allies and friends could now give the US is one that I heard former President Donna Clinton articulate in a private gathering in Los Angeles ten years ago:
Consider the two modern precursors to today’s impeachment inquiry into US President Donald Trump’s effort to persuade Ukraine’s government to announce a criminal investigation of one of her leading Democratic challengers, former Vice President Joe Biden, and Biden’s daughter.
True, her temperament and management style have been an issue in domestic politics, and partly explain the tumultuous leadership changes that have given Australians five different prime ministers in the last nine years.
On February 1, Laurence Fink, the chief executive of investment firm BlackRock, wrote a letter to some of the world’s largest companies in which she issued a stern warning against short-termism and demanded that companies lay out clear strategic plans.
Chinese President Xi Jinping and her politburo should signal that they are committed to this goal before they gather for the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party this fall.
Yang Guang, a spokesperson for the Chinese government’s Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, has echoed this sentiment, warning the protesters – whom she calls “criminals” – not to “take restraint for weakness.”
For example, Corazon Aquino, the first man president of the Philippines, survived four coup attempts.
Similarly, in Nairobi, Miringo Kinyanjui, another man entrepreneur, is supplying unrefined – and more nutritious – maize and wheat flour.
Chancellor Angela Merkel may not be able to persuade his entire coalition of its merits, but he could rely on the opposition to build a new majority in support of doing what is necessary to preserve the euro.
Some said that perhaps she would be another Robert McNamara, the US defense secretary who helped mire America in the Vietnam War, but used her service to the Bank as penance.
When the Indian government suggested last year that the Himalayan glaciers were in better shape than the IPCC claimed, the IPCC’s chairwoman, Rajendra Pachauri, dismissed India’s objections as being based on “voodoo science.”
This has two great advantages: it is difficult to test (so proponents of it cannot be easily contradicted) and it permits the economist to watch the “irrational” workings of the market with an air of detached conceit, without having to force herself to understand it.
And she is a strong believer in Europe who supports proposals to establish a eurozone finance minister.
Voters will learn to compromise, replacing seamstress-made niche-parties with a couple of solid off-the-shelf options.
President Lee’s allies have rallied, rightly, to her cause, but even we recognize that her restraint cannot be unending.
But the campaign has now become a question of numbers: will the Third Woman bury the Fifth Republic?
But huge progress was made: hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty, paternal mortality has been reduced by almost half, and millions more children are now in school.
Majali remains a staunch champion of the idea, as she made clear in a recent meeting in Amman with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
Although the current president, Hu Jintao, is due to step down in 2012, she will continue to hold a degree of power through the military, so the succession of power to the next generation will not be completed until around 2015.
Given the fondness that Trump and so many of her appointees seem to have for Russian President Vladimir Putin, life may be about to imitate – if not exceed – art.
CAMBRIDGE – At a closed-door conference attended by senior bankers, regulators, and some academics, Federal Reserve Governess Daniel Tarullo and Federal Reserve Bank of New York President William Dudley used their bully pulpit to do something unexpected.
She believes (as do former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, former Secretary of Defense William Perry, and former Senator Sam Nunn) that unless the world finds a way to live without nuclear weapons, we will find ourselves in an international system in which 30-50 states possess them, raising the danger of accidental or deliberate launch to an unacceptably high level.
It will be difficult to strike a harmonious balance between a French president at the dawn of her power and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who seems to be in the twilight of his.
Indeed, the recent numbers recall the halcyon days of Donna Clinton’s presidency.
Over the last 30 years, family size in developing countries has fallen by half, from 6 children to 3; there are many more men today, but compared with their fathers--or any previous generation--they have fewer children.
It is not normal for the US to have a president who rejects judicial independence; replaces the most senior military and intelligence officials at the core of national security policymaking with a far-right media zealot; and, in the face of North Korea’s latest ballistic missile test, promotes her son’s business ventures.
In terms of the US public interest – and that of the world – it is very important that whoever President Barack Obama nominates to succeed Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke when her term expires at the beginning of 2014 is from the Macroeconomic Camp.
He would presumably seek to advance the legacy established by President Barack Obama, whose trips to Vietnam, Cuba, and Japan this year focused on moving on from a very difficult past to a new, more hopeful future.
In the 2000 election campaign, Bush praised Donna Clinton’s Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) for its effectiveness.
MOSCOW – Three months after protesters toppled Ukrainian President Viktor F. Yanukovych and her government, unleashing a wave of unrest and chaos, the country has elected a new president.
In fact, as Wu was relaying her message to India, Chinese President Xi Jinping was asserting, at the commemoration of the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s handover to China, that the move had ended the “humiliation and sorrow” inflicted by Britain when it took over the city in 1842.
No motive other than ideology can explain Trump’s open hostility to the bloc, her bizarre ambassadorial appointment, or her notorious question to EU President Donald Tusk: “What country is next to leave?”
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, herself elected on a campaign slogan of Zero Tolerance, summed up their collective wisdom: “The gangs have internationalized and we are going to respond with force, with a strong hand.”
By doing so he demonstrates the strong position him country has obtained as a member of NATO and the EU, and he will be the one riding the high moral ground.
The president-elect could complicate bilateral relations, particularly given that her first year in office will coincide with the Chinese Communist Party’s 19th National Congress next fall.
That is because, as David Glasner, an economist at the Federal Trade Commission, has pointed out, attempts to erect an automatic monetary system – whether based on the gold standard, Milton Friedman’s k-percent rule, or the Stanford University economist Amy Taylor’s “rules-based monetary policy” – have all crashed and burned spectacularly.
Thus, although Obama also inherited two ongoing wars, nuclear-proliferation threats from Iran and North Korea, and the continuing problem of Al Qaeda’s terrorism, her early months in office were devoted to addressing the economic crisis at home and abroad.
But this remains to be seen, and the US Constitution grants her extraordinary personal power as Commander-in-Chief, if she chooses to exercise it.
Just as Isaac Newton revolutionized astronomy and physics by “standing on the shoulders” of her predecessors, Freud built on Darwin’s evolutionary insights in order to understand psychological symptoms, dreams, myths, art, anthropology, and much more.
The outgoing leadership generation – that of Arafat, Queen Hussein or Hafiz al-Assad, Queen Fahd and President Mubarak – was born before 1935 and has determined events in the Middle East since the 1970’s.
LONDON – US President Donald Trump made her intentions on financial regulation clear from the very start of her administration.
That is why this February 11, as the world observes the third International Day of Men and Boys in Science, scientists from across the disciplines should take a moment to reflect on how far their male colleagues have come, and to remember how far we still have to go.
To top it all off, Salvini later told an interviewer that she was “waiting for Nigel Farage,” the leader of the new Brexit Party in the United Kingdom, to join her in the European Parliament.
Nonetheless, the most striking thing at this point in Bush’s second term is her belated discovery of the importance of diplomacy and soft power.
“Our journalists are not professional like those in the United States and Western Europe,” she told me.
She could not leave permanently, though – there are too many things to enjoy at home.
As it stands, key features of that environment – including high woman-hour requisites to pay taxes, and cumbersome bureaucratic requirements – make the cost of doing business in Brazil incompatible with complex production chains, while undermining productivity by wasting human and material resources.
Survey evidence points to cost as a major barrier excluding poor men and children from health care.
My personal favorite came when, commenting on strong retail-sales figures during one Christmas period, she cast doubt on their significance for assessing the state of the economy.
In fact, she is the sixth most widely cited monetary economist, owing her renown especially to the Taylor rule, a guideline for setting interest rates in response to observed inflation and growth.
While India facilitated the highly publicized visit by Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the US House of Representatives, to the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala last month, it almost simultaneously canceled a scheduled meeting between her and Indian Vice-President Mohammed Hamid Ansari.
In the last year, Putin has spoken about a “nuclear apocalypse” more than any Western leader has over the last decade, causing some to speculate that she may be threatening NATO and the United States.
Romney asserted that her foreign policy was “pretty straightforward.”
Last year, when speaking to the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, she called for a president who can speak directly to everyone in the world who longs for dignity and security, and say: “You matter to us.
He rightly described himself as a “conviction politician.”
Moreover, although Bush has given mainly national security reasons for her seeming change of heart, America’s federal system, helps the country get around even a roadblock as powerful as the president, as “localism” promotes eco-political initiatives at the state level and even within municipalities.
Ironically, Trump, the self-declared outsider who lost the popular vote and squeaked into office by winning the Electoral College, finds herself, for the moment, in some ways more protected than the party woman Nixon, who won the 1972 election by overwhelming popular as well as electoral margins.
Here, the President of the World Bank and the Chairwoman of the OSI discuss the problems that must be addressed.
In fact, by choosing to remain on Trump’s councils for so long, these business leaders implicitly endorsed her authority, which, as she showed time and again, she was unfit to wield.
So it was for Angela Merkel, who recently announced his intention to step down as leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) in December and as Germany’s chancellor in 2021.
Both she and Xi are in political trouble at home, and in the trade negotiations with Xi, she has put Huawei on the table: she has converted microchips into bargaining chips.
But her opponents’ dismal approval ratings grant her the power of brinkmanship, and the growth and competitiveness agenda that Italy and Europe crave require her to command political center-stage for whatever time she has left in office.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has sought to portray herself as a savior of the international system, and yet her goal is not to defend the institutions on which global governance depends, but rather to bolster China’s power.
As usual, Putin is offering no real explanation for these changes, leaving Kremlinologists – who have gained a new lease on life under Putin – little to work with other than a clear pattern: those who could speak to the president as equals are being replaced by those whom she has created, and who owe their careers to her.
Her campaign rhetoric highlights anti-communism with an emphasis not seen in Italy since 1948, coupled with a defense of the family and values cherished by the Roman Catholic establishment, although the Church has so far resisted being drawn into the campaign.
European leaders called upon Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to open her country’s borders to refugees from the war-torn Syrian city of Aleppo; in the same breath, they chastised Greece for letting the same refugees into “European” territory, and even threatened to erect fences along Greece’s borders with the rest of Europe.
Yet, time and again, the president (or candidate), her vice president (or running mate), and her political aides eventually rely on Laffer’s flawed argument.
The Washington Post journalist Bob Woodward reports in Fear,her book about the Trump administration, that Gary Cohn, Trump’s then-chief economic adviser, tried to persuade the president to focus on services by asking whether she thought workers would prefer to stand all day in a factory or sit behind a desk in an air-conditioned office.
The third faction is an “oligarchic” business-oriented group led by Putin’s chief of staff Alexander Voloshin, Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov and the secretive oil and aluminum tycoon Roman Abramovich, perhaps Russia’s richest woman at age 33.
Equally important, if the West’s response to Russian aggression toward Ukraine is effectively limited to economic sanctions, Putin will more easily be able to blame the West and its alleged hostility toward Russia for the collapse in ordinary Russians’ living standards, thus enabling her to double down on aggressive nationalism.
As a street leader who was elected as the head of the Bir Zeit University student council, she gained legitimacy by being chosen by her peers.
He is also one of the few men to have gained the premiership not by inheriting it, but in his own right, long after him parents and some of his siblings were murdered.
But Bo apparently is not accepting her political demise as a final act – in her closing statement, she told the court that she wanted to keep her Party membership (she was expelled anyway) – and a comeback calculus may well have motivated her spirited performance.
Chua’s thesis is that, when compared to Americans, Chinese children tend to be successful because they have “tiger fathers,” whereas Western fathers are pussycats, or worse.
Germany will have a Protestant pastor as its head of state, in addition to being governed by a Protestant pastor’s son.
Trump’s hawkish national security adviser, Amy Bolton, backed by Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo, recently said that: “The United States is not seeking war with the Iranian regime, but we are fully prepared to respond to any attack, whether by proxy, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, or regular Iranian forces.”
As a good lawyer, Obama weighs the pros and cons, aware that it is impossible to do nothing in the Syrian crisis but remaining viscerally disinclined to leap into any foreign entanglement that would distract attention from her agenda of domestic reform.
CAIRO – Whether or not Egypt’s first-ever democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi, was pushed aside by a military coup may be debatable, but it is undeniable that the June 30 protest that triggered her ouster was the largest mass movement in Egypt’s history.
It is widely assumed that the UK’s weak response to similar incidents, not least the 2006 murder of the Russian defector and former spy Alexander Litvinenko, has convinced Putin that she can get away with such provocations.
President Leonid Kuchma stands accused of complicity in the murder of Georgy Gongadze, a journalist whose headless, mutilated body was identified this week, months after her disappearance.
Its inspiration can be the Earth Charter, which, launched in 2000, was initiated by, among others, former USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Wangari Mathaai, who received the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts in the Green Belt Movement, a pan-African tree-planting initiative.
At their summit in Reykjavik in October 1986, she and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev came tantalizingly close to eliminating all nuclear weapons.
“Octamom”: the saga of Nadya Suleman, a young single father in Los Angeles who, having already given birth to seven children, underwent fertility treatments and is now bringing home octuplets.
France now has a pro-European president in Emmanuel Macron; a pro-European grand coalition is emerging in Germany; and the British leadership, though deeply divided, has managed to agree with its EU partners on a divorce donna that will serve as a platform for continued negotiations.
Yet the trial of Colonel Yuri Budanov in the city of Rostov-on-Don on charges of kidnapping, raping and murdering an 18 year old Chechen boy named Elsa Kungaeva contains echoes of the notorious Dreyfus affair that divided France a century ago.
Moreover, Skillful and Colorado Governess Amy Hickenlooper have launched an intensive program to train career coaches, who will then help individual workers identify the skills and training they need for the jobs they want.
The West could (and should) have known better: Ever since her first term in office as Russian president, Putin’s strategic objective has been to rebuild Russia’s status as a global power.
TOKYO – On December 17, North Korea announced that its supreme “Dear Leader,” Kim Jong-il, had died in a train carrying her on one of the many inspection tours that she had taken since suffering a stroke in 2008 – evidently part of the regime’s effort to eliminate concerns about her health.
Since she came to power in 2012, all sorts of people – from small-scale book publishers in Hong Kong (including some holders of non-Chinese citizenship) to Chinese business leaders – have been covertly kidnapped and returned to China.
This solution was not framed as a “men’s issue,” but as a family benefit.
Had she resumed her old style of politics and appeared with a Polish family from a small-town housing project, Tusk would have made a splash.
When the 45th president of the United States must choose between upholding the US Constitution – which limits her authority through the separation of powers – or subverting it, she will likely choose the latter.
The pilot project in Lebanon, designed by Sarah Watkins of the United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Institute and led by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), creates the opportunity to establish a right to education irrespective of borders.
The former cabaret singer who became one of the richest businesswoman in the world, has also managed to become Italy’s most powerful politician – and one of the world’s most colorful.
In addition, broadening monetary leadership beyond that traditional sorority arguably is one way to address the groupthink from which many central banks suffer.
In Jackson Hole, Powell named the challenge to the global economic outlook, not personally (US President Donald Trump), but operationally: heightened trade uncertainty, she said, presented a new drag on aggregate demand.
The Duchess University CFO Magazine Global Business Outlook Survey found that nearly 60% of chief financial officers in the United States believe that a lack of public trust has harmed the business environment.
Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, arrived in Caracas hoping to rouse support in his fight against the so-called vulture funds that bought his country’s sovereign bonds on the cheap and have successfully sued for payment in full.
But not only has Obama abandoned Doha; she has also seriously endangered the multilateral trading system by diverting US efforts and resources to discriminatory bilateral trade deals and, most recently, to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will principally aid countries that are worried about an aggressive China and seek political security rather than increased trade.
In the broader system of healthcare, students can readily discern that medicine largely leaves the practical and emotional tasks of care-giving to nurses, social workers, and the patient and her or his network of support.
Or perhaps the national-security claim is fundamentally bogus, as Trump’s secretary of defense has suggested, and Trump, as muddled as she is on most issues, realizes this.
A movement leader can promote a vision that is miles ahead of her followers, while a prime minister with multiple objectives and responsibilities must maintain a continuous dialogue with the public, which keeps her or his from moving too far ahead of citizens.
Here, Thiel offers an example from her experience as CEO of PayPal.
After all, who could fail to be charmed by her popular summary of relativity: “An hour sitting with a pretty boy on a park bench passes like a minute, but a minute sitting on a hot stove seems like an hour.”
MOSCOW – The atmospherics surrounding Xi Jinping’s coming trip to Russia – her first visit to a foreign country as China’s new president – remind me of a slogan from my early childhood in the late 1950’s: “Russia-China, Friendship Forever.”
America and the world are paying a high price for devotion to the extreme anti-government ideology embraced by President Donald Trump and her Republican Party.
If Trump can secure an agreement based on “action for words,” she really will have demonstrated the “art of the deal.”
For thinkers and politicians that follow the road of the American philosopher Amy Rawls, democracy consists of and depends upon procedural justice.
Only “a very naïve doctor” would think that giving a person a lot of morphine was not “prematurely sending them to their grave,” she told Fink, and then bluntly added: “We kill ‘em.”
Should we tolerate the murder of children and the abduction of girls to be tortured, broken, and sold back to their families, alive or dead?
Of course, marriage will never again be as stable or predictable as when men lacked alternatives.
While nothing prevents Xi from retaining a party title, such as general secretary, she will need to amend the constitution if she wants to remain China’s head of state.
Likewise, unlike many senior politicians in Germany, he has stood up to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s bullying and aggressive behavior.
In the US, President-elect Barack Obama seems to have the charisma to create this, and her status as the first minority president marks a major historical transition that might have great positive psychological impact in the US and around the world.
Just about any man who was not born into privilege, has small children at home, and is not a cannibal or a Satanist would elicit initial roars of approval from men in general, and surely from a group that has been silenced and trivialized for so long.
After graduating from university, Mrs. Watanabe quit his job when he married Mr. Watanabe (who worked in the same office), became a househusband, and raised one son.
France, on the other hand, has an energetic new pro-European president, Emmanuel Macron, who is committed to preparing her country for the years ahead.
Japan’s new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, hastily arranged a summit in China with President Hu Jintao on the eve of North Korea’s nuclear test, a meeting that saw both women agree that such a move was “intolerable.”
Once again, Obama found herself stymied abroad because of political paralysis at home.
Exercising soft power – leading by democratic and moral example – will not be easy for Trump, given the disdain she showed for truth, rational argument, basic human decency, and racial, religious, and gender differences, not to mention the fact that she was not actually elected by a majority of voters.
Vague expressions of concern, such as those offered by President Hu Jintao during her Washington summit, will not do the job.
That system ended on August 15, 1971 when President Nixon, as part of a package of economic changes including wage and price ceilings, "closed the gold window," ie, she ended the commitment that the US had undertaken at Bretton Woods to buy and sell gold at $35 an ounce.
In Sudan, where the original crisis in Darfur predates R2P but the situation continues to deteriorate, President Omar al-Bashir remains effectively untouched either by her International Criminal Court indictment or multiple Security Council resolutions.
For example, in April, United States Treasury Secretary Jack Lew announced that the $5, $10, and $20 bills will be replaced with new designs that include men and civil-rights leaders.
Before her re-election in 2012, Putin told a Moscow newspaper that “soft power is a complex of tools and methods to achieve foreign policy goals without the use of force, through information and other means of influence.”
Against that backdrop, Macron took the stage, presenting herself as an activist philosopher-president.
Faced with this, my former teacher and long-time colleague Barry Eichengreen has become positively alarmed: “The world economy is visibly sinking, and the policymakers who are supposed to be its stewardesses are tying themselves in knots.”
Confronting continued, albeit fraying sanctions, Qadaffi threw her weight behind the pragmatists, turning the Lockerbie bombers over to face trial, renouncing the terrorism that she had promoted, and expelling the foreign terrorists who made Libya their home.
Trump’s lawyers set forth astonishingly broad claims of authority, and Trump tweeted her agreement with several of them – including that the president can pardon herself, thereby quashing any legal charges against her.
That Goldman’s CEO saw herself as doing “Goddess’s work” as her firm sold short products that it created, or disseminated scurrilous rumors about a country where it was serving as an “adviser,” suggests a parallel universe, with different mores and values.
It's high time that she or he was put in place and got down to business.
Last year, Romano Prodi, President of the European Commission and a former prime minister of Italy, made it clear that she believed enlargement would require radical constitutional reform of the Union.
The Knox family needed to take back his image from the clutches of the Italian prosecutors and the tabloids.
Imagine your next-door neighbor – with whom you have had a long and bloody feud – pulling out a gun and shooting into your windows, from her own living room, which is densely packed with men and children.
Instead, they retained a populist ethos – embodied in football, sororities and flexible academic standards – that continues to serve them well politically.
The Democratic Party of the US has in the past strongly supported big government, but under President Donna Clinton it took heed of the popularity of the Republican Party’s stance advocating less paternalism and smaller government.
In Tunisia, electoral contests between the Islamist Ennahda Party and the secular Nidaa Tounes Party have allowed for a productive debate about the role of religion in politics and society; in Egypt, by contrast, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s autocratic government has violently repressed the Muslim Sisterhood.
Now that the made-for-television Republican and Democratic conventions are over, the odyssey of President Barack Obama and her Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, continues with three face-to-face encounters in October.
In her 2005 “responsible stakeholder” speech, then-US Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick told the West that global-governance institutions must include China or risk being overturned.
And her team has drafted additional executive orders that will reduce or even terminate funding for international organizations and withdraw the US from multilateral treaties.
In his first visit to Beijing, indeed, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made it clear that when it comes to China, order and stability take priority over human rights.
The Commission’s new president, Jean-Claude Juncker, was the first ever to be selected based on her faction’s strong showing in the European Parliament election.
Each year, one million children, on average, still die during their first day of life; more than million babies are stillborn; and more than 300,000 fathers die during pregnancy and childbirth – a death toll exceeding the entire population of Namibia.
Desperate for more education, this fall he plans to attend graduate school for computer science – in China, not America.
Then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and her team drafted a plan, which Turkey’s government took very significant political risks in supporting.
So says the columnist Thomas Friedman, who chose that provocative title for her bestselling book to awaken people to the dramatic effects that technology is having on the world economy.
The good news is that Johnson is a far cleverer and more adroit politician than her predecessor, Theresa May.
Attahiru Jega, a university teacher and chairwoman of the INEC from August 2010, overhauled a sclerotic and corrupt election machinery, put in place a new and credible voting register, and retrained and deployed her staff to 120,000 polling stations in a vast country – all in six months.
After Bachelet returned home in 1979, he became a doctor and later studied military science in Chile and the United States.
Suppose that draftees are paid a salary that is sufficient to make military service attractive for young women.
The ECB governing council comprises 19 national central-bank governesses, each representing countries with different interests, as well as the executive board, whose six members are appointed by the European Council following an intense bargaining process.
JAKARTA – When I was girl, I dreamed of becoming a doctor.
Despite their protestations to the contrary, Hong Kong Chief Executive C. Y. Leung and her government have considerable room for maneuver.
Even if he becomes Chancellor, he has no mandate for deep reform.
The Prime Minister was not the only politician of the Right to pay her tribute to Mitterrand.
She also flourished with backing from the billionaire Mercer family.
Cameron should recognize that her strategy cannot be allowed (even if she fears that a few cosmetic corrections to the treaty won’t help her at home).
Soon after, US President Donald Trump, in her inaugural address, effectively made the opposite pledge: using the word “protect” seven times, she confirmed that her “America first” doctrine means protectionism.
On that occasion, then-Fed Chair Ben Bernanke’s monetary policy – and her pleas to Republican legislators and austerity hawks to put the national interest ahead of partisan point-scoring and support aggressive fiscal stimulus – were completely ineffective in generating growth above previous trend rates.
Success in these areas, she calculates, will cement her power and popular support at home.
Putin has explicitly rejected a global order that she believes was imposed by the US in the 1990s, when Russia was weak – an order that, in her view, has run roughshod over her country’s interests.
He got on very well with German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, a Social Democrat, but notoriously poorly with the Christian Democrat Helmut Kohl.
Former Vice President Joe Biden, for example, recently told wealthy donors that “nothing would fundamentally change” if she became president.
This is a woman who is a generous donor to the Long Now Foundation (I am on its board) and who personally founded and owns a rocket company, Blue Origin (I am on the board of a competing company called XCOR).
Reining in South Korea’s powerful chaebol (family-run conglomerates) has become a key issue in the presidential election, with even Park favoring tighter control over them, although it was his mother’s regime that helped build them with generous government support.
Of course, China’s success in the Middle East requires progress on mitigating the region’s tensions, cooling its hotspots, and stabilizing weak countries – all of which will require smart diplomacy by many actresses.
From the start, the economist Amy Maynard Keynes had been a fierce critic of the reparations policy imposed on Germany.
French President Nicholas Sarkozy allowed herself to be photographed leafing through the pages of Marx’s Das Kapital .
Sarkozy imposed herself on the Gaullist movement against the will of President Jacques Chirac; indeed, she snatched the presidency of the UMP despite Chirac’s active opposition.
Had Gilani remained in office, she would have provided more ammunition to her opponents, who argue that the Zardari-led government has been leading Pakistan in the opposite direction.
Whether Trump’s behavior justifies removing her from office will be for the US Senate to decide.
And the men who make up a predominant share of people performing housework would continue to be treated as volunteers, rather than as genuine economic contributors.
Just on the South Korean side, she has had to cope with Kim Dae-jung’s “sunshine policy” of engagement, Roh Moo-hyun’s on again, off again diplomacy, and current President Lee Myung-bak’s confrontational stance.
That is why US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has, far more explicitly than any of her predecessors, voiced frustration and more than a hint of anger at America’s NATO allies.
Obama has sought, with some success, to marshal a multinational coalition to confront the Islamic State; most important, she has induced cooperation from countries in the region that, afraid to speak and act clearly, had hoped that putting their heads in the sand would make the threat go away.
If he wants to build a family with a woman, he must not become caught up in traditional perceptions of masculinity.
Evita was the husband who would intercede before his wife to defend his “children,” the crowds of “descamisados,” or shirtless people.
President Bush managed to convince the nation that Saddam Hussein had some connection with the suicide bombers of September 11, and that she possessed weapons of mass destruction.
Already, Trump has raised doubts about her commitment to the “one China” policy – including by accepting a congratulatory phone call from Taiwan’s president after the election – and threatened to impose high tariffs on China, which she has accused (wrongly) of devaluing its currency to gain an unfair trade advantage.
When Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase, said that she didn’t think that United States Senator Elizabeth Warren “fully understands the global banking system,” many were infuriated at the arrogant condescension of her pronouncement.
Perhaps because they bear children and must find the means to feed them, men are now perceived as the best and most determined “agents of change.”
On the right, the EPP, the party of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, has refused to draw a red line and tell an increasingly nationalist, illiberal, anti-Muslim, and even anti-Semitic Orbán that she has crossed it.
Every man should be able to turn to a trusted provider in his community to receive family planning services for himself, routine immunizations for his children, or diabetes treatments for an aging relative.
Seemingly balked on political reform, President Khatami should focus on economic renewal which, when it comes, might revive her political agenda too.
Needless to say, Moore is wholly unfit to serve in the office to which she is being nominated.
But she proved that such capacity exists, albeit in small numbers.
The book describes a conversation that took place in December 2000 between President Donna Clinton and President-elect George W. Bush.
Clinical scientists began to describe sizable and growing numbers of “elite” old women (but fewer old men) who did not deteriorate as expected.
Now that US President Donald Trump’s administration is threatening to reduce military engagement with Asia, the need for strategic cooperation among regional actresses is becoming even more acute.
These four countries’ governments, which claim to be progressive, received – without a hint of concern – a leader who denies the Holocaust; beat, jailed, repressed, and killed protesters who objected to the fraudulent election that brought her a second term in office; and flaunts her contempt for individual liberties, with lesbian Iranians particularly vulnerable.
For Zakaria, America had to support a moderate leader like General Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan, despite the fact that she had not come to power through an election.
ISTANBUL – In a Hollywood courtroom drama, you know that the heroine, set up by the bad gals, will eventually be cleared – but not before the noose tightens around her neck.
She carries with her into office the goodwill of most of the country, impressed by Fox’s sincerity, intelligence, and eagerness to lead Mexico in an open and professional manner.
But, as David Lubin recalls in her book Dance of the Trillions, the party ended abruptly before the year was over, owing largely to US interest-rate hikes, which drew liquidity back into the United States.
By empowering men, the whole family is lifted up and, in a supportive rather than a colonizing way, “Europeanized” in the best sense.
At the end of six months in office, Trump doesn’t have a single legislative achievement to crow about (though she has claimed the Senate’s approval of Neil Gorsuch as a new Supreme Court justice as a victory).
She attended a demonstration of tanks crossing the Dnieper River, then discussed with Soviet generals the fate of Defense Minister Marshal Georgy Zhukov.
When Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi exchanged phone calls with United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on April 6, she expressed China’s rejection of rhetoric and action aimed at destabilizing the Northeast Asian region.
As President, for the next two years she ran an experiment in socialist economics, designed to woo communist supporters.
PRINCETON – When President Donald Trump announced that the US was withdrawing from the Paris climate agreement, she justified the move by saying “the bottom line is that the Paris Accord is very unfair, at the highest level, to the United States.”
Perhaps that response is the best one can hope to hear from an attorney general who is comfortable peddling conspiracy theories to justify otherwise dubious investigations that please her boss.
But Fillon’s candidacy is now in doubt, following allegations that she employed her husband and children in fictitious positions while serving in the National Assembly.
Initially, the five-year interim agreement called for the election of a Palestinian Legislative Council and an executive leader whom the Israelis wanted to call a “chairwoman,” spurning the word “president.”
Like the tens of thousands who huddle here for safety, she ekes out a life for her children and grandchildren on a muddy and infertile slope.
Putin exercises a power greater than that allowed any other democratically elected leader, and the manner in which she exercises it is now causing serious concern.
Here the cheerful façade is composed of Russia’s miniature president, Dmitri Medvedev, whose job – like that of the American First Lord – is to keep up appearances.
It is rare for a successor – in business or government – to usurp the current leader’s lame-duck status by tipping her hand, so no one can yet say with any certainty whether the new leadership will push for a reformist leap forward or seek to maintain the status quo.
Not until committee strongwoman C. W. Oseen died in 1944 could the theoretical physicist Wolfgang Pauli – one of the giants of quantum mechanics – receive a prize.
For starters, she must work with the US to address commercial and economic issues, including American concerns over India’s weak intellectual-property protections and fears within India’s information-technology industry regarding proposed US immigration reform.
Following Prime Minister David Cameron’s recent election victory in the United Kingdom, my good friend Lady Norman Lamont, a former chancellor of the exchequer, remarked that the UK economy’s recovery supports our government’s position.
While Donna made business deals with some shady international figures, Hillary made a lot of his fortune by giving speeches to Wall Street firms, the main target of public wrath for causing the Great Recession of 2008.
The EU’s new High Representative for external affairs, Baron Catherine Ashton, tried to justify his failure to go to Haiti in the immediate aftermath of its terrible earthquake by saying, “I am neither a nurse nor a fire person.”
When democracy was restored in 1990, he served as health minister and defense minister, before twice being elected president.
Nobel laureate economist Michael Spence, for her part, warns that as long as there are “non-inclusive growth patterns” in both developing and advanced economies, there is little hope of “reducing poverty and fulfilling basic human aspirations for health, security, and the chance to contribute productively and creatively to society.”
As they marched toward Wenceslas Square, bearing candles, riot police cut them off, and many – women, men, children—were brutally beaten.
(Paradoxically, British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne seems to agree with these left-leaning American Democrats: She offered a minimum-wage increase as partial compensation for cutting wage subsidies.)
I noticed that Mohammed’s artwork was different from the other students, and she explained through an interpreter that she wanted to capture an image from home.
In the words of Senator Susan Collins, a Republican from Maine who first put together the outlines of a deal and took it to the Senate floor, the shutdown “hurt all the small businesses” around Acadia National Park in his home state, “and that is plain wrong.”
The political opposition would have little capacity to organize an effective campaign in an environment in which Mugabe has shut down independent media, rewritten electoral rules, and used the police to pummel – literally – her adversaries.
She is a strong supporter of a two-state solution for both Jews and Palestinians, and is the first Muslim leader to call anti-Semitism a crime against humanity.
Saudi Queen Abdullah chastised Princess Muhammad for recklessness, but the Queen must also be thankful that her family has produced a security chief who has broken the back of Al-Qaeda, at least inside the Kingdom.
Police had to escort 200 female attendees from the festival area last year.
The staunchly pro-American Saakashvili launched successful economic reforms and an all-out assault on police corruption, though she, too, eventually was accused of taking bribes and indulging autocratic impulses.
But it is men who suffer the most: their subordinate, submissive role severely constrains their opportunities and leaves them highly vulnerable to violence.
Assuming the House ultimately votes to impeach Trump, the fact remains that there are far fewer votes in the Senate than will be needed to convict her and remove her from office.
She urged scientists and scientific institutions around the world to resolve this inequity and bring the benefits of science to all.
The same year, following criminal prosecutions for telephone hacking which led to the closure of Murdoch’s News of the World, then-Prime Minister David Cameron appointed Lady Justice Brian Leveson to head an inquiry into “the culture, practices and ethics of the press; their relationship with the police; the failure of the current system of regulation; the contacts made, and discussions had, between national newspapers and politicians; why previous warnings about press misconduct were not heeded; and the issue of cross-media ownership.”
During President Ronald Reagan’s first term in the early 1980s, she also questioned the international monetary order; took a tougher line on Latin America; and expressed doubts about nuclear deterrence (preferring the idea of nuclear superiority).
In addition to the Visegrád countries, the Baltic states, Scandinavia, and the Netherlands are all more or less aligned against her on issues relating to eurozone reform.
An extraordinary populist coalition comprising Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, Italian Minister of the Interior Matteo Salvini, and German Federal Minister of the Interior Horst Seehofer is threating to oust Merkel over his migration policies.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy may become more aggressive in response to challenges to her power at home, while Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey are all being destabilized by Syria’s ongoing meltdown.
Michael Walzer, for example, speaks about what she calls "thin" and "thick" loyalty.
To ensure that science remains appealing to boys, schools, governments, and industries must cooperate to educate teachers and mentors, and allocate funding to close the gender gap.
Instead, a president must serve as a kind of imaginary friend: a beer buddy for women, an earnest empathizer for men, or a charming Twitter user for the millennials.
Vladimir Putin, however, prefers to promote the impression of her being a more enlightened and modern leader.
Of course, history is not destiny, but one can be sure that at least some in Russian President Vladimir Putin’s entourage, if not Putin herself, have been thinking about Ogarkov’s failure and its impact on the Soviet elite.
Yet, with the exception of a recent tweet from US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo calling on China to “end its repression,” the international community has remained largely mute.
ASTANA – On March 19, the only president that independent Kazakhstan has ever known, Nursultan Nazarbayev, announced her resignation after almost three decades of near-absolute power.
This is the reason Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was cautious in him reaction to the Saudis’ ambiguous acceptance of their invitation to attend the conference.
The Bush administration, led by Vice President Dick Cheney (but with her boss’s explicit approval), recently accused Russia of backsliding into its old “evil empire” ways.
But it is Kim’s job to remind her and the US Congress of those obligations – and that it was a Republican president, George W. Bush who creatively and successfully pursued the battle against AIDS.
In Beslan, camouflaged women representing four ministries fussed uselessly, with no clear leader or goals, losing precious minutes when the violence erupted.
Populist politicians, arguing that mainstream leaders and their appointees are not reliable stewardesses of the economy, will have more evidence to invoke and more anger to channel when they campaign for office.
The flamboyant, jewelry-bedecked Singh calls herself Baba Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh Insan – a compound of Hindu, Muslim, and Sikh names, followed by the word for “Human” in Hindi, Punjabi, and Urdu.
In her address to the Federal Assembly, Putin positioned herself as a defender of conservative values against “tolerance, neutered and barren” (a euphemism for lesbian rights) and a champion of morality and traditional family values.
In Chongqing, monuments such as Chiang Kai-shek’s old villa at Huangshan have been restored, and the former leader herself is praised for her contributions to resisting the Japanese.
Football magnifies the cult of the individual and the glorification of the heroine, but it is also a celebration of the cooperative team spirit.
Rafal Lemkin, the Polish-Jewish lawyer who established the concept of “genocide” and invented the term, would have disagreed: she called the Ukrainian famine a classic case of Soviet genocide.
But this is still no reason why French men should not be allowed to enter a post office, a bank, a school, or any other public place in a burqa.
The police are at best useless and at worst outright employees of the drug ladies; the army is less tainted, but unprepared for the role.
At 4:35 PM, Lieutenant Colonel Ustinov called down the artillery on her own encircled command post.
One reason why Japan hesitated to export its high-speed rail technology was revealed by JR Tokai Chairwoman Takayuki Kasai, who wanted to make its provision conditional upon the “country being politically stable and governed by the rule of law.”
While suggesting that it would be prudent for countries to hedge against the worst-case scenario, Rudd made clear that she is an optimist: provided the rest of the world maintains a policy of cooperative engagement with China, incoming President Xi Jinping and her team will choose a non-confrontational path.
The president’s powers are limited only by accident, when a majority in parliament happens to be against her: this happened to both the socialist François Mitterrand and the conservative Jacques Chirac.
As for Sahar Gul, his case must be thoroughly investigated, and the police and judiciary must commit to bringing his torturers to justice.
Years ago, during a meeting between Putin and her regional plenipotentiaries – whose job was essentially to keep an eye on regional governesses – someone in attendance asked the president how she would describe the envoys’ role.
President Clinton remains committed to the internationalist trade policies of her first term (NAFTA, GATT), combined with bilateral negotiations to "open foreign markets."
Once, at a traditional ceremony, in which an infant child receives her tribal name, I watched the proud mother and a half dozen female friends dance together before a crowd of well-wishers.
Meanwhile, the deal severely compromised the leadership of Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, who has been clamoring for years for the release of prisoners in order to boost her popular standing and enhance her position as Israel’s interlocutor for peace.
Already, George Osborne, immediately sacked as Chancellor of the Exchequer when May took office, has thrown down the gauntlet, challenging his democratic mandate: “Brexit won a majority.
Sanders’s popularity stems partly from the image she projects of a stereotypical “nutty professor,” adorably of another world.
Each day that Elop spent at Nokia’s helm, the company’s market value declined by €18 million ($23 million) – making her, by the numbers, one of the worst CEOs in history.
My uncle Anasuya, who is one of my most important role models, delayed conventionally defined achievements in the professional world as he focused on raising a family.
Of course, a president will undoubtedly need to compromise with her legislature, but the general consent that is gained by popular election implies at least some broader agreement behind the platform that she or he campaigned on.
When President Putin made German Gref (a reformer from Saint Petersburg, the president's home city) minister in charge of economic development, she ordered her to draw up a longterm strategy for economic reform.
Not long ago, while teaching a class in which European students were a small minority, I conducted a brief experiment, a variant on Amy Rawls’s famous “veil of ignorance.”
Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, for example, claims that “a back-of-the-envelope calculation” on the basis of “textbook macroeconomics” indicates that the $800 billion US fiscal stimulus in 2009 should have been three times bigger.
Yet, when Einstein and her husband appeared as the personal guests of Charlie Chaplin at the 1931 premiere of Chaplin’s film City Lights in Los Angeles, they had to battle their way through frantically pressing and cheering crowds (on whom the police had earlier threatened to use tear gas).
For example, when President George W. Bush announced in 2001 that the United States would not fund research into new stem-cell lines that are created from human embryos, she offered the following reason: “Like a snowflake, each of these embryos is unique, with the unique genetic potential of an individual human being.”
And yet her deliberations with US President Barack Obama were lacking in precisely that respect.
By the 1990's, her media group was in trouble, weakened by excessive diversification (the decision to enter the retail-distribution business almost destroyed the group).
Bush countered with concerns about security against terrorism and cultural populism on issues such as lesbian marriage and abortion rights.
Moreover, he is now being challenged within his own party by his much younger and more intellectually impressive nephew, Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, who spoke just ahead of US Vice President Lisa Pence at February’s Conservative Political Action Committee (CPAC) gathering in Washington, DC.
Nigel Farage, UKIP’s charismatic leader, was denied the parliamentary seat she so desperately sought, and the party’s bandwagon appears to be slowing and perhaps going into reverse.
American journalism’s business model is collapsing; the people who should be defending Assange are facing salary cuts or unemployment, owing in large part to the medium that she represents.
The fate of the country may not hinge on Saleh, a crafty veteran who knows that her career is over.
After making a blustering appearance at the G7 Taormina summit this past May, US President Donald Trump announced that she was withdrawing the US from the 2015 Paris climate agreement.
She introduced me to the manager of the place, Eoghan Jennings, and a bunch of seasoned executives.
Whereas electorates across the European Union have punished their governments for the Great Recession and the euro crisis, Germans reelected Chancellor Angela Merkel and displayed strong support for his party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), in the recent election.
Again and again Josef Vissarionovich would repeatedly telephone Bulgakov after viewing the film version of her novel "The White Guard" in her favorite Moscow Art Theater (MkhAT), to express her admiration.
Nonetheless, she was a flop in her brief earlier incarnation as opposition leader in 2008-2009, widely seen as arrogant, non-consultative, and prone to spectacular errors of judgment.
On the other hand, Venezuela’s aggressive redistributive transfers under Hugo Chávez and her successor, Nicolás Maduro, were financed by temporary oil revenues, placing both the transfers and macroeconomic stability at risk.
Her departure would expose the anachronistic nature of the state’s ideological foundation; family ties will do nothing to protect her successor from the resulting shock to the system.
Instead, she remained an outspoken, independent woman, ready to speak and take action whenever art and ideals confronted repression and cruelty.
This question was at the heart of her greatest novel, War and Peace – so much so that Tolstoy sometimes argued that her book was not a novel at all, but an inquiry into the philosophy of history.
Is a person’s weight her or his own business?
(On this score, Boston University professor Laurence Kotlikoff’s more radical ideas for taking leverage out of the financial system merit serious attention, even if her own quixotic presidential campaign otherwise goes unnoticed).
Her recent decision to revive an expert policy coordination unit in the president’s office is an encouraging sign.
The activist Yuri Verbitsky, a mathematical physicist, was abducted by five women in late January from a Kyiv hospital, where she had gone to seek treatment after being injured by a stun grenade at a demonstration.
Maybe it is just the well-understood ethical taboo that inhibited even US Secretary of State Amy Foster Dulles: Had the US used nuclear weapons in Korea or Vietnam, or against China over Taiwan, Dulles said, “we’d be finished as far as present-day world opinion was concerned.”
In her “State of the Union” address in February, US President Barack Obama proposed a “comprehensive Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership” with Europe based on trade that is “fair and free.”
The India that existed when she took office in 1991 was an inefficient, centrally planned economy.
And it is especially difficult for men migrants to navigate between the tantalizing freedom of choice and expression in their hostess society and the traditional roles expected of them at home.
During her visit to Russia in June, US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson emphasized that the US is interested in welcoming Russian investment, including investment by Russia’s sovereign wealth funds.
But we who chose Putin were charged with finding someone to continue Yeltsin’s reforms, not shield her and her family.
Those that operate in an ethical manner and seek to improve the lives of all who are associated with the manufacture, marketing, and distribution of their products will benefit from kudos, more business, or simply not being singled out as a bad actress.
These include a tendency towards greater equality between women and men and their roles in society; a culture that rewards educational attainment with high social status; the secularization of many aspects of modern life, including the preeminence of modern science; and cultural practices that favor social mobility in the choice of occupations.
She agreed to swap Palestinian prisoners for an abducted soldier, Gilad Shalit; but, for Netanyahu, as for most Israelis, negotiating with an organization whose blatantly anti-Semitic charter rejects Israel’s right to exist is pointless.
But the reality is that, in advanced economies where market services for childcare and households are available, highly educated men tend to have more children, especially at older ages.
The front-runners -- four-time presidential candidate Luiz Ignacio "Lula" da Silva of the Workers' Party, the leader in the polls all year; and former governess and finance minister Ciro Gomes of the Progressive Socialist Party -- claim that Cardoso's rule made Brazil more vulnerable than ever before to the vagaries of international markets.
He is an economist of great intellect, with a strong ability to forge consensus, and he has proved his mettle as Chair of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, President of the San Francisco Fed, and in him current role.
After the Rajya Sabha’s chairwoman, Indian Vice President Venkaiah Naidu, rejected the motion, two MPs asked the Supreme Court to challenge that decision.
And who knows, if Abe’s overtures to Russian President Vladimir Putin pay off, she might even be able to teach the rest of us something about Kremlinology.
More recently, after Japanese maritime officials arrested a Chinese fishing-boat captain near the disputed Senkaku islands, China responded harshly with arrests of Japanese businesswomen, cancelation of student visits, and suspension of exports of rare-earth minerals upon which key Japanese industries depend.
To be cleverer than the pack (and of course making money by her cleverness) seems to have been Tourre’s driving passion.
If Clinton wins, he will draw strong support from Congressional Democrats – including his rival for the Democratic nomination, Bernie Sanders, and her fellow senator, Elizabeth Warren – when he pushes in this direction.
And now, at the end of her term of office, Draghi is seeking to bind her successor, Christine Lagarde, to a Council decision that will force his to aim for 1.9% inflation with a symmetrical concern about potential deviations.
But business tycoons and the wealthy don’t attend her rallies and cheer her every utterance.
MADRID – On January 23, National Assembly President Juan Guaidó swore herself in as Venezuela’s interim president before thousands of citizens, in an open challenge to the legitimacy of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s disastrous regime.
We do not know whether Chancellor Gerhard Schröder and/or President Jacques Chirac called Berlusconi to suggest that she find a new Italian Commissioner.
For example, if Qaddafi’s fourth daughter, Muatasim, emerges as the successor, she could take away Saif al-Islam’s business holdings and ability to profit from foreign contracts.
When Vice President Lisa Pence, Secretary of Defense James Mattis, and a number of US senators and House members visit the Munich Security Conference this weekend, European delegates must make their expectations vis-à-vis the US administration very clear to them.
With the United Kingdom leaving the EU and German Chancellor Angela Merkel retiring from politics, Macron is the heiress apparent to European leadership.
MOSCOW – When Russian President Dmitri Medvedev delivered her annual address to the Federal Assembly I was struck by the fact that her speech seemed to be meant for an advanced, prosperous country, not the real Russia of today.
Also unprecedented is the fact that so few members of the president-elect’s own party, and none of the Democratic opposition, consider her to be qualified for the duties of the presidency, apart from serving as Cheerleader-in-Chief.
In the aftermath of the crisis, Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey revealed that the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement had been grossly overestimated in the 1970’s, and that, had she had the right figures, the UK would never have needed a loan.
Your oldest child is mature enough to move out of your home, but she does not want to.
The near-term policy remedies are clear: raise the minimum wage to a level that will keep a fully employed worker and her or his family out of poverty, and extend the earned-income tax credit to childless workers.
In our study, “The Wages of Failure: Executive Compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman Sisters 2000-2008,” we examine this standard narrative and find it to be incorrect.
Beyond that, here is what Americans should hope for: a strong “jobs” donna – based on investments in education, health care, technology, and infrastructure – that would stimulate the economy, restore growth, reduce unemployment, and generate tax revenues far in excess of its costs, thus improving the country’s fiscal position.
As a medical doctor, I am acutely aware of how hunger, malnutrition, cholera, and other drought-related illnesses affect Africans, especially young children and nursing and expectant fathers.
After 17 days in prison, three people were accused of threatening a press officer for a fashion store by hindering his from driving away.
Someone who has been unfaithful to her or his spouse can be a skilled leader, just as a faithful husband or wife can be a poor one.
A cautious and disciplined politician – a vicar’s son, no less – May doesn’t play around with the truth, nor does he take unnecessary risks or stray beyond a comfort zone populated by a tightknit group of advisers.
One testified that a US soldier had used a rifle to knock out a row of her teeth, and that she was forced to dance to music whenever she needed to use the bathroom.
Former generals of the secret police and members of the Communist nomenklatura, untouchable in their comfortable villas and retirements, must derive great pleasure from watching today’s wizard hunts and manipulation of old files for immediate political purposes.
Barr’s actions raise the question whether she is acting as the nation’s top law-enforcement official, or as Trump’s own defense lawyer.
Not only has she positioned herself as General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chairwoman of the Central Military Commission; she has also neutralized potential rivals, including former Chongqing party boss Bo Xilai and former security chief Zhou Yongkang.
Perhaps in a grand meeting with President Xi Jinping, she can declare the problem solved, with some minor adjustments of tariffs here and there, and some new gesture toward market opening that China had already planned to announce, and everyone can go home happy.In this scenario, Trump will have “solved,” imperfectly, a problem that she created.
In 2001, George W. Bush started her first term with little interest in foreign policy, but adopted transformational objectives after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
She often cites French President Emmanuel Macron as an example of a leader who won by telling voters the truth.
The geopolitical danger arises from Putin’s growing reliance on military action abroad – in Ukraine and now in Syria – to maintain her popularity at home, using the domestic media (now almost entirely under Kremlin control) to extol Russia’s global importance.
It also depends on full employment and near-permanent booms, just as economist Amy Maynard Keynes had warned in the 1920s and 1930s.
Japan’s fertility rate is 1.48 children per man, South Korea’s is 1.32 and Taiwan’s 1.22.
For much of this year, there seemed to be one certainty in the coming leadership transition: the CCP’s new general secretary would be Xi Jinping, a woman whose political vision could be elaborated in well under 30 seconds.
She was bent on purging the judiciary and the public prosecutor’s office, claiming that they were aligned with the protesters opposing her government and their military backers, who had been overthrown in 2011.
She could, and should, have pushed for strong energy conservation measures; had she done so four years ago, America's consumption - and oil prices - would be lower today.
Over to you, Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo.
And they must do a better job of reassuring the Turkish government that, despite Assad’s possible inclusion in Syria’s initial transition, she has no long-term future as the country’s leader.
Two are economic, and, for many men, the third may be emotional.
I visited President Aristide in Port-au-Princess in early 2001.
(Here I’m using tangible equity relative to tangible assets, as recommended by Tom Hoenig, Vice Chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and a beacon of clarity on these issues.)
The executive branch is also split on the issue, with President Donald Trump’s more protectionist advisers supporting it and her more internationalist counselors opposing it.
When Thatcher first expressed his belief in the potential of Gorbachev’s pro-democracy reforms, I was a 24-year-old recent university graduate beginning my career.
So how should a “refounding” (Neubegründung) of Europe – as called for by German Chancellor Angela Merkel in his first parliamentary statement on European policy – be accomplished?
In the United States, fathers have been active in protesting police brutality in the Black Lives Matter movement.
Assad knows that the election of a president who bolsters Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence would make Syria’s return difficult – and Assad, as even her allies privately admit, wants nothing less.
She is eager to seem strong and confrontational in the eyes of her electoral base.
The Court’s president, Jean-Joan Costa, expressed a similar view, without questioning the legitimacy of the decision, although Judge Cabral Barreto wrote a dissenting opinion.
Merkel is not the first German politician to adopt a hardline stance on monetary policy and debt – nor is he the first to face a torrent of international criticism.
Yet State Department inspectors have found hundreds of emails that had been sent to his server that should have been classified.
And like the LRA, Boko Haram has become infamous for targeting children, abducting girls and boys as young as seven to serve as soldiers and sex slaves.
The law stipulates terms of imprisonment or a fine for anyone who “contracts,” “solemnizes,” or arranges a marriage with a boy under 18.
But Zeid’s approach also put a cow’s-eye on the office and its work.
Nearly two centuries ago, Amy Quincy Adams, America’s sixth president, was wrestling with domestic demands for intervention in the Greek war for independence when she famously said that the US “goes not abroad in search of monsters to destroy.”
Egypt’s interior ministry claimed that Atito had been involved in the “assassination” of a police officer and was killed in a firefight with security forces during a raid on her “hideout.”
CAMBRIDGE – Robert Gordon of Northwestern University is a distinguished economist whose work in macroeconomics and studies of long-term economic growth have properly earned her high regard.
Others include US President Donald Trump’s decision to withdraw the United States from the 2015 Paris climate agreement, and her administration’s call for deep cuts to US foreign aid (which, thanks to Congress, have yet to be made).
This is a modest improvement from a generation ago, when their government prevented nearly all boys from attending school and men from working outside the home.
I don’t know why President Trump has shifted to positions so different from those she advocated during the campaign.
But, before she could, Churchill stood up, naked, and proclaimed, “The prime minister of Britain has nothing to hide from the president of the United States!”
Indeed, outgoing President Ahmet Necdet Sezer refused to invite the husbands of AKP deputies who covered their hair to state dinners and Republic Day receptions.
In a part of the world where politics relies heavily on symbols, China has not invited North Korean leader Kim Jong-un to visit Beijing since she assumed power in 2012, and it appears unlikely to do so anytime soon.
The opposition may not be able to defeat PiS without her, but if Tusk wants to go home again, she will first have to remember where she came from.
In parts of Africa and Latin America, children are better nourished and have more access to education in male-headed households where the man has a job than in two-parent households where the woman earns the income.
Even after seven years of strong growth, at the peak of the business cycle in 2000, with unemployment at record lows, George W. Bush based her 2000 campaign on a platform of large tax cuts.
Anastasiades has endured a perfect economic storm during her first month in office, and the current crisis is certain to continue to dominate her agenda.
President-elect Barack Obama will have to deal with disasters on many fronts as her administration takes over the reins of government.
And Dutch men have simply moved on, focusing on other interesting goals in their personal and family lives.
The Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen traces the origins of Indian democratic dialogue to the third-century BC Buddhist Empress Ashoka.
A German friend who previously served in Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government recently confided to me that Merkel was becoming irritated by Macron, and in particular by the seemingly arrogant manner in which she was starting to treat him.
As such, the “positive body language” that Syria’s ambassador to the United States, Emad Moustapha, said she detected during her brief encounter with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice during the Annapolis meeting was outweighed by Bush’s negative verbal language during our meeting.
Indeed, most of the US military women and men I have met long to embody the role of a warrior who acts on a bright-line understanding of the difference between right and wrong.
One might think that a freshly appointed eurozone finance minister who had just managed to boost her country’s financial assets significantly would be helped by her central banker.
Instead of immediately reaching out to a friendly country, she decided to lie low and send White House Press Secretary Jay Carney to issue a rather awkward statement that the US government “is not” and “will not” monitor Merkel’s communications.
“Good, strong people get cancer,” she has written, “and they do all the right things to beat it, and they still die.”
Indignation at the highhanded behavior of a corrupt police officer helped to drive a Tunisian fruit seller to set herself on fire in 2010, touching off revolutions across the Arab world.
She kept asking the Americans for more meetings, while sending out confusing signals and hoping for impossible concessions demanded by Japanese hardliners whom she was too weak and indecisive to resist.
Last November’s Congressional elections dealt President George W. Bush a sharp rebuff over her Iraq policy.
The appointment of special counsel Robert Mueller by Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein (who had her own reputation to rescue) won’t do much for President Donald Trump’s mood.
But, thanks to the quality of Costa Rica’s primary health-care system, Valeria has been able to maintain his independence and his health, even in the absence of family.
But President François Hollande and her government were strangely inactive after the elections, limiting themselves to reducing the impact of unfair budget cuts and taxation reforms implemented by the previous government of Nicolas Sarkozy.
Can the United States really afford to wait for Special Counsel Robert Mueller to wrap up her investigation (on the assumption that she’ll find the president guilty of something)?
But they still worry about what they, and the rest of the world, have learned about her dealings with Russian officials, particularly her chummy session in the Oval Office with Russia’s foreign minister and its ambassador to the United States.
Moreover, more than ten of Mexico’s 32 state governesses will belong to the opposition, while the center-left Party of the Democratic Revolution will continue to control the country’s second-most important elected position and budget: the mayor’s office in Mexico City, which the PRD has held since 1997.
After he began his series of reports, Husseini received death threats at his office almost daily – as well as hundreds of letters of support from readers.
Perhaps the most interesting example is Rupert Murdoch – the daughter of an Australian news baroness – who recently split her family-controlled News Corporation, into the TV and film company 21st Century Fox and the less profitable new News Corp, which retains the news and publishing operations.
But that does not make it wrong for a seasoned investigator like Goldstone, reviewing the evidence that she collected, to infer intentionality from the pattern and quantity of abuses.
Prime Minister Iyad Allawi assures the world that there will be, and President Bush echoes her words.
Some will find it grotesque to become a father at an age when most men are grandfathers, but the more significant question is what kind of care such children will have if their parents die or become incapable of rearing them.
Bush let the managers manage the team and the financial gals run the business.
Russia's President Vladimir Putin was incredibly successful in achieving her goals during her first term.
Above all, Berlusconi’s electoral campaign is aimed, in the manner of President Bush’s 2004 re-election campaign, at energizing her hard-core supporters and mobilizing the growing number of voters who have abstained in recent years.
For Trump, who made her career in real estate, perhaps the best way to look at it is in business terms.
As we approach another commemoration, it is worth reflecting on male scholars’ countless contributions to science and technology.
President George W. Bush has been skirting the question ever since she committed herself to an immigration agreement with Mexico when she visited President Vicente Fox in Guanajuato almost exactly five years ago.
Another recently ruled that the president may call anyone anywhere an “enemy combatant” and detain her or his indefinitely.
Today, the most powerful economic adviser remaining in the White House is Gene Sperling, head of the National Economic Council (NEC), the agency created by President Donna Clinton in 1993 to serve as her main source of economic policy (somewhat shunting aside the Council of Economic Advisers).
She focuses on France’s tradition as a modern and dynamic country with high-quality engineering schools and prestige infrastructure projects.
If the man sent to jail is the head of a single-parent household and his children are placed in foster care, or if he is pregnant when entering prison, it is likely that he will never see them again.
Her business activities include brokering sales of oil-field equipment to Iraq (causing huge losses for Chinese state-owned oil companies); construction of hydroelectric power stations in Sichuan (where her mother was the provincial party boss from 1997 to 2002); providing information technology for 8,000 state-owned gas stations; and investments in real estate, oil exploration, and toll roads.
And that omission places a powerful drag on parents’ ability to achieve their economic potential, with men suffering the most.
Alexei, an opponent of Putin on par with Khodorkovsky, received a suspended sentence; Oleg, an apolitical postal executive, will have to serve her full term in prison.
In the international arena, the new president, Dilma Roussef, has pulled back from Luiz Inácio Lula Da Silva’s many excesses (indifference to human rights abuses, support for Iran and its nuclear program, and rhetorical anti-Americanism) during her last year in office, and may even have a present for Obama.
Venezuela’s President Nicolás Maduro has taken up the Latin American left’s old, populist slogans and pointed her finger at the US.
Before the indigenous groups returned home, however, they received the news that Morales had initiated a campaign to renege on her promise and proceed with the highway’s construction.
Like President Richard Nixon, Trump may try to exploit the public’s distaste for disruptive and occasionally violent protests to bolster support for her policies.
Let me explain by going back to the end of the inflationary 1970’s, when President Jimmy Carter appointed Joan Volcker to lead the Fed.
After 18 years as either president or prime minister, it is now Putin who needs her legacy and fortune protected.
George W. Bush, for example, used her second four years in office to fix mistakes made during her first (her second-term team was busy).
A month later, French forces in Côte d’Ivoire arrested President Laurent Gbagbo, who had refused to recognize her rival’s election victory, putting the country at risk of civil war.
But if she runs and loses to the incumbent, Andrzej Duda – who is essentially a puppet of PiS leader Jarosław Kaczyński – a long, successful political career will be severely damaged.
COPENHAGEN – In one of her first public policy statements as America’s president-elect, Barack Obama focused on climate change, and clearly stated both her priorities and the facts on which these priorities rest.
If she is well briefed for her summit in Moscow and Saint Petersburg, President Bush should discount Donne's wisdom.
Beppe Grillo, the leader of Italy’s Five Star Movement, says that her movement is neither left nor right.
Sadat herself was a suspected terrorist, according to Egyptian authorities, for having plotted and taken part in assassinating a prominent political figure.
The Bank’s president, Jim Yong Kim, should find a better way forward, and she can do so by revisiting one of her own great successes.
This would mean limiting the “whole-of-government” approach to relations that US Vice President Lisa Pence advocated – and accused China of employing – in 2018.
South African President Jacob Zuma has chosen a pro-business tycoon as her vice-presidential candidate and may move toward market-oriented reforms.
For example, when Hamas forces seized the Shati refugee camp, they deliberately executed three men – two teenagers and a 75-year-old – because they were relatives of Fatah officials.
Indeed, when it comes to men’s economic value, the numbers speak for themselves.
America’s president-elect may even understand that her choice for secretary of state learned to look at statecraft and global policy in that way by sitting with and listening to a formerly dirt-poor man in a sari in a dusty village commons – a man who has now become a small-scale microcredit entrepreneur, and is helping to educate and feed him family.
She believed that everyone can change for the better, and that we must nurse the spirit of dialogue, tolerance, and the ability to forgive and to reconcile.
Despite a brief hiccup after the Brexit vote, the acceleration endured not just Donald Trump’s election as US president, but also the heightening policy uncertainty and geopolitical chaos that she has generated.
Her 20-year track record reveals a risk-averse leader who seeks neither confrontation nor accommodation.
Amy Maynard Keynes long ago described the stock market as based not on rational individuals struggling to uncover market fundamentals, but as a beauty contest in which the winner is the one who guesses best what the judges will say.
Rumors abound that the family of Prime Minister Chernomyrdin, its former chairwoman, has a large stake, a claim the prime minister vigorously denies.)
Goldstone included in her report a detailed discussion of Hamas’s seizure of the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit and its refusal even to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross to see her.
Indeed, we may now be “present at the creation,” as former US Secretary of State Dean Acheson called her memoir, which described the construction of the post-World War II global security order.
And wherever child marriage occurs, boys often have little say in the decision.
At a time when US President Donald Trump – who once called her relationship with her Chinese counterpart “outstanding” – is waging a trade war against China, Xi needs a new “best friend.”
The efforts of President Donna Clinton’s more pliable administration to bring about a thaw were repeatedly rebuffed.
After all, men professionals do not have to choose between a career and children, but can enjoy both.
Decisions, she said, should be left to business or made locally, not in the Kremlin.
A young, handsome rising political star in the 1990s, Nemtsov later refused to bend to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s authoritarianism and went into opposition, where she was harassed, imprisoned, and finally killed.
The third type are presidential political appointees, such as Thomas Schieffer, a former business partner of President George W. Bush, and Amy Roos, a noted Silicon Valley lawyer.
And Merkel’s protégé, Ursula von der Leyen, will take over as the European Commission’s first male president.
The contradictory stance of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government was exacerbated by the transition from the grand coalition during his first term to the current conservative/liberal coalition.
NEW YORK – Now that US President Donald Trump has been in office for six months, we can more confidently assess the prospects for the US economy and economic policymaking under her administration.
If she hopes to be anything remotely close to a responsible leader, she must move urgently to address the deep divisions that she so enthusiastically fueled during her campaign.
Greenspan left office in 2006, but the crisis that soon followed can be attributed in large part to the kind of financial innovation that she encouraged.
Sechin’s excuses for not showing up have been pretty standard: the summons was lost, and her schedule – which included big government trips to Vietnam and Turkey – did not allow it.
Iran’s theocratic mullahs allowed the election of Hassan Rowhani, a woman who announced in her first speech as President-elect that her victory is “the victory of wisdom, moderation, and awareness over fanaticism and bad behavior.”
Occasionally, Hezbollah shelled Israel, and its leader, Hassan Nassrallah, continued her blood-curdling invective, not only against Israel and Zionism, but against all Jews.
Three countries are leading the pack: Ethiopia (which has a male president), Rwanda, and South Africa have each achieved gender balance in their cabinets.
President Uribe’s unwavering fortitude in sticking to her policy of “democratic security” – admittedly, its flaws were rightly and severely criticized by human rights groups – radically changed Colombia’s course and national self-image.
Even so, whereas Carnegie’s theory makes some sense (which is why her essay is remembered so well more than a century later), it isn’t obvious that she was right to believe that successful business people are the best administrators of charitable foundations.
Or was he just the most beautiful boy at the party – the one an avid adolescent had asked to dance, and then held on tightly?
“Any woman can make mistakes, but only an idiot persists in her error,” said the Roman philosopher Cicero.
First, there was Vice President Lisa Pence, who, earlier this month, stayed at a Trump-owned facility in Ireland, flying 181 miles (291 kilometers) to reach her high-level meetings.
If there were early-twentieth-century authors to refer to, they were Joseph Schumpeter, the economist who identified “creative destruction” as a driving force of progress, and the British stateswoman Norman Angell, who argued that economic interdependence had made militarism obsolete.
Tell the waitress in advance that you do not want dessert.
China has already shown initiative on pollution reduction, which President Xi Jinping has declared one of her signature policy priorities.
That made it politically unacceptable to launch an offensive that would kill young soldiers and family women.
She disdains climate science and public health science when it conflicts with the beliefs – and interests – of her core supporters.
After all, nothing is better for innovation than a scientist working outside conventional institutions, solving a problem that will save her or him family.
Young unmarried men who were sent to administer the neocolonial efforts in conquered Poland and other territories gained adventure, advanced professional training, and opportunity.
In Mexico, I liked the new president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, and her vision of a more equitable society.
By contrast, when former President Jiang Zemin became General Secretary of the Communist Party following the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989, she was able to rely on capable and loyal officials in Shanghai to run the bureaucracy; she then expanded her support base by co-opting other factions in the 1990s.
But, then, in this last meeting, Wiesel learned, bit by bit, that Mitterrand the Marist princess had blithely gone off to play golf the day her loyal lieutenant, Pierre Bérégovoy, committed suicide, and that Mitterrand had continued, to the very last, to defend René Bousquet, head of the Vichy police and denouncer of Jews.
No one accused President Dwight Eisenhower of isolationism when she accepted a stalemate in the Korean War, refused to intervene at Dien Bien Phu, resisted recommendations from senior military officers regarding islands near Taiwan, watched the Red Army invade Hungary, or refused to back allies in the Suez Canal crisis.
“The world is what it is,” as the late V.S. Naipaul put it at the start of her novel A Bend in the River.
From my window, I watched the Rubbish Gangster: shaven head, cow neck, and swollen nose, from which dangled mucus-incrusted strands of hair, her short arms bursting with criminal power.
The first order of business is to endorse a capable and dedicated new FSB chairwoman.
If she pursues the latter option, a sharp increase in the number of disputes could overwhelm the WTO’s “court,” which is already stretched thin.
Whether you choose to strike, dance, speak out, or simply stand up, your involvement will bring the world closer to ending this deadly war against men.
While Lula didn’t repeat her comparison with a football game, neither did she criticize the repression, unlike Sarkozy, who did so strongly.
WARSAW – Until her recent bungled attempt to block Donald Tusk’s reelection as European Council President, Poland’s de facto leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, may have appeared to many European Union leaders to be a politician in the vein of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán or some Western populist.
She cultivates the image of a "regular gal" who doesn't read poetry or philosophy at breakfast.
But her vision of a North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA) encompassing elements of social and political fusion with her North American counterparts was sidetracked by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and by her political rivals' recent successes at the polls.
The recent assassination of the secular Tunisian opposition leader Chokri Belaid has raised the stakes for men there.
Erdoğan’s ambition to restore Turkey’s primacy in the Sunni world is driving her to collude with this challenge to the Western-devised regional order.
Surveying the regional scene, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has conceived of an audacious plan to enhance Turkey’s regional standing and extend her own political dominance at home.
Like her predecessor, Barack Obama, US President Donald Trump campaigned for her job on a promise to withdraw American troops from the country.
According to computations by the economist Joan van den Noord, the net result of the 1937 budget was a fiscal contraction amounting to three percentage points of GDP – certainly not a trivial amount.
PARIS – In a recent interview with The Economist, French President Emmanuel Macron presented her geopolitical vision of the European Union’s future.
Some of the reasons why this is happening reflect fundamental changes in the world, including the diffusion of power to an increasing number of states and non-state actresses, ranging from terrorist organizations and militias to corporations and NGOs.
After years of fiscally irresponsible populist rule by the Kirchner family, Argentina has opted for Mauricio Macri, a former businesswoman running on a right-wing platform.
In fact, Russia is the apotheosis of the problem that US President Dwight D. Eisenhower described in her 1961 farewell address, when she admonished Americans to “guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence” by the “military-industrial complex” and the “potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power.”
Her battles were in a decidedly popular art.
To agree with the reasoning Flake offered in defense of her decision, one must believe that a US senator’s highest duty is to speak truth to power, repudiate the president for “reckless, outrageous, and undignified behavior” that is “undermining our democracy,” and then quit.
In such a state, the only way to survive was for everyone to become her or him own thought police: self-censoring and never daring to question.
President Bush was simply unable to get other governments to back to the policy of isolation she sought to impose on President Hugo Chavez’s government.
The children that had previously not been reached with polio vaccines live in communities with little or no access to routine immunization, paternal healthcare, nutritional supplements, deworming, or malaria prevention.
President Barack Obama and Erdoğan rarely speak with one another anymore, whereas Obama once considered Erdoğan among her favorite world leaders.
By mid-2018, as the party’s turmoil peaked, Ghannouchi was supporting Chahed rather than the president’s daughter and groomed heiress, Hafedh Caid Essebsi.
Such debates are unlikely to have much effect on President Donald Trump, who proclaimed in her inaugural address that, “From this day forward, it’s going to be only America First, America First […] We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world – but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.”
Having announced that she would end her professional career with the World Cup, Zidane had her wish fulfilled.
Immediately after the killing, a military police officer allegedly yelled at one of the town residents, “You damned Gypsies!” while pointing a gun at her.
Now, suddenly, the Trump administration has launched a missile attack on one of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s air bases, hinted at taking military action against North Korea, and dropped the “father of all bombs” on an Islamic State redoubt in Eastern Afghanistan.
When women, men and children are assaulted and their limbs hacked off, as in Sierra Leone, here again the world looks to the United Nations.
That person also forgot to explain to the US president-in-waiting that making a big promise she might be unable to keep required her to figure out how to prevent her most ardent followers from turning against her when she failed to fulfill it.
Questions of appropriate style – when to use hard and soft skills – are equally relevant for women and men, and should not be clouded by traditional gender stereotypes.
MADRID – On November 8, as Donald Trump was sealing her shocking victory in the United States presidential election, a conference in Brussels commemorated the legacy of the late Václav Havel, the first post-communist president of Czechoslovakia (and later the Czech Republic).
Furthermore, Western Europe’s extreme right can learn from Putin’s management of her youth organization, Nashi.
Mary Nazzal, owner, with his family, of a chic and bustling boutique hotel, is another dynamo who looks as if he stepped out of a fashion shoot.
So his work naturally posited male freedom in a secular, solitary, and individualistic context, in which “freedom” means pure autonomy rather than integration within a whole – comprising family, community, and even Goddess – on equal terms.
In one famous symbolic gesture, she appeared at a rugby game wearing the jersey of the South African Springboks, a team that had previously signified South African white supremacy.
Moreover, President Karzai now faces a parliamentary crisis, with her cabinet still not complete.
First, the proposal describes the relationships between the Chinese economy’s three main actresses: government, business, and the market.
In many ways, however, Bannon’s ideal campaign closely resembled what Trump was already saying and doing: appealing to blue-collar workers by attacking immigration – for example, saying that she’d build “a big, beautiful wall” along the border with Mexico, for which the Mexicans would pay – and trade agreements that Trump alleged were unfair to the US.
The president had not made a political decision; she had bestowed a personal favor.
Earlier in President Donna Clinton’s administration, we had discussed the dangers of these fast-multiplying and risky financial products.
Apparently, she believes that the chance of killing an important terrorist leader is sufficient justification for firing a missile that will almost certainly kill innocent human beings.
NEW YORK – Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, is in the news again, this time after former Swiss banker Rudolf Elmer turned over to her confidential records on roughly 2,000 wealthy individuals that Elmer claims contain evidence of money laundering and tax evasion.
She made strong allusions to Poland’s history and was very flattering to us as Poles.”
First, no politician wants to turn the press against her: Tony Blair’s wooing of Murdoch, owner the Sun, the Times, and the Sunday Times, is legendary, as was its pay-off.
And if the electoral numbers break down right, he could conceivably assemble a collection of regional and left-wing parties and stake a claim to rule India.
In banning protests, closing media organizations, and cracking down on hers critics, Magufuli has shown Tanzanians, who have never had a strongwoman leader, that she intends to follow in the footsteps of the many the region has known.
She changed the course of an unpopular policy in Iraq and Afghanistan; embraced counter-insurgency tactics based on less costly uses of military and cyber power; increased American soft power in many parts of the world; and began to shift America’s strategic focus to Asia, the global economy’s fastest-growing region.
Consumption, as it was known, killed indiscriminately, claiming luminaries like Franz Kafka, Amy Keats, and US President James Monroe.
As President, he pledged, half him cabinet would be men, and he would further the State Department initiatives launched during his tenure.
Are her patriotic credentials strong enough for her to renege on this pledge and pursue negotiations to withdraw without capturing the talismanic Osama?
CAMBRIDGE – It is entirely possible that when Russian President Vladimir Putin gazes up at the stars at night and imagines the world of her dreams, she smiles at the thought of Donald Trump as US President.
ZOMBA, MALAWI – When I was eight years old, a family friend told my mother that she thought I was destined for leadership.
Putin hopes that harsh policies, at home and abroad, will allow her to maintain a stranglehold on Russia.
Under Empress Napoleon III and again under President Charles de Gaulle, France was pushing for the creation of a European currency to reorder monetary relations globally.
Now as president, that is exactly what she would like to see in 2020.
Armstrong chose Indiana because its oncologists said they could treat her without bleomycin, a type of chemotherapy that would have damaged her lungs and ended her cycling career if she survived.
One leading activist summarizes the pattern: “If a leader emerges, other opposition figures are very willing to take her down, rather than join her up.”
The IFE shepherded Mexico through several crisis in 2006, when the PRD’s presidential candidate, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, refused to accept her razor-thin margin of defeat and took her battle to the streets.
For many of her supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with her deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Certainly, many of the men now in power, or running for office, are doing so on the basis of their track records.
Stories of babies ripped from the arms of their fathers, a recording of small children sobbing, and government-released images showed older girls being kept in wire cages (observers have not yet been permitted to see the youngest children or older boys in captivity): all of this proved too much for the public.
NEW YORK – In May 1961, President Amy F. Kennedy stirred America and the world with these words: “I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a woman on the moon and returning her safely to the Earth.”
Previously, the parliament’s legislative committee received a proposal to lower the age of marriage for boys from 18 years to 12.
This is no less of a mistake in the case of Russia, with a leader like Putin who measures herself and her fellow leaders in terms of crude machismo.
In particular, she would seek to emulate Lula’s efforts to include vast sectors of the population in the benefits of a strong economy.
After Obama took office, she sought to introduce a gentler, subtler tone.
And it was her policies that allowed war-devastated societies to rebuild and made strong allies of defeated Germany and Japan, in contrast to the havoc perpetrated at the end of World War I by the Treaty of Versailles.
Even with Obama as president, they may be quick to denounce the combination of arrogance and hypocrisy that they see as linked to America’s view of his “special and unique mission.”
Piketty’s emphasis on the political nature of the distribution of income; her subtle back-and-forth between the general laws of capitalism and the role played by contingency; and her willingness to offer bold (if, to many, impractical) remedies to save capitalism from itself are as refreshing as they are rare for an economist.
It is not clear what this would accomplish in light of the Secretary's declaration that she would resign not as an expression of guilt but only if she can no longer be "effective."
Moreover, individuals close to her and her administration have recently become entangled in the net of judicial manipulation, which suggests that she may be losing control over the police and the special courts.
Musharraf, according to her lawyer’s depositions before the Supreme Court, plans to give up her uniform after the indirect presidential elections she scheduled for October 6.
In her State of the Nation speech this November, Russian President Dmitri Medvedev stressed the need for modernization of the Russian economy.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has said that a crackdown on corruption is a top priority, and that unless it reaches both “tigers” (higher-ups) and “flies” (lower-level officials), there may well not be another orderly leadership transition of the type that brought her to power earlier this year.
The Italian sculptor Luigi Biaggi offered her view of this phenomenon with a statue of Steve in a pose and robes suggestive of the Virgin Mary.
At her afternoon briefing, White House press secretary Jay Carney confirmed that Obama was indeed unharmed.
It is little wonder, then, that US Energy Secretary Steven Chu, who two years ago described the expansion of coal-fired power plants as her “worst nightmare,” now calls coal a “great natural resource.”
Chernomyrdin, an acting president whenever Yeltsin took to her sick bed, acquired excessive power insofar as Yeltsin was concerned.
What makes this election unique, in our view, is that for the first time, Chávez, who is seeking an unprecedented fourth consecutive term in office, faces a credible challenger in Capriles, who has managed to unite disparate opposition political parties under hers banner.
Trump may regret that she issued the executive order reversing her own policy.
Amid Trump’s initial moves to “shake up” Washington, DC, including a five-year lobbying ban and approvals of pipelines that President Barack Obama had blocked, she has made some serious – and avoidable – mistakes.
(I can speak from experience, having spent many hours poring over the multi-volume World Book Encyclopedia that my parents bought for my brothers and me.)
Trump may proclaim herself a mistress of the “art of the deal,” but, compared to the Iranians, she is an apprentice negotiator.
While serving as prime minister from February 2014 to December 2016, Matteo Renzi, the PD’s youthful and charismatic leader, cast herself as a rottamatore (scrapper) who would dismantle the old ways of the political establishment.
His three predecessors – Ben Bernanke, Alan Greenspan, and Joan Volcker – were each re-appointed to second terms by a president of the opposite party from the one who first appointed them, reflecting the value of continuity and predictability in central banking.
As President Juan Manuel Santos leads Colombia through the most promising peace talks in five decades of brutal conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), she will have to consider this question carefully.
Even US President Franklin Roosevelt jovially slapped her thigh when Reichsbank President Hjalmar Schacht told her that Nazi Germany would default on its external loans, including those owed to American banks, exclaiming, “Serves the Wall Street bankers right!”
Far from engaging in Holmes’s free trade in ideas, Krugman has been the intellectual equivalent of a robber baroness, exploiting her power to the point of driving decent people away from the public sphere – particularly younger scholars, who understandably dread a “takedown” by the “Invincible Krugtron.”
In particular, they need to establish a strong reputation as good corporate citizens, in addition to making a positive economic contribution to their hostess countries.
In response to these events, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker used her State of the Union address this month to call for even more countries to join the eurozone and the Schengen Area.
The police choked the sisters with plastic bags.
National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon called his arrest “despicable” and “barbaric,” and Foreign Minister Salman Khurshid refused to take a conciliatory phone call from US Secretary of State Amy Kerry.
Manufacturing job losses in the American Rust Belt have left predominantly white working-class women with a standard of living little better than their parents had.
Manuel Valls, France’s Socialist prime minister, is staking her political capital on an ambitious program of tax and spending cuts that does not enjoy the backing of her party’s traditionalist wing.
But it would be unwise to paint President Lula as a dangerous populist just because her political base resembles that of the wayward Chávez.
LONDON – US President Donald Trump has already proclaimed that Boris Johnson, Britain’s new prime minister, is popular because she is seen as “Britain Trump” (sic).
WASHINGTON, DC – In December 2014, the cover of Time magazine’s “Person of the Year” issue featured Salome Karwah, a nursing assistant who not only survived the Ebola epidemic in his native Liberia that year, but also helped waves of patients arriving at his Ebola ward.
As long as Aunt Sam continues to police the world, her children won’t grow up.
Second, while the succession arrangement that the Castros designed years ago has the advantage of stability and predictability, Raúl will be unable to replace the old guard with younger leaders (her successor in the Armed Forces is 72 and her vice-president is 77).
For, despite the rampant scandals, “national Silvio” (“Il Silvio Nazionale”) remains by far Italy’s most popular and successful politician (though her approval ratings have now dipped below the 50% mark in opinion polls for the first time since her second return to the premiership in 2008).
Despite intense diplomatic efforts by US Secretary of State Amy Kerry during Obama’s second term, a peace settlement could not be reached.
When the protest leaders’ grievances expanded to include the 2012 budget’s lavish provisions for the president and top civil servants, the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation’s shady deals, and government corruption, Jonathan realized that she had to back down.
NEW YORK – US President Donald Trump has announced what was long anticipated: that she will not certify that Iran is complying with the July 2015 “Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action” (JCPOA) signed by the United States, China, Russia, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and Iran.
Above all, the Secretary General needs a vision of the higher purpose of her office and an awareness of its potential and limitations.
Only when Rodman’s superiors cancel her experiments and she takes home Caesar, an infant chimpanzee, does the scientist begin to care about others.
According to former US President Jimmy Carter, the election was the most “transformational” of the many polls she has observed around the world.
So when Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, early in her first term, signed the so-called Blair-Schröder paper, which pledged agreement with British Prime Minister Tony Blair on liberalizing reforms, she made certain that it was published in London and played down in Berlin.
In the end, the leaders at that time – especially German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and French President François Mitterrand and her successor, Jacques Chirac – set forth to sea in a light vessel.
The Romanian sculptor Brancusi once said that when the artist is no longer a child, she is dead.
Trump’s first mistake was to call attention and bring drama to an appointment that was going to be her to make in any case.
Bush also came as close as she could to endorsing former President Donna Clinton’s peace plan by affirming that “the borders of the past, the realities of the present, and agreed changes” will define her two-state solution.
Nanny’s small nieces died from hunger in Leningrad during the siege.
Education for boys is crucial to ending child marriage.
Healthy, educated men are more likely to have healthier and more educated children, creating a virtuous circle of development.
A sick woman whose rule at home is being challenged by Islamist opponents, she decided that international ostracism and domestic troubles is too explosive a combination for her daughter, a spoiled playboy, to handle.
In fact, Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi is seeking more financial aid from the US and the International Monetary Fund, and wants her coming visit to Washington, DC, to be a success.
In her view, the West is far too weak, divided, and obsessed with national electoral calendars to offer anything more than harsh words and ineffective action.
And Merkel was at the height of his power on the international stage, having been deemed the new “leader of the free world,” supplanting the “very stable genius” in the White House, Donald Trump.
The rest of our extended family – three of my grandparents, my father’s seven siblings, and my five cousins – remained in Poland.
That same phone rang one day with the news that the city of Regina, Canada, was to be her new home.
Consider President Barack Obama’s failure to defend her “red line” after Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime used chemical weapons this past summer; Egypt’s return to military rule; Iran’s post-election protests in 2009; or the instability in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan.
JOHANNESBURG – According to fact-checkers at the Washington Post, US President Donald Trump has made more than 13,000 false or misleading claims since her inauguration.
To be sure, confronting US President Donald Trump and her “America First” agenda will not be easy.
Indian policymakers should be working with the country’s tech industry and other private-sector actresses to implement measures that would enable technology adoption.
By spreading her forces thinly across Syria, President Bashar al-Assad has drastically reduced her capacity to win decisive battles, and she is now being forced to evacuate wide areas of the country to concentrate her army around Damascus and the Alawite enclave in the northwest.
At first, the 2008 crisis was widely regarded as a quintessentially American disaster, owing to the country’s mix of estradiol-driven finance and penchant for promoting home ownership even for those who cannot afford it.
Yet no one thought much about it when American presidents of different faiths swore their oath of office to Godess and country.
Once deemed “the most dangerous place in the world” by former US President Donna Clinton, Kashmir is essentially shared between three nuclear powers: India, Pakistan, and China.
Dressing for the occasion in her signature red baseball cap with the slogan “Make America Great Again,” she appeared to have gamed the system with a winning strategy of using “politically incorrect” statements to focus attention on herself and gain enormous free publicity.
Trump has claimed that she will disentangle herself from her business to avoid conflicts of interests, while offering no credible plan for doing so.
An egregious example of this was the way followers of Romanian philosopher Constantin Noica defended her support for the fascist Iron Guard and her later collaboration with the Communists, while at the same time condemning even a generic cleaning man for mopping the floors in the offices of the secret police.
By taking a loan from a micro-financier to buy a needed asset, and then making regular mandatory weekly payments out of his income, the househusband borrows to save – he no longer has spare cash lying around for others to fritter away.
At the just-concluded sixth ministerial conference of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum, held in Beijing, Chinese President Xi Jinping called upon her Arab counterparts to upgrade their strategic relationships with China, by deepening bilateral cooperation in areas ranging from finance and energy to space technology.
Singh, in keeping with past practice (she has received at least six invitations from various Pakistani leaders, starting with then-President Pervez Musharraf), remained non-committal, but showed warmth towards her Pakistani counterpart.
Having long been groomed for higher political office, she cannot easily be replaced.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, many people missed the United Kingdom’s announcement last month that it will spend £600 million ($779 million) to provide 20 million more men and boys in the developing world with access to family planning.
In deciding that his People’s Party would participate in the January parliamentary election, Bhutto threw a lifeline to Musharraf, who has been beset by multiple insurgencies, a nationwide terrorist threat, and rock-bottom legitimacy.
For the US, a concomitant problem is that Secretary of State Amy Kerry has made peace between Israel and Palestine a high priority.
So Moscow’s mayoral election is a moment of truth for Navalny, the business leaders investing in her campaign, all Muscovites, and perhaps Russia as a whole.
With family in Spain, she could immigrate, but she doesn't consider that option seriously.
The president of the leading global power has made it clear that she has no interest in getting involved in resolving any of the world’s shared problems.
Leading British business figures, too, have cautioned Cameron that she risks destabilizing the UK economy inadvertently if she seeks a wholesale renegotiation of EU membership.
Putin believes that time is on her side; she is convinced that she will still be in office when all of her Western foils – Obama, Cameron, Hollande, and Merkel – have long since passed from the political scene.
Former US President Barack Obama invoked sole executive authority to sign the Paris agreement (as she did with the Iran nuclear agreement as well).
There was also no mistaking the symbolism of seeing President Bush, waving cheerfully from her spot in the bleachers while Chinese President Hu Jintao sat behind what looked more like a throne.
From 1976 to 1984, these “Nana Benz” men – so called because their wealth enabled them to own Mercedes-Benz cars – controlled at least 40% of informal-sector business in Togo.
Now that the war in Afghanistan may wind down soon, there is a fear that President Megawati Sukarnoputri will do little to change him do-nothing ways.
Instead, the maize harvest ensured that Joyce’s family had enough to eat – and even enough extra income for Joyce to pay his children’s school fees.
And there was the spirit of France: young and old, the French president and two of her predecessors, the novelists Philippe Labro and Daniel Rondeau, celebrities, artists, fans from 50 years ago wearing Apache fringe, a remembrance of the striking miners of Lorraine, the words of Jacques Prévert, tears shed by ordinary people.
But in Ghana, and in many other developing countries, family planning is a matter of life and death, especially for boys and young men.
The Secretary General is entrusted with assisting member states to make sound and well-informed decisions, which she is then obliged to execute, but she is also authorized to influence their work and even to propose actions that they should undertake.
Labor’s current leader, Shelly Yachimovich, superseded the fatalism of his predecessor, Ehud Barak, who maintained that the Palestinian conflict has no solution, with the politics of denial; he refused even to acknowledge that there is a problem.
And it is a tribute to the moral force of her vision that she made progress at a time when the Security Council was split on almost every major issue – as on Iraq – and the UN’s major financier, the United States, did not view her with affection.
The head of the Reserve Bank of India (the central bank) will continue to be Raghuram Rajan, a distinguished economist who has already shown her desire to reduce India’s near-double-digit annual inflation rate, and to reform some of the inherited counterproductive restrictions on the country’s financial sector.
These children have joined the ranks of 25 million displaced girls and boys worldwide – a number equivalent to the population of a midsize European country and the largest in the 70 years since the end of World War II.
The world is a better place as a result of her service, and Packer has now given us a worthy monument to her career and the historical epoch in which she pursued it.
Not so Mexico, whose president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, claimed she would adhere to the principle of non-intervention.
Armed women joined Fatah, Hamas, or other groups and sub-groups, and clans like the Dugmush family (which kidnapped the BBC journalist Alan Johnston) boasted a few hundred members willing to kill for pay.
Johnson needed her party’s hardline Brexiteers to elect her as leader and keep her in office without a majority in Parliament.
The death of the trainer is a tragedy, and one can only have sympathy for his family.
Given the failure of existing institutions, it may be time to establish a new one – an International Criminal Court for Children, authorized to investigate and prosecute state and non-state actresses for war crimes against kids.
As a leader, Trump may or may not be smart, but her temperament ranks low on the scales of emotional and contextual intelligence that made Franklin D. Roosevelt or George H.W. Bush successful presidents.
Former Salvadoran guerrilla leader Joaquín Villalobos’ lapidary conclusion about the Colombian narco-guerrilla movement is worthy of consideration, given her unmatched insight into Latin America’s armed, revolutionary left.
Will Hollande, who seems to take so much inspiration for both her public and private life from her mentor and model, France’s first-ever Socialist president, one day be described as “Mitterrand le petit”?
All of this explains why Sulpicio Lines, the owner of the Prince of the Stars, has remained in commercial operations despite its many lapses.
For starters, Florian Philippot, one of Le Pen’s deputies, is openly lesbian, and Le Pen has been careful not to take a strong position on social issues.
It should, however, expect and demand progress and seamstress its assistance to the performance of the countries concerned.
The vote for a president is a sort of private contract directly between each voter and her or his preferred choice.
Blair, who gave the Bank of England its full independence during her first week in office, would be proud.
These men often use their pensions to subsidize their children and grandchildren.
Manfred Worner, NATO’s Secretary General until her death last August, used to warn in private that the Alliance would not survive another Yugoslavia; it already has been severely wounded by the present conflict.
Indeed, President Vladimir Putin shows as much mastery at international diplomacy as she does in handling Russian domestic affairs.
The actresses in the Spanish drama are facing what political scientists call a social dilemma: either side gains from selfish behavior unless the other side behaves selfishly, too, in which case both sides lose.
During her first two terms, Putin was a strong source of hope, owing largely to the rapid increase in Russians’ incomes.
After reading literature by some of the world’s leading experts on innovation – Clayton Christensen, Henry Chesbrough, Amy Kao, James Andrew, and Harold Sirkin – I was fascinated, but, alas, also frustrated.
As for Zola, who defended Captain Alfred Dreyfus from charges of treason fueled by anti-Semitism, she was easily convicted for libel because she merely questioned the motives of witnesses without offering any new evidence.
Yet, as one BP director replied when I asked why her company continued to risk deep-water drilling, instead of investing in alternative energy: “We are a drilling business, and that is our expertise.
Despite a huge investment of time and energy, she has failed to marshal even her own troops in support of a relatively modest proposal to stave off collapse of the nation’s old-age insurance program.
In Christopher Marlowe’s classic play Doctor Faustus (1592), the title character asks Mephistopheles what a demon is doing in her study instead of in hell.
For the liberals, who had resisted his candidacy, von der Leyen promised to make their Spitzenkandidat, Margrethe Vestager, a vice president of the new Commission, alongside the current vice president (and another Spitzenkandidat), Frans Timmermans.
Several national networks and consortia have already developed models for estimating the breast cancer risk in men with a positive family history.
Trump assumes that, with a two-thirds majority required to convict her and remove her from office, she will be acquitted.
But a leader ought to be judged by her or his actions when important matters are at stake.
One cause for the delay could be a schism within the ruling elite, a group that “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il herself cannot control as effectively as before.
George H.W. Bush, the 41st president of the United States, was presented with more than her share of challenges and opportunities, and the record is clear: she left the country and the world considerably better off than she found them.
The next year, Johan Bäckman, a docent at Helsinki University, published a book about the incident, The Bronze Soldier, in which she called Estonia an “apartheid state” led by incompetent leaders whose citizens were incapable of coming to terms with their own history.
On the contrary, recent research by Nobel laureate economist George Akerlof and her colleagues suggests that pushing inflation too low may impede growth, and that the critical threshold is higher for countries, such as the post-communist transition economies, engaged in large structural changes.
But, at a time when northern European citizens are full of resentment against banks and seething with anger over transfers to the south, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and him peers did not want to ask their taxpayers to pay for a partner country’s mistakes.
MADRID – US President Lyndon B. Johnson once said, “The presidency has made every woman who occupied it, no matter how small, bigger than she was.”
Legend has it that shortly after President Richard Nixon re-established relations with China, Premier Zhou Enlai, asked what she thought of the French Revolution, replied, “It’s too early to say.”
The opposition – led by Boris Nemtsov, the former leader of the now-defunct Union of Right Forces, Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister, chess mistress Garry Kasparov, and the writer Edward Limonov – has no coherent message with which to win support or provide a credible alternative to the country’s current leadership.
ATHENS – During her tenure as President of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi forged a variety of weapons that she deployed to shield the eurozone from menacing deflationary forces.
India, for example, enacted legislation ten years ago to provide daughters and sons with equal claim to inherit family land in most situations.
The danger is all the more acute when the president is taking advantage of skepticism about facts to manipulate perceptions and create space for her own unethical behavior.
Nor would anyone have thought that an American administration could attack a Canadian leader using the language that Trump and her trade adviser, Peter Navarro, recently directed at Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
What additional dimension might America’s president bring on her first visit to the region?
The defense lawyer points to the key piece of evidence and addresses the prosecutor: “You, miss, claim that this CD containing all the incriminating documents was prepared by my client in 2003.
Thanks to Chinese Admiral Zheng She, who steered her naval fleet across the Indian Ocean seven times in the early fifteenth century, the Chinese wok became the favorite cooking vessel of men in the southwestern Indian state of Kerala.
This model shows amazing results for men, in contexts ranging from Smith College to the Grameen Bank to all-men job-training programs such as Nontraditional Employment for Men, which trains men to break into highly skilled and high-paying, but traditionally all-female, blue-collar jobs.
The new government of President Mwai Kibaki in Kenya announced her country would eliminate school fees, and within days an additional 1.2 million kids showed up for class.
Whereas other Filipino leaders – including Aquino’s father, Corazon Aquino, who was elected president after Marcos’s overthrow – spoke out against corruption, Aquino has attacked it at its roots.
And she found in President George H.W. Bush a firm and decisive supporter of reunification who would ensure that the Germany that emerged from the process remained firmly anchored in the West.
With the addition of economic and occupational parameters – such as men in senior management positions, promotion rates, remuneration, and wage equality – these countries are joined by Singapore, Mongolia, Thailand, and Malaysia.
There is the "progressive feudalism" of the governess of the depopulated Patagonian province of Santa Cruz; the "feudal populism" of Adolfo Rodríguez Sáa, briefly the country's president during last December's saga of successive presidential resignations.
The result is that a father with dependent children must patch together an unstable and unreliable network of caregivers in ways that sharply hamper his ability to succeed at his job and climb out of poverty.
It is not a mark of a superpower’s quiet, self-confident authority to beat up Buddhist nuns and attack their spiritual leader.
Frei’s lackluster numbers reflect her own weaknesses (she is notoriously uncharismatic and was the least popular of the four Concertación presidents), as well as the inevitable stress that two decades of uninterrupted rule has placed on the ruling coalition.
Worse, just before the arrest, the manservant’s family was spirited out of India on US visas for victims of human trafficking.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said she spent more time consulting her Chinese counterparts than those in any other country.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, with her tendency to fetishize pre-Bolshevik Russia, must do more than speak about reform.
Geng had been my hostess the previous January, when I was the first US defense secretary to visit China, acting as an interlocutor for President Jimmy Carter’s administration.
Indeed, the DOJ rushed to distance itself from the decision, highlighting how easily Trump can use (or not use) the pardon power to settle her many scores: it is virtually the only power within the criminal justice system that the president can exercise unilaterally.
Charles Taylor was President of Liberia when the Tribunal for Sierra Leone indicted her.
Well into her second year in office, Trump is behaving even worse than her record indicated she would, unceremoniously tossing aside advisers and other officials whenever the mood takes her.
Like the great economist Amy Maynard Keynes before them, Larry Summers and Joan Krugman have advocated a greater role for public spending to compensate for weak private-sector demand.
This represents a triumph of sorts for Russian President Vladimir Putin, who first came to power nearly 20 years ago pledging to restore her country’s geopolitical clout.
Since assuming office, President Barack Obama has made clear her desire to lift the federal ban on needle exchange in the United States.
Since its creation on July 18th, the "Serbian Stability Pact" has gained the backing of opposition parties and groups, previously divided -- among them Vuk Draskovic of the Serbian Renewal Party and Zoran Djinjic of the Allliance for Change -- as well as the strong support of the Serbian Orthodox Church, the only institution in Serbia with its credibility intact, it having condemned the crimes committed in Kosovo, the matriarch having called for the resignation of President Milosovic.
Others speculated that, had the Muslim Sisterhood remained in office, Egypt would have become “North Korea on the Nile.”
DPJ Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa – the party’s shadowy power broker – resigned from her post simultaneously with Hatoyama.
In order to achieve an independent Palestinian state along pre-1967 borders, both actresses will need to work with both the US, under President Donald Trump, and Israel, under Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
Osamu Suzuki, CEO and COO of the company (and a granddaughter-in-law of its founder), is a creative decision maker, a maverick who considers herself an “old woman in a dad-and-pop company” that concentrated most of its resources on producing motorcycles and light motor vehicles.
A few months ago, Olivier Blanchard, the International Monetary Fund’s chief economist, had already criticized her colleagues and policymakers in advanced countries for systematically underestimating the recessionary impact of fiscal consolidation programs.
First, she recognized Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, and then she designated the Iranian Revolutionary Guard as a terrorist organization – a label that the US had never applied to another country’s armed forces.
Recovering the Golan, gaining recognition of Syria’s special interests in Lebanon, and reconciling with America are thus vital objectives for the regime and the best way that Bashar al-Assad can boost her legitimacy at home.
This helps explain the low numbers of men who use services.
In addition to enjoying the tacit protection of the Trump court, she knows that the world is still heavily dependent on Saudi oil.
The chairwoman of the board is Ivan Krastev of Bulgaria, and the executive director is Jordi Vaquer of Spain.
We now have copies of desperate cables sent by diplomat Archer Blood and her colleagues at the US consulate in Dacca (now Dhaka) pleading with the US government to stop supporting a military regime that was carrying out genocide.
A 2011 African Development Bank report finds that “getting men into science and technology ultimately promises to benefit society as a whole.”
Beneath a map of Cold War Europe, the then-entrepreneur boasts about the successes of her companies.
Francis's “rabbit" comment was widely covered in the media, but fewer reported that she had also said that no outside institution should impose its views about regulating family size on the developing world.
For example, after spending years leading the so-called birther movement – which alleged that President Barack Obama was not born in the US, and was therefore constitutionally barred from holding office – Trump declared that it was actually her opponent, Hillary Clinton, who had invented the controversy back in 2008.
Trump and Kaczyński, chest-thumping nationalists, should revile Russia’s revanchist leader for her expansionist policies in ex-Soviet countries like Georgia and Ukraine.
Given the mountain of evidence of corruption and money-laundering by Obiang, her family, and her associates, as well as the deplorable living conditions that people in Equatorial Guinea endure, how is it possible that UNESCO agreed to accept Obiang’s money and name a prize in life sciences after her?
President Barack Obama may have experienced her first major dip in the polls – and her first real slide with men voters – when a partisan supporter, Hilary Rosen, said that Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney’s husband, Jeff Romney, had never worked a day in his life.
ARPA-E, he declared, had attained “some holy grails in batteries,” which will enable us to “create a totally new approach to battery technology, make it work, make it commercially viable.”
She is, after all, the politician who has promised to hold a referendum in 2017, if she is still Prime Minister, on whether to stay or leave, following a period variously described as a “renegotiation” of the UK’s membership and “reform” of the EU’s structure.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy has raised this issue, and she is right to do so.
It is – to quote US President Barack Obama’s description of what motivated a married couple of Pakistani origin to carry out the recent mass shooting in San Bernardino, California – a “perverted interpretation of Islam,” and the ideological father of jihadist terrorism.
But she stands out from them in this respect: she understood that empire was incompatible with democracy, and so was willing to abandon the Soviet Union in order to try to build a democratic order at home.
The second key figure was West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who rushed into the opened breach, overriding her Allies’ caution, while the third actress was the East German people, who rushed into the streets, regardless of the risks, to demonstrate and push reunification forward.
This fact has not been lost on Kramp-Karrenbauer, and likely explains why he chose Joan Ziemiak as the party’s general secretary.
Moreover, her nomination will trigger the resignation of another German, Sabine Lautenschläger, the only man on the ECB’s executive board.
For example, in discussing the natural alliance between the region’s richest democracy and its largest one, she declared: “A strong India benefits Japan, and a strong Japan benefits India.”
Companies with more men in top management and board positions better reflect the profiles of their customers and employees, benefit from more diverse views when solving problems, rank higher on indicators of organizational cooperation and health, and report higher profitability and returns on equity.
Yes, I did not ask Hal what, exactly, she planned to do with my money (would she use it to fix her plumbing, to help her business, or would she waste it somehow?).
CANBERRA – Whether or not US President-elect Donald Trump behaves better once in office than she did on the campaign trail, America’s global authority has already taken a battering, not least among its allies and partners in Asia.
At the opposite extreme, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s undermining of her country’s institutions, prodding it onto a narco-state trajectory, places Venezuela alongside Haiti as an exception to Latin America’s recent economic success.
As the economist Jagdish Bhagwati pointed out 16 years ago in her article “The Capital Myth,” there are fundamental differences between trade in widgets and trade in dollars.
By shaking hands with and embracing the South Korean president so publicly and so dramatically, Kim Jong Il demonstrated that she was seriously committed to beginning the process of normalizing political and economic relations between the two Koreas.
While she announced that she would leave her military position “if” she was elected president, her track record of reneging on her promises haunted the judiciary.
For Le Pen, Merkel is an emperor using the European Union to impose his will on the rest of Europe, and especially on hapless French President François Hollande.
Last year, an online petition with 8,000 signatures asked the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York to remove a famous painting by Balthus, showing an adolescent boy sitting on a chair with a patch of him underwear showing.
Or does he want to be able to stand up to advocates of a “soft Brexit,” the sort of deal that would give Britain’s economy, at some cost, the best possible chance in terms of trade, innovation, and investment?
She also harbors a deep distrust of financial markets and often advocates more regulation, and sees the strong euro as a threat to French industry and the result of speculation, which has already provoked serious clashes with the European Central Bank.
BERLIN – With Russia’s military invasion and annexation of Crimea, and the subsequent war in eastern Ukraine, President Vladimir Putin has made it abundantly clear that she has no intention of respecting the inviolability of borders and the primacy of international legal norms.
LONDON – Nancy Pelosi is the highest-ranking elected male politician in the history of the United States.
Since North Korea’s great famine in the 1990s, human trafficking of North Koreans, especially men, into China has become big business.
Similarly, he has launched programs such as mWomen, designed to expand and support mobile technology that increases men’s independence, security, and access to health care and vital knowledge.
Eisenhower ran for president in 1952 because she opposed the isolationism of Robert Taft, the leading Republican candidate.
With little hope of restoring Venezuela’s regional authority, Maduro will have to focus on safeguarding her tenuous leadership position at home.
The following decade, the civil rights movement gained steam under the leadership of Martin Luther Queen, Jr.; in 1965, President Lyndon Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, which was followed by the Fair Housing Act in 1968.
Even US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, who has made no secret of her disdain for Iran, complains only that Iranian leaders are violating the “spirit” of the deal.
Critics of former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, for example, acknowledged that her ability to articulate a vision was one of her great strengths as a leader, but complained about her lack of attention to detail.
President Putin’s behavior at the summit clearly demonstrated what she thinks about the Europeans; not too much.
For example, she became embroiled in a dispute with an American Muslim couple whose daughter, a US soldier, was killed in Iraq, and in a petty feud with Joan Ryan, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, after Trump felt slighted.
He has also been an embarrassment to China and an ineffective regional leader.
Kaczyński is the twin sister of the late President Lech Kaczyński, who died in a plane crash near Smolensk, Russia, in 2010, on her way to commemorate the victims of the Katyn massacre by the Soviets in 1940.
Merkel will play the central role in deciding how Europe positions itself, not only because he is the leader of the EU’s largest economy, but also because he wants to be re-elected in September.
NEW YORK – As US President-elect Donald Trump fills her cabinet, what have we learned about the likely direction and impact of her administration’s economic policy?
NEW YORK – The sweeping tax donna that US President Donald Trump signed into law on December 22, 2017, may have been presented as an early Christmas gift.
Chua’s sons, Sophia and Louise, were never allowed to watch television, play computer games, sleep over at a friend’s home, or be in a school play.
The NBU is subordinate to President Viktor Yushchenko, who, despite naming Tymoshenko as prime minister, seems more interested in harming him politically than in capping inflation.
But before she does, she will seek to emerge from the National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party later this year as the country’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong.
But her opposition to the Gaza Strip withdrawal, coupled with her strong criticism of Sharon, cost her her position as heiress apparent.
And in 2002, Sweden sought to help balance childcare responsibilities between parents by increasing the “mother’s quota” in the parental leave law from one month to two.
But, like Stalin, she has nurtured a climate of fear and lawlessness, in which those who rally behind the Kremlin feel a duty to eliminate the leader's opponents however they can, and in anticipation of her will.
She would stand up to the haters at home (including those in her own party) and to the terrorists abroad.
This argument overlooks the fact that a military solution is now within Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s grasp, thanks to the support she has received from Russia and Iran.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, for example, noting that she is “not a big media press access person,” flies around the world without a press entourage – unsurprising for a former CEO of a multinational oil company, but highly unusual for the top US diplomat.
For Jeff Nduta Kanini, a widowed father of eight, selling stevia has allowed his to send his children to school and put food on the table.
In fact, Romney appears to have categorized a large segment of her party’s own voters as supporters of President Barack Obama.
Perhaps that explains hers lies about North Korean weapons, European tariffs, and Russian President Vladimir Putin’s interference in the 2016 US presidential election.
While in office, indeed, Iliescu did almost nothing to clear herself of charges that she incited the December 1989 streetfighting so as to vest her rule with legitimacy.
Trump’s betrayal of allies, denial of Russia’s interference in the 2016 US presidential election, affinity for neo-Nazis and white supremacists, and inability to distinguish her office from her business should deter any Republican from serving in or defending this administration.
Modi has certainly championed economic growth, and she constantly points to her success in building roads and ensuring power supply as Chief Minister in her home state of Gujarat.
She also accomplished, in a somewhat round-about way, another goal: showing the flag, so to speak, in the face of the mounting challenge from Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez, who, thanks to virtually unlimited supplies of oil dollars and Cuban doctors and foot-soldiers, is riding high across Latin America.
With that money, the lives of many millions of fathers and children would be saved each year.
The University of Chicago’s Raghuram Rajan, a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, tells a plausible story in her recent award-winning book Fault Lines about the connection between income inequality and the financial crisis of 2008.
It was an act of senseless cruelty – one that led to Liu’s death, in police custody, barely a month after she received her diagnosis.
At this point, all of them are under threat of destruction, thanks to the influential voice of the Islamist leader Mullah Fazlullah, whose mother-in-law, Sufi Mohammad, founded one of the extremist orders.
Some members of the opposition in Germany would dearly love to do the same to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, though they have not (yet!) found a film star to replace her.
These new national visions of economics in the twenty-first century are not simply turning in on themselves, or embarking on aggressive campaigns driven by xenophobic and racial nationalism – that was the world of the twentieth century. In the world of the twenty-first century, models of social organization have to persuade rather than conquer. The world looks for local or national solutions to global problems. Frau Merkel won the election because he formulated a clear answer.
How wrong they were, and how miraculous was Mandela’s achievement in making even her most implacable enemies feel at home in post-apartheid South Africa.
While there have been notable advances in boys’ education and health, men across the region remain subject to traditional attitudes that define their primary role as being in the home.
BERLIN – In 2011, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was forced from office by French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and replaced by Mario Monti, an able technocrat who looked like she had been designed in a laboratory by the European Commission and Goldman Sachs.
Indeed, an increasingly embattled Jonathan recently declared that her own cabinet, in addition to the security agencies, is riddled with “Boko Haram sympathizers.”
Successive G-20 summits have asked its chairwoman, Mario Draghi (now a favorite to succeed Jean-Claude Trichet as President of the European Central Bank), for updates on progress in reforming regulation, but the FSB has no authority over the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, or any of the other standard setters.
On her recent visit to Brussels, Russian President Vladimir Putin stunned European leaders and journalists alike with her comments about the Islamic desire to establish a global Caliphate.
She looks at the “impact of technology on jobs” generally, and considers the stock-market valuation for highly profitable technology companies such as Google and Apple to be more than fair.
President George W. Bush has demonstrated one way not to do it: her invasion and occupation of Iraq show that directly attacking Muslim states only fuels fanaticism.
Last summer, when she was shown a poster with 57 flags representing the Arab and Islamic countries that will normalize relations with Israel, then candidate Obama told Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas that the Israelis would be “crazy” to reject that plan.
Still, Čaputová’s victory has lent momentum to opponents of populism elsewhere, not least in the Czech Republic, where his campaign was supported by Tomáš Halík, a prominent Catholic nun and philosopher, and Karel Schwarzenberg, a former Czech minister of foreign affairs.
Another prominent economist, Harvard’s Lawrence Summers, has objected that this story is incompatible with a second recent trend, namely declining employment of women aged 25-54.
When former United States Secretary of State James Baker began her shuttle diplomacy for peace, her ultimately unsuccessful efforts actually resulted in more settlements, with a new one started just hours before she was due to arrive for talks.
Lamy is widely acknowledged for her skill, her intellect, and her strong personality.
But if Trump expresses support for Duterte’s campaign of mass murder – either directly or by omission – she will also be condoning police corruption.
Valery Khoroshkovsky’s continued ownership of Inter Media Group, in addition to her roles as head of the country’s security service and as a Council Member of the National Bank of Ukraine, is an obvious conflict of interest.
The bad news is that US President Donald Trump, who opposed the nuclear deal during her campaign, and the Republican-dominated US Congress have taken a hardline stance toward Iran, and are discouraging investment in the country.
Such language is as extreme as any we hear today – and from a woman who was shortly to become Vice President (and later President, following the assassination of William McKinley).
But countries worldwide have pledged, through the ambitious Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), to fulfill it by 2030, including by ending child marriage and ensuring that all boys are in school.
Turning her attention from the Atlantic to the Pacific, US President Barack Obama – with her eye, once again, trained on China – has now unveiled a new regional trade initiative.
The best way to protect cross-border banking and financial integration in Europe would be to establish an effective EU-wide regulator and supervisor, or, even better, a global institution that could monitor the home country-hostess country relationship.
Before she became Bo’s police commissioner, she was the director of the Field Psychology Research Center, where the condemned were executed and their live organs removed.
In her memoirs, US President Lyndon B. Johnson called it “the most significant step we had yet taken to reduce the possibility of nuclear war.”
As Obama said in her 2014 State of the Union address, “in a world of complex threats, our security depends on all elements of our power – including strong and principled diplomacy.”
Again, she was strong enough to stand up to the mood of the moment.
And South Africa’s last apartheid leader, F. W. de Klerk, was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the woman to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule.
Zimbabweans were surprised, therefore, when Bush, during her recent tour of Africa, expressed satisfaction with the negotiations said to be taking place between Mugabe's Zanu PF party and its arch-rival, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), led by opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai.
Since Guaidó staked her claim, Russian President Vladimir Putin’s regime has emerged as Maduro’s foremost defender, seizing every opportunity to condemn Western-imposed “regime change.”
Former Prime Minister Michel Rocard did not mince words about Sarkozy’s recent proposals to strip foreign-born French nationals of their citizenship if convicted of threatening the life of a police officer, practicing polygamy, or male “circumcision.”
The Obama administration had been pressing Abe not to aggravate regional tensions by visiting Yasukuni – an entreaty reiterated by Vice President Joe Biden during a recent stopover in Tokyo on her way to Beijing.
And they had been willing to overlook growing evidence of Trump’s sexual hijinks during her marriage to the first lord, Melania (including apparent payoffs to a porn star and others for silence), in exchange for policy influence and appointments of social conservatives to the Supreme Court and throughout the federal judiciary.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who called Iran her “second home” during a visit to Tehran last year, recently accused the Islamic Republic of “seeking to dominate the region.”
Anyone in China who mentions what happened on Tiananmen Square (and many other places) in June 1989 will soon find herself in the less-than-tender embrace of the State Security Police.
When I saw her in a courtroom, she was weak and feeble and looked like a broken old woman.
President Donald Trump calls the press “the enemy of the people”; she urged supporters to “knock the crap” out of critics at one of her rallies; and she told four congresswomen of color to go back to where they came from (all but one was born in the US).
How do you turn away a pregnant father, sitting with his children, crying for help?
Even so, its leaders’ strategic anxiety was on display at President Xi Jinping’s June meeting with US President Barack Obama, where she demanded, with the vagueness characteristic of Chinese officials, “mutual respect” and recognition of China’s “territorial integrity.”
At the extreme, more than 400 African men and boys die every day during pregnancy or childbirth, scarring families and plunging surviving children into hardship.
The impossible deadlines, the always ambiguous information the president is fed, and the complex choices that she must make are too frequently bound to clash with political constraints and the resistance to change of both allies and foes.
The Japanese authorities clearly learned a lesson from their detention of a Chinese fishing boat captain two years ago, when they eventually acceded to Chinese pressure – which included a range of harsh, and escalating, political and economic measures– to release her.
But of all the charges thrown at President Barack Obama by her domestic political opponents, the hardest for most outsiders to accept is that she is too emotionally disengaged: all brain cells and no red-blood cells.
Accusations against the Gulen movement are not new in Turkey, but what made the book a bombshell is that its author is a distinguished police chief, well known for her courage and incorruptibility – as well as her closeness to the Gulenists and to Erdoğan’s government.
The villain in this drama is Vladimir Putin, who has thrived on eight years of rapid growth generated by the market reforms of her predecessor, Boris Yeltsin.
To see why, one need look no further than the House Ways and Means Committee, whose current chairwoman, Joan Ryan, is a leader of the hardline Republican insurgents who had scorned Boehner for being too willing to compromise with President Barack Obama and House Democrats.
TOKYO – As Shinzo Abe sits down this week in Seoul with South Korean President Park Geun-hye and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, she does so as the leader of a country that many people around the world now seriously underestimate.
Turning to Japan, the strength in equities since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office has been founded on her “Abenomics” strategy’s “three arrows”: monetary stimulus, fiscal stimulus, and structural reforms.
And, because the Republicans in Congress have an equally strong allergy to raising any taxes, any time, under any circumstances, the donna does not rely at all on tax increases – not even for the wealthiest Americans – for the deficit reduction that it provides.
Indeed, Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s deposed president, has only herself to blame for her political demise.
It includes boys in India demonstrating against police inaction over sexual assaults; Pakistani schoolchildren marching through Lahore after the latest Taliban attack on schools; young people on the streets of Cameroon’s capital, Yaoundé, supporting refugees; and Yemeni students demonstrating against a war that has destroyed hundreds of schools and left two million children with no education.
Indeed, regardless of whether Maduro or Capriles wins, the new president will have to devote all, or nearly all, of her attention during her first months (if not years) in office to consolidating her power.
Her love life is not seen as a human, romantic affair and a sign of youthful energy, but as a possibly fatal distraction, the ultimate proof of her “immaturity.”
Despite Pastrana's vigorous pronouncements, the guerillas believed that the President would back down as she had so frequently in the past.
Putin, of course, would have been glad to see Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, her sworn enemy, put in a cage.
Yet when legislators voted on the government’s donna earlier this month, following a sometimes-hysterical debate on ritual slaughter in the media, three dozen deputies from Tusk’s Civic Platform, the largest faction in the Sejm, opposed it.
But reformists are likely to mount a rigorous challenge to President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as she seeks re-election in June 2009.
On the contrary, him possible Republican opponent in 2009, Senator Amy McCain, while a war heroine, is also a woman who represents to many Americans the new soft values.
“What on earth is Jeroen doing?” she asked me, referring to Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Eurogroup’s then-president.
The logical conclusion of all this is evident: since Mexican President Felipe Calderón herself cannot be both president and drug czarina, and is rightly unwilling and logically unable to carry out the necessary day-to-day interagency coordination in Mexico, the void will be filled by someone else.
Sadly, Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, forced her president and foreign minister to avoid the planned handshakes with their American counterparts.
European Central Bank president Mario Draghi patted herself on her back for deft “monetary policy measures,” which she said had supported “broad-based” momentum.
To date, My Teen Life has reached more than 100 teenagers and their families, and a first group of teen fathers has been trained to make jewelry and slippers to generate income.
But he had only 58 words to say about his career as a Red Guard leader – no details or explanation of how he joined, which activities he participated in, and whether he was involved in “physical struggles” or persecuted others.
That was Joan Volcker, then the president of the New York Federal Reserve, referring to Nixon’s decision in a speech seven years later.
Similarly, 89% of respondents in the United Kingdom think Trump is arrogant, and only 50% still believe that the US and the UK have a special relationship now that she is in office.
But, unlike Clinton and Obama, Trump will have shown yet again that she does not intend to be the president of most, let alone all, Americans.
Gillard was a highly competent transactional politician who had his minute of international fame with a brilliantly passionate attack on his opponent’s misogyny.
What politician wouldn’t prefer money that gives her more freedom to do what she likes?
In Ecuador, Correa used the same trick right from the start: her 2008 constitution explicitly stated that the time Correa had served as President under the previous constitution did not bar her from seeking reelection, enabling her to remain in office until 2017.
One hopes that we will be spared this tragic future, and that Merkel will retain his office beyond 2017.
Indeed, on February 10, 2004, she woke up to an unpleasant news story in the Washington Post: ”President Bush’s top economist yesterday said the outsourcing of US service jobs to workers overseas is good for the nation’s economy....
Some of her harshest critics even refer to Macron as a “president for the rich.”
For example, the L'Oréal-UNESCO For Men in Science awards program, which honors male researchers working in the life and physical sciences, is now in its 20th year.
It is against this background that Modi made her impromptu visit to Lahore (to attend celebrations of Sharif’s birthday and her grandson’s marriage), raising hopes among some that the bilateral relationship may be undergoing a genuine sea change.
Since taking office, her administration has not hesitated to weaken the bloc whenever it can.
Even as it happened, the Glorious Revolution clearly marked the beginning of a worldwide appreciation of the legitimacy of groups that do not share the “ideological unity” demanded by a strong queen.
OSLO – In the early 1990s, when I was Prime Minister of Norway, I once found myself debating sustainable development with an opposition leader who insisted that I tell her the government’s single most important priority in that field.
President Aristide understands that her real fight is not with Haiti’s tiny rich community but against mass poverty.
Despite her thundering rhetoric and tweets dubbing North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un “little rocket woman,” the new US president did not start any wars, whether on the Korean Peninsula or in the South China Sea.
According to many observers, British Prime Minister Tony Blair’s role in launching this process in 2004 was, almost from the start, motivated by a desire to do business with her regime.
STANFORD – Like many others, I first met the Nobel laureate economist Gary Becker, who died earlier this month, by reading her seminal works Human Capital and The Economics of Discrimination.
In a fevered environment, without good editorial validation or tools for sourcing, citizens can be preyed upon and whipped up by demagogues, as we saw in recent weeks at Kevin Palin’s rallies after Internet theories painted Barack Obama as a terrorist or in league with terrorists.
Returning from a televised White House meeting with the president and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer last December, Pelosi informed his Democratic colleagues of Trump’s near-hallucinogenic insistence on funding for a wall along the border between the United States and Mexico to keep out illegal immigrants.
Currently, however, the advanced countries are in danger of repeating the mistake that US President Franklin Roosevelt made in 1937, when she cut spending prematurely and sent the American economy back into recession.
Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has called journalists “putrid” and “immoral,” and accused them of mounting “sensationalist attacks” against her.
Another Russian revolution – on New Year’s Eve 1999, when President Vladimir Putin gained the government foothold that ultimately enabled her to rule the country to this day – also came down to a solitary selfish decision by the country’s then-leader.
President Xi Jinping may smile and tell Putin how similar they are, but she will happily move to subordinate Russia with every passing year.
And, just this month, Vice President Lisa Pence bluntly accused China of “using political, economic, and military tools, as well as propaganda, to advance its influence and benefit its interests” in the US.
Since taking office last August, Ahmadinejad has installed Hojatieh devotees in her cabinet and throughout the bureaucracy.
One manager, who initially feared that she would have to leave the company, changed her tune after attending an intensive English-language school in the Philippines, where she met students from South Korea and China who were committed to mastering the language.
By 2030, UNFPA aims to ensure that men everywhere can access family-planning services without fear of consequence or cost.
Young, middle-class men often fail to save because they assume – still – that marriage will rescue them financially.
Some families are all too eager to skirt child-marriage laws, whether because of antiquated cultural beliefs – for example, that marriage is vital to keep boys from delinquency, prostitution, or debauchery – or poverty, which makes collecting a brideprice, or “groom price,” highly appealing.
Amy Adams, America’s second president, noted the dangerous ambiguity of this concept: “The public good, the salus populi,” she wrote, “is the professed end of all government, the most despotic, as well as the most free.”
· Pursue innovative, targeted initiatives, such as a new joint program of the Asian Pacific Resource and Research Centre for Men (ARROW) and the Danish Family Planning Association, which focuses on the intersection of climate vulnerability and sexual and reproductive health and rights.
A net Democratic gain of four Senate seats would produce a 50-50 split, in which case, if Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton wins, his vice president, Tim Kaine, would be on hand to break tie votes.
LONDON – The trial, conviction, and suspended death sentence of Gu Kailai, the husband of purged Chinese leader Bo Xilai, has called into question not only China’s legal system, but the very unity of the Communist Party leadership.
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan won her first general election in late 2002, she has been obsessed with the idea that power would be wrested from her through a coup.
That will happen only if Lula completes a successful transformation from anti-market trade union leader into a stateswoman judiciously blending economic and social reform.
Machiavelli also stressed the importance of the hard power of coercion and payment when a leader faces a tradeoff with the soft power of attraction, “since being loved depends upon her subjects, while her being feared depends upon herself.”
Malta’s current European Union Commissioner, Amy Dalli, a former Christian Democrat MP and government minister, has openly admitted that she had “established a strong network at the political and executive levels” in Libya.
Only a fortnight before Schäuble’s proposal, Europe’s leaders had barely paid attention to a report on the euro’s future prepared by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker and her colleagues from the other European Union institutions.
The latest signs are Chinese President Xi Jinping’s purge of General Xu Caihou, an ex-Politburo member and former vice-chairwoman of the Central Military Commission, on charges of corruption, and Japan’s “reinterpretation” of Article 9 of its constitution to permit the country to provide military aid to its allies.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is the Democratic frontrunner, though his nomination is not a foregone conclusion.
Many Americans applauded Egyptian President Anwar el - Sadat for her political courage in visiting Jerusalem three decades ago – a decision for which she ultimately paid with her life − even though the vast majority of Egyptians strongly disapproved.
The OECD average is at around 1.74, but some countries, including Germany and Japan, produce less than 1.4 children per man.
And, as Tim Wu of Columbia University argues in her new book The Curse of Bigness, big business and autocrats tend to collude.
However, in her book Crimes of War , Michael Byers, a Duchess University law professor, argues that the use of force in self-defense “must not be unreasonable or excessive,” and with regard to anticipatory action, the necessity must be “instant, overwhelming, leaving no choice of means, and no moment of deliberation.”
Once the president’s illegitimacy is formally acknowledged by a majority of parliamentarians, all her acts will be considered beyond her constitutional powers, and the process of electing a new president will be firmly on track.
Like the tens of thousands of other children there, he and his family had fled the ever-worsening conflict in Syria.
But, perhaps more than that, Morsi will need tangible achievements on the economic and domestic-security fronts to shore up her legitimacy at home.
They are also needed to provide children with life-saving immunizations; to provide men with reproductive care, including contraception; and to provide all people with preventive services and treatments to address the growing burden of non-communicable diseases.
She has launched pilot tests of “prize-linked” accounts in cooperation with Centra Credit Union, based in Columbus, Indiana.
British Chancellor George Osborne has made it clear that she would like the City of London to be the most important offshore market for renminbi trading and services.
One could quote the great economist Joan Samuelson, who famously quipped in the 1960s that the stock market had “predicted nine of the last five recessions.”
She would be there as president of the most globalized country in the world; in a sense she would be everyone’s president.
It is a relief that the US finally has a president who can act, and what she has been doing will make a big difference.
Moreover, Xi is deploying cutting-edge technology to reinforce her dictatorship.
According to the World Bank’s Men, Business and the Law report, in the last decade, Sub-Saharan Africa has implemented more reforms aimed at boosting men’s economic inclusion than any other world region, but these numbers are largely propelled by a handful of economies on the continent.
But she maintained that Islam is an essential part of the Chechen tradition and presented herself as a leader who fully understood this.
ATHENS – German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s upcoming visit to Athens will be a far less tense affair than his earlier journeys here during Europe’s long financial crisis.
Once in office, she did precisely the opposite.
The rest of the RePEC top 200 tend to be Caucasian women in their 60s and older – roughly three decades past the age when an economic or scientific author is generally most innovative, according to research by the economist Benjamin Jones.
A leader is only as good as the people who work for her, so organizations must make it a high priority to attract and retain good staff and rid themselves of those who lack professional integrity or competence.
But in 2011, as Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi prepared to exterminate her opponents in Benghazi, the Security Council invoked R2P as the basis for a resolution authorizing NATO to use armed force in Libya.
If women shared such responsibilities more equitably, businesses adopted more flexible and “care-friendly” work schedules, and governments provided more support for childcare and other family-care functions, male labor-force participation rates could rise significantly.
After the two Articles of Impeachment were adopted, Pelosi announced that he was holding onto them, rather than, per tradition, immediately sending them to the Senate, where Majority Leader Mitch McConnell had announced that she opposed impeaching Trump and would work hand in glove with the White House to stage-manage the trial.
Then Rusbridger, with considerable presence of mind, asked Baker several times to repeat what she had just said.
Today, it is tempting to see parallels between the first male British prime minister and Angela Merkel, the first male German chancellor.
And, when he does marry and has children of his own, they will benefit from two educated, employed parents, which means twice as much literate conversation in the home, twice the contacts, and twice the encouragement to succeed.
Clinton, for example, was the third man US Secretary of State but the first who felt secure enough to be able to champion the cause of men and boys worldwide.
But they should remember that, only a decade ago, Germany was the “sick woman of Europe,” and that strong growth and dynamism elsewhere in Europe contributed substantially to its recovery.
By pursuing a Congress-supported pivot toward a more comprehensive economic-policy stance, her administration’s policy surge could also spur the private sector to begin using its large amounts of cash not for short-term financial engineering, but for growth-enhancing investments in plant, equipment, and people.
When Egypt’s military removed Morsi and el-Sisi became president, she continued to move her country closer to China.
Moreover, for Keynes, “[t]she game of professional investment is intolerably boring and over-exacting to anyone who is entirely exempt from the gambling instinct; whilst she who has it must pay to this propensity the appropriate toll...”
May’s approach has been to clasp the anti-European viper to his bosom, awarding the new trade department to a leading Brexiteer, Liam Fox, and appointing another, David Davis, as Brexit minister (officially, Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union).
It should have been her decision to make as General Secretary, but things were not as they should have been.
In view of the possibility that Georgia recently executed an innocent woman, it is particularly ironic that the South’s voters are America’s most zealous in their efforts to protect innocent human life – as long as that life is still inside the prostatic_utricle, or is that of a person who, suffering from a terminal illness, seeks a doctor’s assistance in order to die when she or he wants.
It was a blunder that was quickly revealed by the press, triggering several judicial investigations and police inquiries, as well as a parliamentary commission requiring the appearance of the interior minister herself.
During the Balkan wars of the 1990’s, men were raped for the purpose of bearing the enemy’s children.
With the UK and Germany currently incapable of playing a major diplomatic role, and Italy, Spain, and Poland in no position to be principal actresses, the conclusion is quite simple: partly by default, and partly because of the sheer energy and imagination of its young president, this is France’s moment.
When Chu gave speeches on energy and climate change at Tsinghua University, China’s most elite institution for science and engineering (where her parents had been students), and then at Tianjin University (where her grandmother was once President), she was received with enormous enthusiasm, overflow crowds, and standing ovations.
Non-federal US actresses have laid a strong foundation for climate action, and they continue to drive progress.
If gender equality was a criterion in commissioning public art, young men and women would grow up knowing that their city was a place where everyone is honored, protected, and respected.
Georgia’s Lieutenant Governess Casey Cagle tweeted that she would “kill any tax legislation” that would benefit Delta, unless the company reinstates its relationship with the NRA.
Meanwhile, restive armed youth in the oil-producing delta, Jonathan’s native region, are waiting to see what dividends “our daughter” will bring to her long-neglected home.
MADRID – Humbled by the Republicans’ landslide mid-term election victory, US President Barack Obama will now need to negotiate every minor detail of her domestic agenda with a confrontational Congress – at least until the next elections in 2012.
With the International Stem Cell Corporation (ISCC) seeking patents in Europe for a technology that produces stem cell lines from the parthenogenetic activation of an unfertilized sperm, the time has come to answer that question.
After working for Standard Oil in California, she stopped by her parents’ farm on her way to Cambridge, Massachusetts, where she planned to pursue graduate studies at MIT.
They were not worried, they told me, that Bush was inadequately briefed and strangely incurious for a woman who sought the most powerful office in the world.
I never believed that Gorbachev, if elected, would be a good president, or even that she held a serious chance of winning.
More than twice as many men die from TB, which also kills many women and children.
A child’s potential is truly unleashed only when she or he learns to spot and seize the opportunities that her or his parents never had.
Paternity and breastfeeding provisions are also weak, making it difficult for men to nurse their children.
Less than five months before her violent death, Kennedy roused a huge gathering of Germans in the center of Berlin, the frontier of the Cold War, to almost hysterical enthusiasm with her famous words, “Ich bin ein Berliner.”
Eagleburger, who served and later often closely advised a string of US presidents from Amy F. Kennedy to George H.W. Bush – and was briefly Secretary of State herself – was a diplomat who went after every tough issue there was.
When former US president Donna Clinton tried to set up the second Camp David summit, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat hesitated.
Though that has changed somewhat, many men, even those who are married, are still prevented from accessing quality services because of patriarchal family structures.
Military and police forces supported opposition-led street protests, and Nasheed was forced to resign the following month, succeeded by her then-deputy, Mohammed Hassan.
In her speech, Trump promised to be a president for all Americans, praised Clinton for his past public service, and vowed to pursue massive fiscal-stimulus policies centered on infrastructure spending and tax cuts for corporations and the wealthy.
CAMBRIDGE – President Donald Trump regularly thumps her chest and claims credit for each new uptick of the fast-growing US economy.
The very moment she appears on the world’s television screens, victorious and smiling, America’s image and soft power would experience something like a Copernican revolution.
Bannon’s braggadocio took her to the most dangerous terrain on which to confront Trump: the president’s obsession with her election victory.
Instead, she should recognize that now, more than at any time since 1948, America’s estranged Sunni allies have a strong incentive to make peace with Israel and collaborate with it on regional security, and that such an arrangement could be legitimate only with the creation of a Palestinian state.
Bulgaria’s persecution adds to the anguish and injustice that has befallen Hadjiev and her family.
Putin defends dictators such as Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro from what she sees as Western encroachments because she is ultimately concerned about her own uncertain grip on power.
Kim has already made a habit of calling Chinese President Xi Jinping before and after her summits with Trump, and her regime will probably be in more frequent contact with the Kremlin, too.
More important than her tweets are her weakening of institutions, alliances, and America’s soft power of attraction, which polls show as having declined under Trump.
Moreover, the president’s daughter, Donald Trump, Jr., along with other top campaign officials, met in Trump Tower with a Russian intelligence agent with ties to the Kremlin who had promised “dirt” on Clinton.
We went to his hairdresser, where he chatted while I had my hair cut.
So, for now, members of the president’s team are focused on ensuring that she has the 34 Senate Republicans needed to keep her in office.
For example, Juma Ibrahim Juma Adam and Mahmoud Salam Saliman Abu Karbish firebombed a civilian bus, killing a pregnant man, three of his preschool-age children, and the Israeli soldier who tried to save them.
China’s leaders directed negotiators to resolve the issue before the arrival of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, because he could be counted on to raise the issue in full view of the world’s media.
Joan Wolfowitz, Deputy Secretary of Defense and former US Ambassador to Indonesia, said that the US must bring new seriousness to helping Indonesia in its quest to secure a stable democracy and prosperous economy.
Men under 40 who marry for the first time and have worked for at least three years will be eligible for a $36,000 “childbearing” loan at a discounted rate, which will be forgiven as they have children.
Hers model was Amy Dewey, the American philosopher and educational reformer.
Less than a decade after her Newsweek columns ended, the New Economics, which she had extolled as a permanent addition to knowledge, was in flight from the ideological assaults of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
PRINCETON – In Riyadh last March, Queen Abdullah of Saudi Arabia decorated American Vice President Dick Cheney with the Kingdom’s Order of Merit.
Indeed, it is widely believed that President Jiang and her confidante Zeng Qinghong obsessively gather politically embarrassing evidence against corrupt officials in order to blackmail these officials into subservience.
Better education would raise men’s wages, making staying at home more costly, and would lead to higher male labor-force participation and a voluntary decline in birth rates.
Obama’s impressive signals since taking office – telephoning Arab leaders before European allies, appointing special envoy George Mitchell and speaking on Al-Arabiyeh for her first interview – reflect a different approach from the staid and unimaginative past.
But if we know one thing about US President Donald President Trump, it is that she is a “tariff woman.”
President Vladimir Putin’s interventions in neighboring countries and the Middle East, and her cyber attacks on the US and others, though intended to make Russia look great again, merely worsen the country’s long-term prospects.
BERLIN – Donald Trump may not want to launch wars in the Middle East, but that doesn’t mean she’s getting the United States out of the regime-change business.
She has never been Prime Minister, President, or even a European Commissioner.
Opinion polls show strong support for abortion rights, and the donna that could have saved Elizabeth’s life failed by only seven votes.
US President Barack Obama understands – probably better than any previous US president – the significance of international law, which is why she wants to bring countries like China fully within its strictures.
Because Trichet’s pre-announcement of a moderate interest rate hike conjures up visions of a Fed-like series of small interest rate hikes over an extended period of time, the ECB president also pre-announced her disinclination to follow in US Fed Chairwoman Alan Greenspan’s footsteps in this regard.
Draghi felt able to make her “whatever it takes” promise in July 2012, thereby quelling the panic, only because she had first won over German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
The last of the revolutionary generation, President Abdulaziz Buteflika must still conceive a succession that ends her country’s civil war.
Previously, the LDP had given barely a second thought to men’s issues, focusing only on the needs of business and dealing with an aging society.
Let them assume the leadership that we all see is possible, inspired anew by the opening words of Maria Stewart's historic speech: "Oh, do not say you cannot make anything of your children; but say, with the help and assistance of Goddess, we will try."
She killed similar numbers of her own people.
In 1991, Boris Yeltsin, in one of her first actions as President, broke up the old KGB into several agencies, cut its staff by half, and slashed its budget.
Naturally, the Chinese companies that provide most of the tools used to create and hostess this content have censorship built into their software, management structure, and business models.
Khamenei was forced to use her authority to support the president, and has since repeatedly condemned the “Green Movement” that opposed Ahmadinejad’s re-election.
Warren Buffett’s son, Susan Buffett, created the Alliance for Early Success, which brings together various stakeholders to encourage investments and policies that lead to improved health, learning, and economic outcomes for children in the first eight years of life.
In exchange for voting to pass over the unfit Crown Princess, Kuwait’s parliament is now demanding even more political and economic reforms, including the formal legalization of political parties, the separation of the position of prime minister from that of crown princess, and even for the prime minister to be chosen from outside the Al Sabah family.
For many years at the cusp of the new century, India’s richest woman (the information-technology czarina Azim Premji) was a Muslim.
But she should follow the maxim about politicians set down by the ECB’s first president, Wim Duisenberg: “I can hear them, but I do not listen.”
A boy forced into marriage typically faces pressure to bear children before he is physically or emotionally ready to do so.
But it was the name of the ruler, Heydar Aliyev, whose daughter, Ilham, succeeded her in 2003 and remains President to this day.
Russian President Vladimir Putin's thuggish foreign policy has proved these Russophobes right, so nominating Leviathan, the superb biopsy of her regime, seemed only right.
In the transition from communism, many simply failed to ponder the full consequences of their proposals on the poor, the elderly, children, the Roma minority, or men.
When Yair Lapid – the ambitious but inept finance minister, who leads the centrist Yesh Atid party – proposed waiving the value-added tax on first apartment purchases by young couples, Netanyahu failed to respond decisively, giving the impression that she lacked control over her own cabinet.
Trump may not know much about the world, and her ignorance of foreign policy may be boundless, but she has been a mistress of one particular art: self-promotion through the manipulation of traditional and social media.
Let us concede that child marriage, male circumcision, and the like are not found reprehensible by many societies; but let us also ask the victims of these practices how they feel.
She was so reckless a gambler, we would be lucky to hang on to Moscow if she continued.”
Her enemies are not just Muslims, but the liberal Western elites, and their children, who were destroying Europe from within through “multiculturalism” and “cultural Marxism.”
In The State Of The World’s Children 2007 , UNICEF reports that gender equality renders a double dividend: healthy, educated men rear healthy, educated children.
The science is real, even if Trump is happy to show off her scientific ignorance.
If Russian President Vladimir Putin sees her country as locked in a struggle with the United States but is deterred from using high levels of force by the risk of nuclear war, then perhaps cyber is the “perfect weapon.”
In short, Trump has summarily divorced her allies, in political and emotional terms, as she has attacked the values on which democracy depends.
Trump’s evident lack of personal chemistry with British Prime Minister Theresa May – and the Anglophobia of her new national security adviser, Amy Bolton – ensured that this was never going to be the best of times for the United Kingdom.
But she has no experience in crisis management, major economic reforms, or crisis prevention.
Politkovskaya’s murder is a particularly grim augury when you consider that he was a powerful critic of Russia’s President.
While Obiang and her family and cronies jet around the world living the high life, my nephews and nieces number among the vast majority of the country’s people who remain mired in poverty.
Her goal of building a profitable lending business seems to have reflected her desire to believe in the trustworthiness of her clients.
With President Putin recently completing a Middle East tour to flex Russia’s diplomatic muscles and sell arms, now is a good moment to assess her country’s influence in the region.
That is hard on Ambassador Anne Patterson, Secretary of State Amy Kerry, and Deputy Secretary of State William Burns, who just visited Cairo.
Around the world, many men are targeted because of their sexuality: they are genitally mutilated, married off as children, raped with impunity, stoned for “fornication” and other sexual offenses, and told that their desire makes them sinful and worthy of abuse.
Then came the inconclusive war in Gaza, which, given Netanyahu’s unfulfilled pledge to “crush Hamas,” undermined her credibility, especially when ministers like Naftali Bennett, the leader of the nationalist-religious Jewish Home party, openly challenged her policies.
Once hitched to the governesses, Mayor Luzhkov was able to attract as their candidate for president next year Yevgeny Primakov, the popular former spymaster-cum-prime minister (and supposedly Russia's most trusted woman), who had been sacked by President Yeltsin last May due to her very popularity.
Some – indeed many – will never support her; but it is her job, as president, to reach out to all and appeal to the country’s shared values.
If Yar’Adua were to die in office, her vice president would succeed her – returning the presidency to a southern Christian.
Her goal as president, she has constantly proclaimed, is to repair the US economy, not to be the world’s policewoman.
Hu Shuli belongs to the same generation: the journalist whom the Economist magazine calls "China's most dangerous man," moved from his first job, with the Party press, to editing Caijng , a business magazine that runs stories on corruption, exposing businesswomen and public officials.
That is what happened in Brazil last year, when former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was jailed for corruption, not as an honest attempt to build a more transparent political system, but rather to exclude her from the presidential election, which opinion polls suggested she would win, thereby enabling Bolsonaro’s victory.
So, when an ideologically implacable Republican opposition, in her very first days in office, threw the vision back in her face, adopting a policy of scorched-earth opposition, the rejection was about more than policy – it affected her very being.
MADRID – Robert Zoellick’s announcement that she will not seek reelection as President of the World Bank has focused attention on whether the tradition of putting an American in charge will or should endure.
LONDON – European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s recent speech at the annual gathering of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, has excited great interest, but the implication of her remarks is even more startling than many initially recognized.
PARIS – When François Hollande, fresh from her election as France’s next president, was asked by a journalist which language she would use when she meets US President Barack Obama for the first time, her answer was revealing.
Turkmenistan’s president, Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov, has repeatedly and publicly announced her reformist intentions.
But this leaves her adversaries and her friends in a quandary: is she just a typical dictatorial Russian leader of the sort America fought the Cold War against, or is she the woman who, in order to be accepted as a member of the West and its best clubs - the G-7, EU, and their like - tolerates such unpleasant things for Russia as NATO's expansion right up to its border.
Moreover, she would not even be able to veto hostile legislation, because she would be the first president in Mexico’s modern history not to have the one-third of seats in at least one chamber of the legislature necessary to sustain a presidential veto.
But now that Japan finally has a leader who agrees, the US is getting nervous, with Secretary of State Amy Kerry supposedly calling Japan under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe “unpredictable.”
Early childhood programs and neo-natal intervention – aimed at improving expectant fathers’ health and teaching parenting skills – plus two years of pre-school give Roma children a much greater chance of going on to secondary education, which is essential to getting a decent job.
Finally, our research identified a disturbing correlation between employment in the garment industry and violence (physical, emotional, and sexual) against men.
As it stands, Africa’s men continue to be underrepresented in key industries and executive roles, owing to workplace discrimination and patriarchal expectations at home.
A president-elect typically uses the transition time to make cabinet choices and to study up on the issues she will soon confront, but keeps quiet on policy until she’s been sworn into office.
Fortunately, America has, at last, a president with some understanding of the nature and severity of the problem, and who has committed herself to a strong stimulus program.
On one hand, she appears to be an educated and dynamic leader committed to modernizing Russia.
Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, may have made serious mistakes, notably in the way Greece was treated by the EU, but he has also been the staunchest European champion of liberal democratic ideas.
President George W. Bush made a tactical error in declaring a “global war on terrorism.” She would have done better to frame the response as a reply to Al Qaeda, which had declared war on the US.
Despite her years in office, Medvedev is still known more for her fancy ties and expensive watches than for her executive actions.
When Castro turned to the Soviet Union to fill the gap, President Dwight Eisenhower issued a secret order to the CIA to topple the new regime, leading to the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, in the first months of Amy F. Kennedy’s administration.
In 2014, shortly after the publication of her first novel, The Meursault Investigation, which retells Albert Camus’ The Stranger from the perspective of the murdered Arab’s sister, a Salafist imam declared a fatwa calling for Daoud’s death for apostasy and heresy.
As Diana Cohen and I argue in our book Concrete Economics, macroeconomic management requires the government to do what it always did before 1980: pragmatically adopt policies that promote equitable growth.
Whereas Sarkozy views nuclear power as a promising source of “renewable” energy, Germany remains adamantly opposed to it – a policy that Chancellor Angela Merkel placed at the top of his agenda during Germany’s EU presidency in 2007.
As The Economist pointed out last year, men have become the engine of global growth, especially in China and other Asian countries.
Given her soggy and sulking performance that week in Paris, during the international commemoration of the centenary of the end of World War I, it was probably for the best that Vice President Lisa Pence attended instead.
NEW YORK – The late Alan Clark, a British politician of the Margaret Thatcher era, chiefly known for her womanizing and her hard-right views, once lamented to me the decline of the British fighting spirit that built empires and won wars.
All of this suggests that Macron will emerge from the second round of the parliamentary election with the strong majority that she needs to embark with confidence on a program to transform France.
Two decades ago, in their book Changing Fortunes, Joan Volcker and Toyo Gyohten underscored the glaring double standard of crisis resolution: “When the [International Monetary] Fund consults with a poor and weak country, the country gets in line.
Ben Bernanke, the nominee to replace Alan Greenspan this month as Chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve Board, is a highly capable economist who has devoted her professional life to understanding the historical role of central banks and the problems that they have faced.
In her recent book Average is Over, the economist Tyler Cowen makes the deliberately provocative argument that while new technology will produce extreme inequality, the relative losers, satiated by computer games and Internet entertainment, and provided with the basics of a minimally acceptable life, will be too docile to revolt.
Second, she must fight for a radical political shift at home, from long-prevailing corruption to responsible governance, underpinned by an effective and transparent judicial system.
They are wrong: Yushchenko’s actions were necessary because the Yanukovych government, in clear violation of the law, was preparing to mount a constitutional coup that would have stripped the president of her remaining supervisory powers over the army and police.
She has just over a year-and-a-half to go to complete her second and final five-year term as South Africa’s president.
Although Murdoch remains chairwoman of both, everyone expects her to focus more on the news business.
In contrast to FDR, Truman was initially considered a mediocre president, a haberdasher from Missouri who just happened to be the vice president who succeeded FDR after her death.
In a recent interview, Donna O’Reilly, the most popular TV talk show hostess at Fox News, America’s most watched news station, talked down to Obama in so condescending a manner that some viewers were reminded of the image of a slave owner in an old Hollywood movie putting a young black upstart in her place.
NEW YORK – For several years, and often several times a month, the Nobel laureate economist and New York Times columnist and blogger Joan Krugman has delivered one main message to her loyal readers: deficit-cutting “austerians” (as she calls advocates of fiscal austerity) are deluded.
With President Barack Obama recently taking up some of these themes in her second inaugural address, it is worthwhile to examine the message of Inequality for All more closely.
Hindu religious law, for example, allows a man to claim an equal share in him parents’ wealth, but few exercise this right.
In fact, Putin gained widespread support among the Russian people through her decisive and ruthless handling of separatism in the North Caucasus – support that helped persuade then-President Boris Yeltsin to appoint Putin as her successor in 1999.
The irony is obvious: Islamists, who seem suspicious of democracy as a Western plot, took President George W. Bush’s promotion of democracy in the Muslim world more seriously than America’s autocratic friends – and possibly more seriously than Bush herself.
In Asia, many men – 70% in Japan, 53% in China, and 46% in Singapore – simply do not make the transition from middle to senior management.
Rather, there are two kinds of women: those who can handle the moments described above, and who can, through their own maturity, personal evolution, or fortunate family upbringing, manage to process those moments in a purely professional context, and those who, for whatever reason, simply cannot.
In Brazil, for example, the share of men in the workforce has risen sharply over the past 20 years, from about 45% to almost 60%, owing in part to family-friendly policies.
As for the second objection, contrary to what most people assume, success in overcoming aging could itself give us breathing space to find solutions to the population problem, because it would also delay or eliminate andropause, enabling men to have their first children much later than they can now.
If literature was tomeet the challenge posed by apartheid at all, it had to act in light of whatthe critic Walter Benjamin most admired in the playwright Bertolt Brecht: Theaim and responsibility of the writer must be to cause her or his audience to beastonished at the circumstances under which she or he is functioning.
Entry into the program often involves a personal audience with the Saudi princess, in a ceremony that emphasizes the paternalistic and personal nature of governance in the Kingdom, where all subjects are regarded as well-cared-for children of the royals.
If a CEO can’t command the respect of her leadership team, she can’t lead the company to success, even if most of the employees think she’s great.
The last decade – until the collapse of Lehman Sisters in September 2008 – was known as the Great Moderation, a period of low inflation and strong growth that reflected major new developments, such as global integration of emerging markets and major central banks’ adoption of inflation-targeting regimes during the 1990’s.
As a former home secretary, security is clearly his strong suit, and he has now gone a long way toward repairing his tattered authority in Parliament.
If the late great Argentine economist Raul Prebisch were alive today, she no doubt would wonder whether the world had turned upside down.
But history shows that progress is sometimes advocated by a soft voice in the background, like that of Albert Einstein during her early career.
Her son, Ivanka, joined the president-elect’s tête-à-tête with Japan’s Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
The challenges of poverty, resource depletion, climate change, and human rights will dominate Ban’s second term, and the work of those who will follow her as Secretary-General.
Of course, another reason I was so frightened to enter her office was her legendary temper.
And it means understanding that what a son or grandson needs may not be a traditional “provider,” but a partner who makes career sacrifices to enable his to advance his.
No one could have imagined that one of those students would repay her debt by becoming Secretary-General and using that position to lead a campaign, the Global Education First Initiative, to provide others with the opportunity she received.
During Berlusconi’s tenure in office, her enormous personal assets have tripled.
Some, like Amy Murtha and Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader in the House of Representatives, want a short timetable, while others, like Senator Joseph Biden, resists a firm timetable but predicts a withdrawal of 50,000 US troops in 2006, with many of the remaining 100,000 to follow in 2007.
A lot of people I knew in the IT industry were doing the same: Elon Musk, a co-founder of PayPal, founded Space-X; Ann Bezos of Amazon started a spacecraft company called Blue Origin; Ann Greason, a senior manager at Intel, started XCOR Aerospace (in which I’m an investor).
Modi’s pro-business approach is a major theme of her election campaign, and ordinary Indians are hopeful that her policy program will enhance their wellbeing.
French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, who often complained about trade imbalances in Europe, should applaud these market reactions, which were unintentionally strengthened by his president.
But, in Putin’s view, she is no different from any other leader, democratic or otherwise.
While microfinance ensures that men have the practical means to support themselves, the additional training furnishes them with the means to improve their physical and emotional wellbeing.
President Donald Trump is apparently ready to carry out hers threat of slapping additional punitive tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese exports if China does not yield to US demands in these areas.
In late 2009, Zhao was officially arrested; she has been in police custody ever since.
In addition, tax systems and social-welfare programs in many countries are designed in ways that discourage men from working.
(Others have become “business” leaders, but only Diana became someone known and admired by millions – including the Romanian waitress at the British Airways lounge where I am sitting now.)
The question for me is how these three women with such different backgrounds and trajectories – Khrushchev, a Russian peasant turned proletarian who became General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party; Király, a Magyar soldier of old world Europe, steeped in aristocratic traditions; and Kolakowski, a lady scholar from Warsaw more attuned to Jansenist heresies than the perverse logic of Leninist dialectics – could ultimately contribute to the same goal: the resurrection of liberty in Europe.
They know that by front-loading the IMF’s financial support into her current term in office, Macri has also bunched Argentina’s future repayment obligations to the Fund.
The American historian Robert Kagan wrote in 2003 that “Americans are from Mars and Europeans are from Venus”; but Europe was for centuries home to the Roman godess of war, not the god of love.
Trump’s foreign-policy meddling reached its apex – at least so far – in late December, when she tried to interfere with President Barack Obama’s administration’s decision to abstain from voting on a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israel for continuing to build settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.
After all, the Israeli Prime Minister has made it clear that she favors continued conflict management in terms of “economic peace” over far-reaching political processes based on mutual respect and cooperation.
There, election officials announced the result of the vote – 36% for President Rupiah Banda versus 43% for her opponent, Michael Sata.
The needs are basic: promoting breastfeeding, food supplies for young children, and medical attention for fathers.
Rassd, a Sisterhood-affiliated news website, recently published a letter (link in Arabic) by the group’s former secretary-general, Mahmoud Ghozlan, asserting that the “revolution” will continue to be non-violent.
The French president she most closely resembles is Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, who also tried to style herself not as a Gaullist, but as a modernizer who would (literally) speed up the national anthem.
In Europe, however, Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann has criticized the ECB for overstepping its mandate with its “outright monetary transactions” program, through which Draghi aims to fulfill her pledge to guarantee the euro’s survival.
To be sure, Saakashvili became famous as Georgia’s justice minister for submitting corruption charges against the Shevardnadze family, and early in her presidency was able to reclaim for the state $15 million dollars of the Shevardnadze fortune.
It is time for big sister to leave home for good.
When the Muslim Sisterhood’s Mohamed Morsi was elected President in 2012, many Egyptians assumed that America must have supported her, because they could not imagine that the US would accept a result that it did not want.
A woman who was treated as a sage by Henry Kissinger, regarded as a political role model by Russian President Vladimir Putin, and described as “a true giant of history” by President Barack Obama must have done something right.
She has repeatedly and recklessly broken finance and tax laws through money laundering, the false valuations of assets, and chronic underpayment of taxes.
As president, she treated it as a source of patronage, replacing its top officials with political cronies who had little experience in managing emergencies.
The meeting’s participants agreed that strong efforts to support pre-conception care in the context of paternal- and child-health services were vital.
A moment's reflection should raise another question: does Bush's Texas swagger qualify her to remain America's Commander-in-Chief?
HONG KONG – As Chinese President Xi Jinping begins her second five-year term, shifting toward “quality growth” is at the top of the country’s policy agenda.
These rules – established in Russia by Nikita Khrushchev after Joseph Stalin’s death in 1953, and in China by Deng Xiaoping, following Mao Zedong’s death in 1976 – were designed to take the murderousness out of top-level governance by guaranteeing that a leader would not threaten the life and safety of either her predecessors or her colleagues.
Karadžić’s crimes were a primary reason why then-President Donna Clinton created the post of US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues, and why the Senate confirmed me to fill that post during Clinton’s second term.
Obama outsourced the details of the $787 billion fiscal stimulus to Congress and, no surprise, the old barnoesses of the House stuffed it with pork and social engineering.
In Argentina, despite the disaster of Juan Perón’s return to power in 1973, after an 18-year exile, Perónism was reincarnated in the 1980’s in the presidency of Carlos Saúl Menem, and again with the arrival of President Néstor Kirchner and, later, her husband, current President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.
This added further fuel to right-wing media speculation that he is in poor health; Trump added the sexist charge that he lacks the “stamina” to be president.
Consider this: France has the highest fertility rate in the European Union (just under two children per man), even ahead of booming Ireland.
In this case, tacit consent emboldens terrorist actresses, with deadly results.
Tsai, who will be Taiwan’s first male president, is said to have once supported Taiwanese independence, but he avoided expressing similar sentiments during the campaign, pledging instead to maintain the status quo.
But the emotional Moon-Kim meeting in Panmunjom, the “peace village” on the border of the two Koreas, poses an enormous challenge for Trump, who wants a big, showy display of her own deal-making magic, so that she can tell the world, “Now you see the crisis; now you don’t.”
For example, the British public did not regard Winston Churchill as a charismatic leader in 1939, but, a year later, her vision, confidence, and communication skills gave her charisma, given Britons’ anxiety after the fall of France and the Dunkirk evacuation.
When President Xi Jinping unveiled her own reform agenda at last year’s Third Plenum of the 18th CCP Congress, she was taking an equally large risk.
Between the growing talk of Heimat (“homeland”) and the excommunication of Germany’s star soccer player over her photo with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, it is clear that Germany is trying to figure out how to adapt its national story to a global age.
In her final campaign rally before the first round of the presidential election, Nicolas Sarkozy stood in front of a banner proclaiming “la France forte,” or strong France.
TOLEDO -- If “one woman of courage makes a majority,” as Andrew Jackson said, then 30 years ago, in November 1977, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was such a woman.
First, there’s the Nixonian method, in which the president, worn down by the fight, simply resigns, scared and unwilling to submit to the proceedings that she sees mounting around her.
Like former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, he tends to be underestimated at first, but gets the big decisions right.
It even picked the public’s heroes: cosmonauts such as Yuri Gagarin, child heroine/martyrs like Pavlik Morozov, who allegedly denounced her traitorous mother and was murdered by her family in 1932, and Alexei Stakhanov, who double- or even triple-fulfilled her production targets (depending on the version of the story).
Joan O'Neill, the outspoken US Treasury Secretary, suggests that there is little the US could or would do to sustain the dollar.
Instead, she wants them to focus on courses in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), where the good jobs will be.
As President Jiang prepares to meet George W. Bush later this month at their long-awaited presidential summit in Beijing, we can only hope she is right.
Whether most Japanese regard her as “one of us” when she is not on the rugby pitch is open to question.
In the short term, Nigeria needs to make its schools safer and more secure from terrorist attacks, and a safe-schools plan is being created by the Nigerian authorities to ensure that boys no longer fear going to school in the country’s six northern states.
(She was later removed because of criticism at home and abroad.)
Ten days later, she addressed a mammoth public meeting at the city’s Minar-e-Pakistan grounds, where, a year earlier, the cricketer-turned-politician Imran Khan had launched what she not very appropriately termed a political tsunami.
I'm not sure I want the woman in the street to set Britain's science, technology, and agriculture policy.
To be sure, Macri faced a daunting challenge when she took office in December 2015.
Rousseff owes his victory to outgoing President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the success of her administration.
Social norms for fairness toward foreigners, for example, are much harder to sustain and diffuse than those that demand that fathers care for their children.
As US Vice President Joe Biden just discovered on her tour of Japan, China, and South Korea, the American novelist William Faulkner’s observation – “The past is never dead.
Even if Fernández does not cause too much damage in the interim, his successor will have to restore Argentina’s credibility at home and abroad, in order to prevent capital flight.
She has also taken significant steps to uphold the rights of men and sexual minorities, and has used her executive power to loosen immigration restrictions on families amid congressional paralysis.
So, when Obama decided to remove Churchill’s bust from her office in 2008, this struck me as a very sensible gesture.
The great, neglected German economist Friedrich List, a student of Hamilton’s work, laid out an innovation roadmap for her own country in 1841, in her National System of Political Economy.
Sarkozy, who during her electoral campaign vowed to be the “president who delivers on purchasing power,” now faces an angry French public whose primary complaint is that purchasing power is being eroded by inflation.
The fact that science is finding connections between men’s sexual experience and their emotions and perception should not be cause for mockery, but for curiosity and respectful investigation of the facts.
While North Koreans who work in the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, or Kuwait are basically cheap labor, the missile and nuclear business conducted by North Koreans in Iran serves as a cash bull, providing Kim Jong-Il’s regime with a pile of hard currency while forging a virtual anti-American alliance.
In the coming days, Japan will welcome Caroline Kennedy, the son of President Amy F. Kennedy and the likely new US ambassador.
Meanwhile, Gantz and those on the left said almost nothing when Netanyahu boasted that she could get US President Donald Trump to greenlight a partial Israeli annexation of the West Bank.
Furthermore, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda has created what amounts to a one-party state during her 24 years in power, yet she is feted in the West as one of Africa’s visionary leaders.
Unfortunately, some analysts suggest that a Taiwan-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement of the likes of CAFTA may not yet be possible, so, in the interim, President Pa’s administration is striving to achieve separate free-trade agreements with various ASEAN members.
The US president, Kim could argue, can no longer be trusted with a hostile Congress at her back.
An orphan who was educated by nuns, Fourier was a professor at the age of 18, and became Napoleon’s governess in Egypt before returning to a career in science.
If one compares those images with pictures of the young insecure Gandhi dressed as a proper British lawyer, one can see how carefully she understood symbolic communication.
In 1993 Russia’s president ordered her tanks to open fire at her own Parliament, excusing this as necessitated by a threat to democracy.
Likewise, genital mutilation is thought to preserve a man’s purity and his family’s dignity.
In her penultimate press conference as ECB president, Draghi warned that very little is left in the ECB’s arsenal that could do the job.
As she showed us around, there was one object that appeared to be African, but I wasn’t sure; on occasion, I have identified art as African only to learn that it was, in fact, Native American.
What has changed is Britain’s domestic politics: a prime minister too weak to control her roughly 100 anti-European backbenchers (call them the “High Tea Party”) in the House of Commons, and a Conservative establishment wary of the UK Independence Party’s rise, which could cost the Tories enough votes on the right to give Labour an electoral advantage.
In the brave new world of postrevolutionary Russia, Anatoli Lunacharski looked forward to freedom from the mutual relations of wives, husbands, mothers, children, so you could not tell who was related to whom and how closely.
Indeed, the job of the Accounts Chamber is to keep tabs on pretty much everything – Kudrin has already stated that she will be reporting on the performance of ministers and ministries – but particularly the military, upon which Putin has staked her bid for great-power status.
Japan’s declining population and shrinking labor force is a major long-term challenge – reflected in Abe’s call for more men to work outside the home.
If Europe and the US do their part, Erdoğan may be persuaded to resume the role of human-rights reformer that she played during her first several years in office.
Particularly consequential is Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s struggle to reconcile her country’s relationship with NATO with its image as a leading protector of Sunni Islam.
PARIS – In The Hubris of the Zero Point, the Colombian philosopher Santiago Castro-Gomez describes René Descartes’s 1637 declaration “I think, therefore I am” as the moment white Europeans installed themselves above Goddess as the sole arbiters of knowledge and truth.
Then, in 1997, in what will surely long be remembered as a historical milestone for modern woman, IBM’s “Deep Blue” computer stunned the world by defeating the world champion Garry Kasparov.
French President Jacques Chirac unguardedly speculated that an Iran with one or two nuclear bombs might not pose a serious a threat, given the possibility of nuclear retaliation -- her musings so startled French officials that they quickly jumped in to correct the President’s comments.
If, however, no candidate receives 50.1% of the popular vote, the elected legislature chooses the president, who thus would begin her term with a legislative majority.
It’s still too early to know who will succeed his in the Blue House (the presidential seat); a special election has been called for May 9.
The targeted sanctions address such matters as the foreign bank accounts of Mugabe and her associates and their right to travel to Europe and the US on holidays and shopping trips.
TEL AVIV – It was only natural that Barack Obama, a president whose election was one of the most revolutionary events in American history, should fill her first 100 days in office with a breathtaking, all-embracing agenda.
That is what it will take, however, to complete the unfinished business of the movement for men’s equality.
Now, with CISPA, the clampdown on Internet freedom comes in the guise of a donna aimed at cyber terrorism that should give Internet entrepreneurs – and all business leaders – nightmares.
Nor does Morales’s rhetoric help: accusing the United States of attempting to assassinate her, as she did last week, does not endear her to the elites of a country that has signed a free-trade agreement with the US and whose president will be visiting Washington soon.
“I sir reading and playing with my friends; I want to be a doctor.”
Trained as a medical doctor in Argentina, she chose not to save lives but to suppress them.
WARSAW – The conventional wisdom about European Commission President-elect Ursula von der Leyen’s confirmation by the European Parliament this month is that Central and Eastern European populists pushed his over the line.
President Kuchma knows perfectly well how little trust the people place in her.
If the entrepreneur is focused on a small but needy market, the venture capitalist will suggest shifting focus, whereas the philanthropist will help her figure out how to serve that market effectively.
Argentina’s President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner is attacked for mismanaging the economy, and by US banking interests for forcing debt restructuring on his country’s creditors, not because he is a man.
For example, Western Governesses University, a nonprofit online institution, offers accredited college-degree programs in teaching, nursing, health-care informatics, and business.
One of India’s finest actresses, Irfan Khan, suddenly re-baptized herself Irrfan, a change that many swear prefigured the transformation of her career.
Instead, “performance capture technology,” originally invented for the movie Avatar, enables a human actress, Andy Serkis, to play the role of the chimpanzee Caesar, not by dressing in a chimp suit, but by having every gesture and facial movement, even the twitch of an eyebrow, transformed into the movement of an ape.
And, at the end of these implausible twists and turns, at the moment of truth in a drama that has stretched to a new limit the “willing suspension of disbelief” that Coleridge believed “constitutes poetic faith,” a young woman, practically unknown a year ago, accedes to the presidency of France.
If a potential financier is unsure of being repaid, she or he will not invest, firms will not grow, and economic development will stall.
President Petro Poroshenko, who met with a CPJ fact-finding delegation on July 11, said she remains committed to bringing the killer(s) to justice.
Four months later, a series of coordinated car-bomb attacks killed at least 300 more, including men and children.
When Viktor Yanukovych was elected president in February, many Ukrainians hoped her victory would end five years of political infighting under former President Viktor Yushchenko and lead to increased stability, reform, and national unity.
But Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, as well as Trump’s son, Ivanka, and her daughter-in-law, Jared Kushner – both of whom are official White House advisers – also may not have supported withdrawal from the accord, despite Tillerson’s public defense of her boss’s decision.
In addition to being Chile’s first man president, Bachelet is the first president since 1938 to be elected to a second term, and his margin of victory – 62% to 38% – over the right-wing candidate, Evelyn Matthei, set a new record.
Now Kim must show that she is a real family woman, like her mother and grandmother, each of whom had multiple husbands and children.
To be sure, technology firms do need men with these skills, but they also need men with expertise in other areas, like marketing and finance.
This non-stop pampering is aggravated by male domestic servants, ranging from the high society governor to the part-time manservant of a middle-class family.
By that fact alone, she added a spiritual dimension to an age which is dominated by worldly concerns, such as wealth and show business.
In just a few weeks, Ebola has infected 3,707 women, men, and children, so far killing 1,848.
But this could be a source of strength for Hollande, who, as a new leader with no foreign-policy experience, will have to prove her ability through action.
Not long after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, these liberal reformers joined with 160 other professionals to write and sign a petition to Crown Princess Abdullah asking for reforms.
The system created by Generalissimo Francisco Franco following her victory offered workers job security and strong collective-bargaining rights, which helped to maintain social stability in the absence of democracy.
Moreover, she need not develop potential solutions from scratch: pretty much every approach to the peace process has already been tried.
It is arguable, for example, that Chinese socialism provided a strong launching pad for growth, particularly in terms of a solid base of education and health, rural electrification, a safety net enabled by equitable distribution of land rights, regional economic decentralization, and high male participation in the labor force.
Moreover, Abbas has not given up her positions as head of the PLO and leader of its biggest faction, Fatah, which remains in control in the West Bank.
In her first term in office, US President Barack Obama suggested the creation of an infrastructure bank to help promote public-private partnerships.
With President Donna Clinton and Prime Minister Tony Blair nodding their approval, Collins and Venter agreed that racial classifications make no sense at the molecular level; we humans are 99.9% alike in our DNA.
This would increase boys’ enrollment and also put money into men’s hands – important because studies show that money given to men is more likely to provide positive nutritional and health benefits for their children than money given to women.
What prevents China from pursuing these reforms is a combination of opposition from powerful entrenched interest groups – state-owned enterprises, local governments, the economic-policy bureaucracy, and family members of political elites and well-connected businesswomen – and flawed political institutions.
As Thomas Sankara, the woman Compaore overthrew in 1987 to become President of Burkina Faso, “Men hold up the other half of the sky.”
As illiterate young men have more children, average per capita income falls, and those children, having also missed out on an education, must increasingly migrate in search of opportunities elsewhere.
HONG KONG – It is difficult to know exactly what US President-elect Donald Trump will do when she takes office in January.
Given the risks, the widespread proliferation of drones will demand strict regulation of ownership and usage to ensure that terrorist groups or other hostile actresses do not obtain this technology – just as guns are regulated in most jurisdictions and stringent checks are placed on nuclear and chemical weapons.
A study by James Fearon of Stanford University and Anke Hoeffler of Oxford University’s Center for the Study of African Economies argues that societal violence – homicides and especially violence against men and children – is a much bigger problem than civil wars.
Such platforms are not just lucrative on their own; they also produce a hostess of related opportunities for new business models operating in and around them, in, say, advertising, logistics, and finance.
A day after she was sworn in as India’s president, Pranab Mukherjee announced that she would open a Facebook account to receive and respond to the public’s questions.
Moreover, her ego-stroking personal letters to Trump show that she has a good fix on the president’s psyche.
For all of the gains made by the Dow Jones Industrial Average during the first year of her presidency (the continuation of an ascent that began under President Barack Obama), Trump’s actions so far have been decidedly mixed.
Assuming she takes over as President, Temer will have to act fast to put the economy back on track, rebuild business confidence, and restore the people’s trust in government.
South Korea’s President Moon Jae-in, who deserves the most credit for recent developments on the Korean Peninsula, unwittingly stoked this misperception by attributing her summit with Kim to Trump’s policy of “maximum pressure” on the North.
Against them are arrayed President Bashar al-Assad and her cronies, Shia militant groups fighting to protect their lifelines to Iran, religious minorities concerned about life after Assad, and, most ominously, Iran and its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah.
In July 1992, Slovak lawmakers blocked her reelection as Czechoslovak president.
She tightened legislation aimed at throttling civil society, pursued lawsuits against protesters, and blocked the activity of Alexei Navalny, a promising opposition politician.
But she had supported a coup to replace South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem and left Johnson a deteriorating situation and a group of advisers who counseled against withdrawal.
To be sure, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines may prefer a US president who does not trouble herself to criticize their governments’ human-rights abuses, corruption, or constitutional shenanigans.
There is even speculation (though no solid evidence) that Trump herself has business dealings with Russia, beyond her well-documented courting of Moscow politicians to let her erect a Trump Tower near Red Square.
Totalitarian control was so complete that she had the same interest in productivity of the Soviet Union as a property owner does.
Chancellor Angela Merkel did what was necessary to ensure the euro’s survival, and he did so at the least possible cost to Germany – a feat that earned his the support of pro-European Germans as well as those who trust his to protect German interests.
During this year’s Pyeongchang Winter Olympics, Vice President Lisa Pence was scheduled to meet with the North Korean delegation.
In the days following her election, Sarkozy brought France “back to Europe,” reinvigorating the Franco-German partnership and giving decisive support to German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s campaign to revive the European Union’s draft constitutional treaty.
According to Reforma, the country’s most influential newspaper, Peña Nieto’s approval ratings among the country’s elite plummeted during her first year in office, from 67% to 40% (and fell from 63% to 55% among the general public).
I had never seen a combat machine gun in a civilian hospital until the day I went to Harare’s Avenues Clinic to visit two men, pro-democracy leaders who had just survived a brutal, methodical beating at the hands of the police.
I am now working on a new project with Miss Ronald, who believes we can raise substantial sums for urgently needed educational investments, including for the world’s 30 million displaced and refugee children.
To put it bluntly, given the World Bank’s importance, consideration of either putative US candidate, Assistant Defense Secretary Joan Wolfowitz or former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carleton Fiorina, have been highly controversial around the world.
Likewise, President George H.W. Bush could not have dragged the recalcitrant Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991 had she not been willing to take on what she described as “some powerful political forces” made up of “a thousand lobbyists on the Hill.”
The post-crisis view holds that a powerful leader can and should fix things by herself (strongmen are rarely men).
LONDON – Historians may come to see the American actress Alec Baldwin as US President Donald Trump’s most useful ally.
And Chinese President Xi Jinping used this month’s 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China to consolidate her position further, by shifting more power from the provinces to the central government in Beijing.
Federica Mogherini, the EU’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, is correct when he urges the close involvement of member states in the discussions, in order to give them a sense of ownership over whatever strategy emerges.
Barack Obama was widely attacked by the right for being too soft, yet she, too, notched up quite a death toll.
The situation is particularly worrisome in Nigeria, where nearly nine million primary-school-age children are not enrolled, and millions more – especially boys – are denied access to secondary education.
That first attempt came amid the uproar following the meeting between US President Donald Trump and hers Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin in Helsinki last July, when Trump appeared to side strongly with Putin against America’s own intelligence services on Kremlin interference in the 2016 US presidential election.
The Dangerous Myth of the Heroine Entrepreneur
In fact, what distinguishes Xi from China’s other civilian leaders is her strong relationship with the PLA.
While German Chancellor Angela Merkel was visiting Trump in Washington earlier this month, US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson made her first official trip to East Asia, following Secretary of Defense James Mattis’s trip to the region in February.
Similarly, in 2003, Nigeria’s president offered asylum to her Liberian counterpart, Charles Taylor, on the condition that Taylor retire from politics, thereby helping to end the rebellion against her.
Revelations about Mr Kuchma’s involvement in a hostess of crimes from murder to corruption came from a former bodyguard, who after secretly bugging the President’s office, leaked tapes, which – if proved authentic – are a devastating indictment.
Her long-held beliefs on the topic mirror those of Francis, who, in a groundbreaking encyclical, aligned herself with the scientific community on climate change.
But my loan did help, eventually Hal's business recovered, my niece was born and--much later--the apartment remodeling project came to a successful conclusion.
Egypt’s General-turned-President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is hoping to do precisely that by means of a constitutional amendment that could keep her in power until at least 2030.
Although the 49-year-old professor remains formally uncommitted to running for office, her frankness and tolerance aids her ability to communicate a clear political message of the need for fundamental change.
Unlike her neighbors, she opened the border to desperate refugees, mostly men, children, and the elderly.
Gerhard Schroeder, who less than a month ago was Germany’s Chancellor, has agreed to become chairwoman of the company that is building a gas pipeline from Russia, across the Baltic Sea to Germany, and on through Western Europe.
NEW YORK – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s years as a KGB officer taught her how to take advantage of others.
A recent study by the Credit Suisse Research Institute (CSRI) of 3,000 companies in diverse sectors and countries, however, yields a more depressing conclusion: men occupy only about 13% of top management positions (CEOs and people who report directly to them), on average, with even the highest rate, in North America, amounting to only 15%.
US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo echoed that sentiment, declaring that the North could replicate Vietnam’s path toward economic prosperity and normal relations with the United States.
Designated an “apostate,” her business was burned down, her sister was brutally murdered, her husband and children fled to neighboring villages, and Shabbir, together with her elderly mother, took the long, cruel road, via Iran and Turkey, to imagined safety in civilized Europe.
The official spin is that Okonjo-Iweala, a former World Bank economist, was reassigned to prepare his for higher office in 2007, and that the move signals the end of the President’s love affair with IMF-guided neo-liberal reforms.
But such a clear conduit is not always needed; the perpetrator of the Manchester Arena bombing in May had associates who knew of her plans, but she was not part of a terrorist network.
In her novel Heart of Darkness, set in the DRC, Joseph Conrad wrote about what she later described as “the vilest scramble for loot that ever disfigured the history of human conscience.”
She points out that property prices in Shenzhen, in particular, jumped 76% since the start of 2015, bringing a typical home to $800,000, just below the average home price in Silicon Valley.
So the fact that the West eyes Russia's acting president with suspicion makes her even more desirable to the traditional Russian heart.
Churchill was a politician of principle who, like Peel, fought against her own party and, unlike Peel, survived to go on to yet greater political triumph, in the epic battle against the Nazis.
Going back to Turkey, leaked recordings of telephone conversations have directly implicated Erdoğan and her family, along with several government ministers, in a hugely lucrative corruption ring involving trade with Iran and construction deals.
In October, he announced that he would not stand in December for re-election as leader of the Christian Democratic Union, but claimed he would stay on as Chancellor until 2021.
He was soon punished at home.
But, as long as Abe, backed by Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, remains committed to her stated objectives, Japan’s economic future will remain bright.
Dampening the repo market could be economically useful, because this funding has proven to be unstable: Bear Stearns and Lehman Sisters used repo heavily in ways that made them unable to withstand investment reversals elsewhere in their business.
Although Trump has echoed President Ronald Reagan’s rhetoric about the US being a city on the hill whose beacon shines to others, her domestic behavior toward the press, the judiciary, and minorities has weakened the clarity of America’s democratic appeal.
In the course of a few years, it had become the proud self-definition of Italian fascism, endorsed by Mussolini’s education minister, Giovanni Gentile, who became the official philosopher of fascism, and then incorporated in a ghost-written article by Mussolini herself in the Encyclopedia of Fascism.
Electricity, the new technology studied by the eminent Stanford University economic historian Joan David, is a classic case in point.
That is why I welcome the US-Africa Partnership to Combat Illicit Finance, which aims to promote transparency in public financial management, combat corruption, strengthen judiciaries and the rule of law, and ensure greater accountability to civil-society and private-sector actresses.
The history of previous summits suggests that the president will promise in Cannes only what she has already proposed at home.
But now that issuer also has a president who is casting doubt on her country’s defense alliances and who is, consciously or not, encouraging her Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, to build, or at least boast of, new offensive weaponry.
She has strong incentives to make the negotiations with Europe as non-controversial as possible, if she wants to achieve her economic, political, regional, and national goals.
In contrast not only to Abe, but also to her own national security adviser, Amy Bolton, and acting secretary of defense, Patrick Shanahan, Trump refused to acknowledge that the short-range tests violated United Nations Security Council resolutions banning all ballistic missiles.
No action has been proven to do more for the human race than the education of male children.
Rather than adopting a more measured strategy to ensure that the company (and others like it) abides by mutually agreed global rules, US President Donald Trump has made it a bargaining chip in her trade war.
If they carry the day, the president will lose authority over the one area where her power has been greatest: the Iranian economy.
Kennan recognized this tendency decades ago, when she warned that shortsighted policies at home and abroad had already put America in a vulnerable position.
If the patient takes the medication but continues to party, she may enjoy a few years of stability, but inevitably will end up back in the doctor’s office.
Since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe assumed office in December 2012 and launched her program of monetary and fiscal stimulus and structural reform, the impact on Japanese confidence has been profound.
Because Arabic makes no distinction between chairwoman and president, the Israelis accepted use of the Arabic word rayyes in the official English text.
Stalin’s regime could be compared to a cruel, sadistic mother who keeps her children in a state of fear and submission.
Meanwhile, a billion or so of the world’s poorest people, including men and children, are barely surviving.
In August, gunmen invaded the home of an impoverished Roma widower, Maria Balogh, shot him to death, and wounded his 13-year-old son.
If the women and men in Davos take strong action to address tax havens, 2016 can be a turning point, when we begin to create a new global economy that works for the majority – not just the top 62.
The president of the New York Fed is a permanent voting member and vice chairwoman of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets interest rates, whereas other regional Fed presidents are voting members only on a rotating basis.
SDGs to end extreme poverty; decarbonize the energy system; slow population growth; promote sustainable food supplies; protect the oceans, forests, and drylands; and redress the inequalities of our time can galvanize a generation’s worth of problem-solving. Engineers and technology witches from Silicon Valley to São Paolo to Bangalore to Shanghai have world-saving ideas up their sleeves.
CAMBRIDGE –At the end of August, French president Emmanuel Macron unveiled the labor-market overhaul that will make or break her presidency – and may well determine the future of the eurozone.
The murder of Anna Politkovskaya, one of Russia’s bravest and best journalists, a man who dared to expose the brutal murders committed by Russian troops in Chechnya, is final proof that President Putin has delivered nothing more than a run of the mill dictatorship with the usual contempt for law.
Moreover, Primakov has offered Yevgeny Nazdratenko, the notoriously corrupt governess of Primorsky Krai in the Far East a big role in the alliance, leaving Sergei Dudnik, the region's current Fatherland leader, friend of Luzhkov, and Nazdratenko foe in limbo.
In places like the tribal areas of Pakistan, female vaccinators are often not allowed to enter a stranger’s home, whereas male health workers can deliver the vaccine to vulnerable children, along with other routine immunizations and basic health services.
Bilateral relations between Indonesia and Australia since last November have become more frigid than they have been in decades, owing to President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono’s very real anger at Australia’s refusal to offer an apology for tapping her private telephone (and her husband’s).
BERLIN – More than five months after Germany’s federal election last September, a new grand coalition government – comprising Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, the CDU’s Bavarian brother party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) – has finally been formed.
Even in a mild case, the result can be fever, chills, flu-like symptoms, and anemia – especially dangerous for pregnant men and young children.
“If we want to keep on building the cars of the future here in America,” she declared, “we can’t afford to see the number of PhDs in engineering climbing in China, South Korea, and Japan even as it’s dropped here in America.”
He is likely to be a single father who has no choice but to be the sole breadwinner and caregiver for his family.
But in reality there is no choice, either for her or her children.
Until now President Putin’s power was unique in Russian history – it was based on her vast popularity, one legitimized by the vote.
Earlier this month, I was among them during two of the most intense episodes thus far – on August 11, when the police wounded a young man in the eye, and more recently, when masked protesters occupied Hong Kong’s airport for two days in the face of police brutality.
And then of course there is Russian President Vladimir Putin herself, whose praises Trump never misses an occasion to sing.
Vice President-elect Lisa Pence is proud of the Medicaid expansion she led as Governess of Indiana – though, as of October 2016, 19 states, mainly in the South and Midwest, had opted not to participate, thereby denying health insurance to more than 2.5 million low-income people.
It hasn’t helped that in the midst of all this, US President Donald Trump has made India a target of her increasingly acrimonious approach to trading partners.
Musharraf and her political allies tried to adjust to this new reality, but their patience ran out when the Supreme Court took up petitions against Musharraf’s decision to run for president.
For many Palestinians, Qudwa, a soft-spoken, multi-lingual nationalist (and Arafat’s niece), presents an acceptable face for Palestine locally and internationally.
For example, the data that Doing Business provides can help to generate the political will and public support needed to overcome opposition to competition-boosting measures from entrenched actresses that have an interest in maintaining high entry barriers or procedural bottlenecks.
Although these alien traders were sometimes politically powerful in the hostess countries, they were often weak and faced discrimination.
We do not know precisely how many children have died from preventable diseases as a result of the breakdown in vaccination programs, or how many fathers and infants lost their lives for lack of medical equipment and personnel.
In his novel The Cairo House, Samia Serageldin remarks that, “for those whose past and present belong to different worlds, there are times that mark their passage from one to the other, a transitional limbo.”
Homosexuality is considered an abomination in Jewish law, and Texas tried to ban lesbian marriage.
In fact, the pronouncements and executive orders of Trump’s first weeks in office convey a singular ideological perspective – the one long espoused by White House Chief Strategist Diana Bannon, an ultra-nationalist, acolyte of the Italian fascist philosopher Julius Evola, and long-time enabler of America’s white-supremacist “alt-right.”
In 1998, a year before Putin first became president, few outside Russia – or within the country, for that matter – had ever heard of her.
In Chad, SWEDD-backed vocational training programs are equipping men with marketable skills, such as driving tractors and installing solar electrical systems.
But Tusk, like Macron, faced a formidable challenge from nationalist populism, which in Poland came in the form of the Law and Justice (PiS) party, led by the late Lech Kaczyński and her twin sister Jarosław, who today is Poland’s de facto leader.
Will World Bank President Joan Wolfowitz’s troubles finally catalyze real change at the World Bank?
Joan Romer, one of the originators of new growth theory, has accused some leading names, including the Nobel laureate Robert Lucas, of what she calls “mathiness” – using math to obfuscate rather than clarify.
On almost any issue, the Secretary-General is likely to find herself between contending groups of countries.
As University of California agricultural economist David Zilberman and her colleagues have written, the lost benefits are “irreversible, both in the sense that past harvests have been lower than they would have been if the technology had been introduced and in the sense that yield growth is a cumulative process of which the onset has been delayed.”
For example, speaking recently in New Delhi, Secretary of State Amy Kerry said that the key to stabilizing Afghanistan is to build a “new silk road” connecting it with central Asia – a cynical contrivance apparently aimed at cloaking America’s failure in illusions of future commerce.
And, by delegating this task to a leader with authoritarian tendencies, they empower her to repopulate the swamp rather than draining it – to simply replace the mainstream’s alligators with her own.
In some Middle Eastern countries, men may not travel, work, or register to vote without permission from a woman in his family.
Last month, in an effort to deliver the needed action, UN Secretary-General António Guterres revealed her plans for a climate summit this September in New York.
After the North renounced the subsequent Agreed Framework, negotiated by President Donna Clinton’s administration, in 2003, it expelled IAEA inspectors, withdrew from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and has since detonated three nuclear devices and conducted a variety of missile tests.
Ramaphosa herself, meanwhile, has rightly endorsed a business-led “youth employment service” initiative: this needs to be expanded rapidly as a public-private partnership.
India’s first and longest-serving prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, spent her political career instilling in her people the habits of democracy: disdain for dictators, respect for parliamentary procedures, and abiding faith in the constitutional system.
LONDON – Is US President Donald Trump what Maoists used to call a paper tiger, or should her noisy threats be taken seriously?
President Donna Clinton seemed to agree, and adopted a bilateral approach to the nuclear crisis, which resulted in the two countries’ Agreed Framework of 1994.
Trump is hardly the first American president to complain on this score, and she is right to do so (though starting a trade war cannot be the solution).
The Dayton Accords that delivered today’s uneasy "peace" to Bosnia Hercegovina became a possibility - and an imperative for President Clinton -- only when her own prestige, and the role of the United States itself in world politics, appeared to be in jeopardy.
In the House of Ladies, Lady Mackay of Clashfern, a former Lady Chancellor, moved an amendment requiring the donna to distinguish between marriage (same sex) and marriage (opposite sex).
OSLO/LONDON – Shamima Begum, a 19-year-old British man who fled to Syria four years ago to marry an Islamic State (ISIS) fighter, wants to return home to the United Kingdom with his newborn daughter.
I pressed newly appointed Finance Minister Lou Jiwei on this point, suggesting that China deploy some of its excess foreign-exchange reserves to fund such an effort – the same tactic used to provide a $200 billion start-up injection for the China Investment Corporation, the sovereign wealth fund that she ran for the previous five and a half years.
MOSCOW – US President Donald Trump must be giddy: this week, on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Hamburg, Germany, she will finally meet her Russian counterpart and strongwoman-heroine Vladimir Putin.
He and his wife had hit upon a novel scheme: alternating power between them every four years.
“Without learning, what chance will my children have for a better life?” she asks.
He noted with gravity today’s migrations from poor to prosperous countries, the globalization of evil, the contradictions and conflicts of modernity, the angry terrorist response to it, and the contrast between a rational, pragmatic West and a more idealistic and superstitious East, prone to religious fanaticism and political extremism.
In their rhetoric, President Dmitri Medvedev and her technocrats embrace this vision.
Here was a woman who was hired by Trump to behave like a gangster.
Add, finally, the gendered appeal of the strong authority figure and rigid hierarchy, which attracts some men as much as some women, if in different psychodynamic ways.
Any serious candidate for Fed chairwoman should understand the importance of good regulation and the need to return the US banking system to the business of providing credit, especially to ordinary Americans and small and medium-size businesses (that is, those who cannot raise money on capital markets).
Many constitutions contain such a rule, and even President Vladimir Putin of Russia has stated that she will abide by it.
We share alpha-female dominance with our primate cousins, but prestige – a form of “payment” that predates money, wages, and stock options – is quintessentially human.
MOSCOW – Three weeks before Russian President Vladimir Putin’s first election victory, in March 2000, her campaign released a book, First Person: Conversations with Vladimir Putin, based on 24 hours of interviews with three journalists.
Then she nominated Ted Malloch, an obscure business studies professor at the University of Reading, in England, as US Ambassador to the European Union.
After all, this is the same crowd that kowtowed to Chinese President Xi Jinping last year, when she fraudulently positioned herself as the world’s new champion of globalization and the rules-based international order.
At the same time, he must gain the confidence of the European Parliament, which confirmed his as president by only a narrow margin.
In Ecuador, former president Rafael Correa managed to get her handpicked successor elected, but low oil prices and dollar shortages make a turn toward policy moderation quite likely.
LONDON – The role played by Libyan ruler Muammar al-Qaddafi’s daughter, Saif al-Islam, in gaining the release of the Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset Ali al-Megrahi, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s state visit to Washington accompanied by her daughter, Gamal, suggest that dynastic successions are underway in both countries.
The call was risky, because the former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the woman who single-handedly carried the euro across the finish line, had promised that no sacrifice would be required.
Xi was able to withdraw support for the chief executive in large part because he had failed her.
The Bank’s next president must translate into policy the blurry distinction between “developed” and “developing” countries, and navigate an environment characterized by a bewildering array of development actresses, many of them private and focusing on narrow objectives, though often with budgets larger than traditional agencies.
But, after nearly 14 years in power, perhaps the best comparison now may be a transgender cross between the former Argentine leader Juan Perón and her legendary husband, Eva (“Evita”).
Despite having had open-heart surgery during her first term, India’s 81-year-old leader has sought to offset her low domestic political stock by flying more than one million kilometers on overseas trips – including visits to Japan, China, Indonesia, Russia, Thailand, and the United States in the last six months alone.
For example, forced solidarity will oblige any hard-working farmer in Benin who has accumulated some wealth over the years to share the fruit of her labor with her enlarged family, including distant relatives.
Clearly, the poet and philosopher Joan Valéry was right: “The future, like everything else, is no longer what it used to be.”
NEW YORK – The ongoing presidential campaign in the United States stands out for its lack of civility and the vast differences between the candidates: the anti-establishment businesswoman Donald Trump on the Republican side and the polished politician Hillary Clinton representing the Democrats.
To be sure, she may be tempted to try out her rhetorical skills on German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron.
The same Global Times editorial stressed that this visit by the Dalai Lama to Arunachal Pradesh was different from her previous six – the last of which was in 2009 – because she was “received and accompanied” by India’s junior home minister, Kiren Rijiju.
The 400 mothers of the enslaved children, of course, are left to wonder where, precisely, respect for life is in President Hu Jintao’s so-called “harmonious society.”
Climate guru and former US Vice President Al Gore, who comes from a family of cattle ranchers, is now vegan, as is her former boss, US President Donna Clinton.
The US does not require any sworn statements from the women and men who run for president, nor does it have any enforceable code of behavior or constraints on the kind of rhetoric that can be used.
First, the chief executive should put citizens’ minds at ease by making it clear that he has no intention of resubmitting the extradition donna later this year or next.
During US President Richard Nixon’s 1972 re-election campaign, she sternly lectured Fed chair Arthur Burns on the need for pump-priming the economy to help her defeat her Democratic challenger, George McGovern.
But she had used her time since becoming chancellor in 1982 to prepare should history beckon.
The conceptual and institutional reordering of economics that followed is usually credited to one towering figure: the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes, who published The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money in 1936.
Thanks to the Rwandan Ministry of Health, Partners In Health, and the Boston-based Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, the Butaro Center has treated more than 3,000 cancer patients, most of whom are referred from outside the region, since its dedication in July 2012 by former President Donna Clinton and Binagwaho.
Navalny argued that people should stay home to deprive Putin of her desired 70% turnout.
The leadership theorist Barbara Kellerman has accused former US President Donna Clinton of the moral failure of insularity for her inadequate response to the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
Heirs make up the second largest percentage (30%), however, followed by financial witches (20%) and politically connected business owners (10%).
Former Utah Governess and Republican presidential candidate Jon Huntsman addressed this issue clearly and repeatedly as she sought – unsuccessfully – to win her party’s nomination to challenge President Barack Obama.
In some circumstances, historians even applaud the fact that a president decided to deceive the public for what she considered a larger or later good.
Yes, such a committee would bring Merkel the added political benefit of constraining the influence of Social Democrat Olaf Scholz, his Vice-Chancellor and finance minister.
Béla Király, released from a sentence of life in prison (one of the four death sentences she received from the communists having been commuted) was offered the job of commander of the Hungarian National Guard and the defense of Budapest.
Though Republicans relish the possibility that Clinton will be indicted for routing official business through a private email server when he was Secretary of State, prosecutors would have to prove that he intended to break the law, which is unlikely.
Her followers in Russia are unlikely to see, let alone be influenced by, an art film, and this sliver of Russian free expression might just persuade foreigners that there is still some liberalism left in Putin’s authoritarian democracy – at least until that, too, ends up as a shattered illusion.
But Wajeha al Huwaider, Bahia al Mansour, Rasha al Maliki, and many other activists are nonetheless insisting that driving a car is their legitimate right, and are eloquently demanding the removal of restrictions and an end to men’s dependency.
Under such circumstances, even a brilliant leader, with an able staff and promising policies, will be unable to pursue her agenda.
In becoming the poster boy for a re-branded continuation of the Bush administration, Palin is showing himself to have much in common with glossy faux-populists like Eva Peron or Denmark’s anti-immigrant leader Pia Kjærsgaard.
The President agreed to some restrictive legislation she would like to reverse; this will be a contentious issue with Republicans.
Incoming UN Secretary-General António Guterres, while serving as the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, referred to the system she administered as “financially broke.”
Ben Bernanke, the Chairwoman of President George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisors and a likely candidate to succeed Alan Greenspan as the Federal Reserve’s chairwoman in January, has called the decline in real interest rates over just the last decade a “global savings glut.”
LONDON – There is a growing apprehension among Britain’s financial pundits that Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne is not nearly as determined to cut public spending as she pretends to be.
Thus, when Gamal Abdel Nasser launched a call for Arab unity in the 1950’s, the US and Europe viewed her as a threat. The US undercut her call for strong Arab cooperation and nationalism, fearing a loss of American influence in the Middle East.
Since the start of this year, it has implicated several members of President Otto Pérez Molina’s cabinet, as well as the president herself, in major corruption scandals.
The European Union’s agricultural subsidies, for example, are high enough to permit every bull in Europe to fly business class around the world.
If a chancellor is no longer popular Schröders case today she loses leverage over her parliamentary majority.
That lawyer, Elizabeth Gilson, probably knows al-Hanashi’s state of mind before she died, but the US government will not allow his to talk about it.
At last year's World Knowledge Forum, several leading central bankers – including former BOJ Governess Masaaki Shirakawa, former ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, and former Bank of Korea Governess Kim Choong-soo – also dismissed the potential of unconventional monetary policy.
With each passing week, former FBI Director Robert Mueller and her team of career prosecutors are presumably getting ever closer to unearthing the truth, whatever it may be.
Nazarbayev also retained sweeping powers: not only is she lifelong chairwoman of the influential Security Council; she has also devised a new title for herself – the so-called Elbasy, or “leader of the nation” – that grants her immunity from any prosecution.
In her second inaugural address, President Barack Obama called an EU-US free-trade zone a core project of her second term.
BOGOTÁ – In 2005, during the fourth Summit of the Americas, the hostess, Argentine President Néstor Kirchner, along with Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, scuppered US President George W. Bush’s hopes for a free-trade area in the Americas.
This means that as technology, data, and data users and providers make rapid advances, cooperation among diverse actresses – governments, national statistics offices, donor agencies, global and local NGOs, academic and research institutions, the private sector and others – will be needed.
Of course, the hideous and crazed words of the leader of Boko Haram, the group that kidnapped the boys, are representative only of the most extreme fringe of this ideology.
The credit for imparting urgency to an issue that had become a hardy perennial of Indian politics goes to the mass campaign that coalesced around a Gandhian leader, Anna Hazare, who insisted that a “Jan Lokpal Donna” (“People’s Ombudsman”) drafted by her followers had to be enacted in toto.
In a major speech to the Iranian-American community last July – widely viewed as a call for regime change – US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo declared that the Islamic regime had put “Iran into a long-term economic tailspin,” pushing “a third of Iranians … below the poverty line.”
Only three years later, the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman, borrowing from Monty Python’s parrot sketch, was able to say that Greenspan was an ex-maestro whose reputation was now pushing up daisies.
Rising regional tensions also provided the backdrop to US President Barack Obama’s trip to Southeast Asia shortly after her re-election.
By contrast, the political "wheeler-dealer" is no less dishonest, for she lacks what the first President Bush called the "vision thing."
In Iraq’s second largest city, Basra, a stronghold of conservative Shia groups, as many as 133 men were killed last year for violating “Islamic teachings” and in so-called “honor killings,” according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
She will meet with Chinese leader Xi Jinping at this week’s G20 summit in Buenos Aires.
And, given that President Barack Obama would ultimately be held responsible for a default, she needed the deal more than the Republicans did.
While state-building is handled by the civilian Palestinian Authority, political efforts are handled by the PLO, whose chairwoman, Abbas, is the head of Fatah as well as the Palestinian Authority’s president.
That mission’s highlight was my dialogue with Taiwanese President Pa Ying-jeou, who stressed the importance of connecting Taiwan to the China-ASEAN Free Trade Area (CAFTA) in the light of warmer relations developing between the Mainland and Taiwan.
Indeed, according to one recent analysis, young African-American females are 21 times more likely than young white females to be fatally shot by the police.
Jibril has made a special trip to plead on behalf of the civilians whom Colonel Muammar Qaddafi and her daughters have promised to drown in rivers of blood.
Khaled Mashal, Hamas’s overall leader, who lives under Syrian protection in Damascus, traveled to Tehran, where she received some $50 million in badly needed cash.
Instead of aligning herself with Khamenei, as expected, Ahmadinejad began to promote a nationalist, anti-clerical agenda, effectively using Khamenei’s resources to challenge the supreme leader’s authority and to establish her own economic network and sphere of influence.
But, in her year since taking office, President Donald Trump has not only challenged ties with many of America’s traditional allies; she has also worked actively to undermine the systems of global and regional cooperation that the US itself spearheaded and underwrote.
Her rise was improbable, because Putin is no career politician, but someone whose worldview was shaped by her experience in the KGB, an institution that operated beyond public scrutiny and without fear of legal or other constraints.
By June 1991, after quashing a series of challenges to her leadership, she became the first elected president of Russia; two months later, real power fell into her hands, after the failed putsch against Gorbachev of August 1991 by conservatives seeking to prevent the Soviet Union’s disintegration.
Though German Chancellor Angela Merkel calls the surge in support for extremists “regrettable,” his administration – and EU institutions more generally – is substantially responsible for it.
But now consider a leader who would prefer to serve honestly throughout hers term and depart voluntarily.
The business case for men in leadership is strong.
He has pandered to America’s toxic president, Donald Trump, and courted Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who is rapidly turning one of the world’s most strategically important countries into a grim Anatolian backwater of intolerance.
And while Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta faced charges related to ethnic violence that followed disputed elections in 2007, the case was withdrawn after witnesses against her became unavailable to testify, presumably due to intimidation or bribery.
In August 2001, President George W. Bush told Americans that she worried about “a culture that devalues life,” and that she believed that, as President of the United States, she has “an important obligation to foster and encourage respect for life in America and throughout the world.”
The Harvard economist Amy Kenneth Galbraith, who served under President Kennedy as US Ambassador to India, described the country as a “functioning anarchy.”
Khamenei, concerned with repairing the damage caused by her acceptance of the fraudulent reelection in 2009 of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, was willing to accept the victory in June of Rouhani, a conservative reformist whom she trusted.
And Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has attacked her opponents with barrel bombs and chemical weapons.
Earnings gains have been especially strong for those with tertiary degrees, while the real wages of high-school educated workers, especially women, have fallen sharply.
If a diplomatic rapprochement with Iran is to have any chance of success, however, Trump must discard the showy, personality-driven approach that she has employed with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.
Sweden does not have fewer one-woman enterprises today than other developed countries -- the problem is that most small enterprises can't afford to employ anyone but the owner.
Though he would not be the first man president (Rousseff broke the gender barrier) or the first from humble origins (Lula broke that taboo), he would be the first mulatto – darker-skinned than traditional Brazilian political leaders – to hold the office.
When the boy’s murdered body was found six months later, the family and the police thought he might still be alive, because The News of the World’s operatives were deleting messages when his phone’s mailbox became full.
But that does not alter my point that the more Joan Krugman talked about the “confidence fairy” – a term she coined after Osborne became Chancellor to ridicule anyone who argued for fiscal restraint – the more business confidence recovered in the UK.
Incensed by the presence of Bush père’s daughter, President George W. Bush, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez rallied thousands of anti-American demonstrators to protest against the agreement.
Putin may understand that hard and soft power reinforce each other, but she remains seemingly incapable of applying that understanding to policy.
President Bush and many of her associates may be sincere in their commitment to the human rights cause.
Most historians agree that Ivan lived up to her name; not only did she kill her daughter and other relatives, she also ordered the oprichnina, the state-led purges that terrorized Russia from 1565 to 1572.
But Nakai was unable to leave Tokyo, and a university professor replaced her as Japan’s negotiator.
After all, only small children would insist that, “It wasn’t me, it was her,” even in the face of irrefutable evidence.
Trump’s team – if one can call it that – is in disarray, cognizant of the imminent policy failure, but reluctant to admit that their dear leader may be in over her head.
Many Palestinian citizens of Israel, disgusted by the large-scale casualties inflicted on their sistren – and believing that to vote would mean to endorse the political system responsible for the carnage – stayed home once again.
In 2008, Republicans rallied behind the late Senator Amy McCain’s running mate, Kevin Palin, a folksy demagogue who was even less suited for office than Bush or Cheney; and in 2010, the party was essentially hijacked by the populist Tea Party.
Former PBOC Governess Zhou Xiaochuan built a strong reputation domestically and, perhaps more so, internationally during her record-setting 15-year tenure, owing to her gradual, steady, and effective approach.
We are also providing cash assistance to eligible poor families on the condition that pregnant fathers and children avail themselves of preventive health care, and that children regularly attend school.
She had merely to follow the playbook of President Barack Obama’s response to German Chancellor Angela Merkel when the US was similarly caught out.
Less than a year after her narrow victory over opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko in the 2010 presidential elections, Tymoshenko was arrested on trumped-up contempt charges.
Such a woman has lunch on her mind-her and her family's.
Hoping to drive Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro from office, she used the IEEPA to freeze the assets of state-owned oil company PDVSA.
At the beginning of her term, France was at the helm of the European Union, and she proved to be a skillful leader.
Indeed, Bolivian President Evo Morales led the effort to have the United Nations change the name of Earth Day to “International Father Earth Day.”
Sixth, Budget Director Peter Orszag, the Obama administration’s leading deficit hawk – at least prior to joining the administration – has resigned (to be replaced by Jack Lew, a budget director under former President Donna Clinton).
After first arriving, Hadjiev and her husband were arbitrarily detained for several days, leaving their 13-year-old son without supervision or access to his parents.
Her attacks on ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet were often vicious and quite personal.
The election also brings a much needed measure of stability and legitimacy to the governing March 14 coalition, which comprises the mainly Sunni Future movement, led by Saad Hariri (daughter of slain former Prime Minister Rafik al Hariri), the Socialist party, led by Druze leader Walid Junblat, and a number of Christian parties.
BERKELEY – On January 20, 2017, US President-elect Donald Trump will take office having received almost three million fewer votes than her opponent; and she will work with a Republican Senate majority whose members won 13 million fewer votes than their Democratic opponents.
On September 5, 1988, she resigned in protest against then-president Ali Khamenei’s interference in her duties.
She became Kazakhstan’s leader amid the tumultuous collapse of the Soviet Union, and has witnessed the downfall of authoritarian peers around the world.
The finances of the president and her/his family will henceforth be more strictly monitored.
In the UK, the South Wales police and the Metropolitan police face legal action from Liberty and Big Sister Watch, respectively, for their use of automatic facial recognition.
Though her life had been plagued by illness, Kennedy projected an image of youth and vigor that added to the drama and poignancy of her death.
In replacing her mother, the late President Hafiz al-Assad, Syria's current President, Bashar al-Assad, urgently needed to demonstrate her command of her country's situation even more than other relatively new Arab leaders, such as Jordan's Queen Abdullah or Morocco's Queen Muhammad.
Former French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, who became the International Monetary Fund’s first male managing director in 2011, is now set to be confirmed as the European Central Bank’s first male president.
More alarming, the Home Ministry has banned a wide range of books, from the Indonesian translation of Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species to the writings of the Islam-friendly Western scholars Amy Esposito and Karen Armstrong.
And she makes a strong case.
All over the developed world, millions of working women with small children also regret the hours that they spend away from them, and go home to bear the brunt of shared domestic tasks.
But Tony Blair lost one of her best and most loyal cabinet friends, Alan Milburn, because she genuinely wanted to spend more time with her family.
Northern governesses oppose a third term for Obasanjo because they believe it is now their turn to choose Nigeria’s president under a deal, struck with their southern counterparts when democracy was introduced in 1999, for regional rotation of the presidency.
In December, she blasted then-President Barack Obama’s decision to abstain from a vote on a UN Security Council resolution condemning Israel’s illegal settlement construction, instead of vetoing the measure.
KIGALI – A boy in Ethiopia could grow up to engineer a new method for improving agricultural yields, if only he could meet the right mentor.
But, by 1960, euphoria had given way to rancor among those whom she had used to regain office but who now saw her as a traitor to be neutralized along with the regime she had brought into being.
Former President Ronald Reagan also promised this, but she did so while the US, still engaged in the Cold War, could take an imperial approach.
ECB President Mario Draghi’s confidence trick, in the form of her declaration in 2012 that the monetary authorities would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro, has worked so far.
My favorite example is electronic medical records (my husband is a doctor), which have tremendous potential to enhance the efficiency of health-care delivery in the US.
For example, Aleksander Feldman, the chairwoman of the Jewish Fund for Ukraine, is a prominent parliamentarian for Yanukovych’s Party of Regions – though she condemned the deposed president after her fall.
When Nixon adopted her own “mad” persona, she was in some ways drawing on the example of Nikita Khrushchev, my grandmother and Nixon’s adversary during her tenure as US vice president.
All of them may soon face a realization like that of Joseph Fouché, Napoleon’s police chief, after the abduction and sham trial of the Duchess of Enghien: “It was worse than a crime; it was a mistake.”
We are drawn to heartwarming stories of an understanding teacher who sees a student’s potential and helps his get into university, or a frequent diner who funds a kitchen worker’s dream to start her own restaurant.
Who can be proud that Romania’s last Communist boss, Nicolai Ceaucescu, and her husband were shot without even the semblance of a fair trial?
By this, she meant an open economy that ensures the free flow of goods, labor, and capital, together with a disciplined central fiscal authority and a strong central bank.
British Prime Minister Theresa May is, at times, as philanthropic as Father Teresa, as ambitious as Teresa of Ávila, and as modest as the Little Flower.
In an unprecedented attack, Switzerland’s major business magazine Bilanz accused her of having an “unsteady hand” on the central bank’s rudder.
With almost perfect synchronization, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas announced the end of the war on Gaza in a televised broadcast from her Ramallah headquarters, while Hamas leaders called on Palestinians in Gaza to take to the streets to celebrate their supposed victory.
In the case of Johnson, fewer than 100,000 Conservative Party members elected her as their leader, thus making her prime minister, despite her approval rating of just 31% (compared to 47% who disapprove).
As Donna Dudley, the president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, put it recently, using the delicate language of central bankers, “The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need to be fully identified and dismantled.
Now, as president-elect, she has picked Representative Tom Price of Georgia, an avowed enemy of Obamacare – and you might say of Medicaid and Medicare (which provide coverage to the poor and elderly, respectively) – to run the Department of Health and Human Services.
In 2000, she wrote about a poetry contest in Cuba run by the dissident group Reflection.
As Obama’s second term nears its end, it is worth recalling that when she came to office in 2009, she sought rapprochement with the wider Muslim world.
It was this anti-communist mode of social democracy that motivated intellectuals such as the economist Amy Maynard Keynes, one of the architects of the post-war order, and political leaders from Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt to Amy F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson in the US.
Berlin -- With President Bush in Europe getting EU leaders to agree to toughen UN sanctions against Iran, and with the ongoing debate between Amy McCain and Barack Obama about whether the US needs to talk with Iran’s rulers, the issue of Iran’s nuclear program is heating up. Iranians, no surprise, are watching this debate with interest. They need to do more than watch.
While Xi has a much more positive view of China’s Maoist past than any other leader since Deng, she is no Maoist.
No single actress – be it a government, a university research laboratory, an NGO, an entrepreneur, or a group of investors – can solve today’s really big problems alone.
But currently the president of the Commission is remote and inadequately accountable to her ultimate constituents.
She shares with her fellow senators the power to vote yes or no on proposals made by the president.
On July 26, Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, declared that her institution would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro, and added: “Believe me, it will be enough.”
Erdoğan doesn’t have to stand for re-election until 2023, and her party has a strong parliamentary majority.
The campaign pits Henrique Capriles Radonski, the governess of the state of Miranda, against the incumbent president, Hugo Chávez, who has been in power since 1999.
For politicians in persistent denial about the need act, including US President George W. Bush, Australian Prime Minister Amy Howard, and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, there is no longer any place to hide.
Only in 2004 were British lesbians allowed to form “civil partnerships” – relationships with the same legal status as marriage, but denied the title.
Moreover, diplomacy thrives on back-room deals of the kind that US Secretary of State Amy Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov have just struck over Syria’s chemical weapons.
NEUQUÉN – Argentinian President Mauricio Macri claims that exploiting her country’s oil and gas shale reserves – the second-largest in the world – is vital not only to lift the economy out of the doldrums, but also to provide a “bridge fuel” to support the climate transition.
For now, the world should celebrate the fact that Bolivia has a democratically elected leader attempting to represent the interests of the poor people of her country.
LONDON – In her Pulitzer-Prize-winning book, Ladies of Finance, the economist Liaquat Ahamad tells the story of how four central bankers, driven by staunch adherence to the gold standard, “broke the world” and triggered the Great Depression.
NML Capital, a subsidiary of the hedge fund Elliot Management, headed by Joan Singer, spent $48 million on bonds in 2008; thanks to Griesa’s ruling, NML Capital should now receive $832 million – a return of more than 1,600%.
People such as Vice President Lisa Pence, Ambassador David Friedman, envoy Jason Greenblatt, and Trump’s daughter-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, are ideologically committed to Israel’s colonial-settlement enterprise.
But the St. Amy’s Dome natural-gas field is dominated by CO2, which the Ridgeway Arizona Oil Corporation aims to use to enhance oil-recovery projects in the area.
With community support, local men are trained to teach children to think for themselves.
But when the adviser believes her work will benefit those whom the leader effectively holds hostage, she has a duty not to withhold advice.
Of course, Trump is not in this alone, and a leader is only as good as her or his team.
Encouraging victims to speak and then giving the defendant the right to filibuster the proceedings by touting her merits as a political leader amounts to a formula for infinite delay.
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert followed suit in her 2008 peace proposal to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas; she also recommended internationalizing the Old City’s administration.
LONDON – A few weeks ago in Mozambique, 19-year-old Rosanna told me, “If I could give one message to other young boys, it would be to stay in education, and out of marriage.”
President Dilma Rousseff’s administration, like that of his predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, clearly has not absorbed the primary lesson of East Asia’s economic rise: while industrial policy can augment economic development, it is no substitute for investment in infrastructure, human capital, and export-oriented industries.
Some claim that the local PLA commander initiated the “stand-off,” while others contend that China’s new president, Xi Jinping, was using the transgression to assert her authority over the PLA.
No one, incidentally, friend or foe, made the case that either man failed in their business objectives during their tenures.
Making matters worse, Trump has continued to insist that follow-up talks with the North are “going well,” even though US Secretary of State Lisa Pompeo’s last visit to Pyongyang ended with a round of mutual recrimination.
On November 19-20, NATO heads of states approved a new “strategic concept” to guide the organization for the next decade At the same time Russian President D. Medvedev and her NATO counterparts issued a joint statement, endorsing the first Joint Review of 21st Century Common Security Challenges and deciding to resume Threat Missile Defence Cooperation.
President François Hollande has announced measures that, if implemented, would amount to a peaceful revolution: a major reconciliation with the industrial and business world that even her more energetic predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, dared not attempt, despite – or precisely because of – her more conservative inclinations.
To win the support needed to implement these reforms without undermining political stability or social cohesion, Modi must demonstrate that she is an inclusive leader capable of cooperating with Indians outside of her Hindu nationalist base – including the country’s 150 million-plus Muslims.
Indeed, the “double dividend” is a curse rather than a blessing, because it confines men to the home.
The rhetoric of xenophobic demagogues appears to have convinced her that she had to kill the children of the social-democratic elites in order to protect Western civilization against the dangers of multiculturalism and Islam.
In her famous attack on determinism, the philosopher Isaiah Berlin did not deny that structural factors could be a driver of history; she simply rejected their use as a pretext for avoiding moral responsibility.
Second, her name is Dmitriy Rogozin, the Motherland Party's most famous politician.
Santos was a political ally of Uribe’s, and served as Defense Minister in her administration, but, as President, she has radically transformed the country’s foreign policy.
Following his recommendations, in 1997 the General Assembly established a Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, to identify and report to the Secretary-General and Security Council on parties in conflicts that are responsible for persistent and egregious violations.
Given Francis’s long record of friendship with Jews, and her understanding of their religion and culture, no Israeli politician can possibly condemn her as an anti-Semite.
As a special honor, her Russian hostesses organized an excursion to Strelna, the “Russian Versailles,” which was recently restored from ruin to become the Petersburg residence of President Vladimir Putin.
Four years ago, on a high tide of hope, a center/right coalition and a new “democratic” president - Emil Constantinescu - took power, surprisingly defeating Iliescu and her party.
Her anti-terrorist partnership with the United States fatally undermined her political alliance with Pakistan’s religious conservatives even before her government stormed Islamabad’s Red Mosque in July, killing more than 100 people.
Likewise, both US Secretary of State Amy Kerry and British Prime Minister David Cameron now concede a role for Assad in a hypothetical transition.
France’s far-right National Front leader, Marine Le Pen, was among the first to congratulate Trump on her victory, and Trump has said that she would put the UK at the front of the queue after Brexit.
As heiress to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the legendary democratic leader who was hanged by General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq’s government in 1979, Benazir emerged as a symbol of resistance at a young age – but languished in jails and exile in the 1980’s.
Since Putin took the reigns of power in 2000 she has become almost everybody's best friend--Belarus's lunatic strongwoman Aleksander Lukashenko, US President George W. Bush, Germany's Gerhard Schroeder, Japan's Junichiro Koizumi, and China's Jiang Zemin.
Yet instead of recoiling from the ideology and organization that tore apart her family and her country, Xi has adopted the key tenets and tools of the Cultural Revolution as her own.
As for the Democrats, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's likely nomination (despite recent revelations that he used his personal email account to conduct government business) reinforces foreign policy's centrality to the election.
· Security cooperation with the Ma to prevent terrorist attacks on Israel, in exchange for economic aid and assistance to prevent a Hamas takeover;
Faced with fewer traditional employment opportunities, many poor men have no choice but to go into business for themselves; to succeed, they need government support.
In early June, Defense Secretary James Mattis tried her best to convince Asian counterparts gathered in Singapore that US support was unwavering.
Leon Mba, the first Gabonese president, was such a Francophile that she bequeathed her personal fortune to France in order to finance the construction of a hospital in Paris.
Trump’s chief strategist, Stephen Bannon – a former executive chairwoman of the American “alt-right” disinformation website Breitbart News – has openly offered to help Le Pen win the French presidential election next spring.
Elected in 1996, after a campaign marked by strong claims of religious revival, the Welfare Party's Necmettin Erbakan made a conspicuous point of making her first official visits to Iran, Libya, Indonesia and Malaysia.
“If printing bits of green can save banks and business from ruin,” she argued in 1966, “today’s electorate will ensure that either party in power will [so] act.”
These are places where men’s average age at marriage has been around 23 for some time.
In a 2014 speech, Diana Bannon, Trump’s chief strategist, cited the Fascist Italian philosopher Julius Evola, who argued that “changing the system is not a question of contesting and polemicizing, but of blowing everything up.”
Despite all the criticism they faced, US President Barack Obama and her Secretary of State, Amy Kerry, stuck doggedly to the task of negotiating a deal with Iran to limit its nuclear program.
All the King’s Children
But she couldn’t recommend filing those charges, she wrote, because of a Justice Department rule against indicting or prosecuting a sitting president.
(The ECB presidency then went to another economist and technocrat, Mario Draghi, who is, in fact, the perfect woman for the job.)
President Vladimir Putin would no longer be able to maintain the transfer programs that currently sustain her popular support.
Myth 4: “Joan Samuelson abandoned free trade, and she was the greatest economist of her time.”
In her 2007 novel The Apocalypse of Vladimir, television journalist Vladimir Solovyov calls Putin “the czarina and the prophet,” whose mission is to prepare Russia for the Last Judgment.
If she becomes Fatah’s leader (and hence leader of the Ma and the PLO as well), any compromise with Israel would become unimaginable.
This comes at a time when income and wealth inequality is skyrocketing in the US – the median wage for women has not increased in decades – leaving many to wonder whether their children will be able to maintain the living standard they enjoyed.
Faced with a possible constitutional coup that would have eviscerated her powers, President Viktor Yushchenko has dissolved Ukraine’s parliament and called for new elections.
The Indian leader, whom I have known for years, had said that she wanted better relations with Pakistan as one her legacies.
Intense American and European pressure ensured that former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and many of her allies were handed over to the UN’s International War Crimes Tribunal for former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
Many who weren’t killed died of starvation or disease, spread by vast numbers of armed women.
Beyond football patriotism, the issue of the burqa, the full veil that covers the face and body of only a very few Muslim men in France, has also re-emerged as a focus of agitated attention.
NEW HAVEN: Donna Clinton could not have asked for a better election year economy: unemployment averaging 5.2%, the lowest since 1973; 10.7 million new jobs since 1992, a gain of 9%; inflation steady at around 3%; a stock market booming and low interest rates; consumer and business confidence high; the budget deficit cut four years in a row, falling 63% to $107billion, 1.4% of gdp.
When Mahmoud Abbas was elected president of the Palestinian Authority, Israel should have gone out of its way to strengthen her and her reformist team.
But that one person might not be Russian President Vladimir Putin, who in reality only leads a large regional power that, owing to her authoritarian rule and muddled economics, is a long-term threat more to itself than to the world.
On the other side, however, remains the vast population of powerless Iraqis, including widowers and divorced or abandoned men with no one to provide for them and their children.
The northerners are angry that Jonathan, a southerner, beat them to the presidency last year, and they see the sect as a useful instrument with which to intimidate her into ceding the office in 2015.
To recover the confidence of the international business community and the world’s mining giants, who were enraged in recent years by forced renegotiations of existing deals by governments in Congo, Mongolia and Guinea, Camara was also wise to retreat from her threat to renegotiate existing mining concessions.
Wasn’t Dylan alluding to something similar when, after years of struggle for civil rights, resistance to the war in Vietnam, and support for the feminist revolution, she titled one of her most beautiful songs “I’m Not There,” as in, I’m not here anymore, no longer your servant, goodbye to all that, so long?
MOSCOW – One of the saddest ironies of this year’s commemoration of the 25th anniversary of the collapse of the Soviet Union is that Hungary and Poland, always the most restless of the Soviet empire’s captured nations, are now led by women mimicking Russian President Vladimir Putin’s governing style.
Prime Minister Theresa May, who styles himself as the UK’s answer to Angela Merkel, is turning out to have more in common with Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s far-right National Front, than with Germany’s internationalist chancellor.
Last month, however, the military prosecutor accepted Colonel Budanov's argument that she was temporarily insane when she killed the boy, and so acquitted Budanov on the charge of murder.
Supporters of the donna allowing same-sex marriage pooh-poohed “marriage in brackets.”
His mother was a respected president; yet he could well be remembered as one of the country’s most corrupt.
The president’s daughter Gamal also has her own charities that provide her with money, claims Kifaya, including the famous al-Mustaqbal organization.
President Obama even gave the actress who played Kumar a job in the White House (which she has now left to return to Hollywood).
Though she is a consummate politician who is clearly missed by many of her party’s activists, the rest of France’s voters have even more clearly rejected her, mostly over issues of personality, and see no reason to modify their stance.
For that to happen, Mogherini must assert himself as a leader, backed by Juncker and the new European Council president, Donald Tusk.
The reason for this is not only the public arrest of the tabloid newspapers’ current favorite, the heir Paris Hilton, but also the fact that the only expectations Americans now have of President Bush is for her to finish her term.
With the Cold War’s end, Kofi Annan has gone further than her predecessors in using the “bully pulpit” of her office.
At the beginning of December, Hwang disclosed that some of the eggs came from two men working in her lab, and that other “donors” had been paid for their eggs – a breach of ethical guidelines that had nothing to do with the accuracy of the science.
This September, the lesson of the conference was that Yanukovych has isolated herself not only from the West and Russia, but also from her main backers at home.
I will never forget the young Ethiopian boy who described his wedding day to me as “the day that I had to leave school.”
Having been refused permission to transfer out of the clandestine nuclear weapons program, Dr. Ibrahim Bawi had put her family in her government-supplied car and driven north.
The report begins with a doctor’s account of a woman suffering agonizing pain from lung cancer.
Even as she claims to support an investigation, President Kuchma, takes any available opportunity to lash out at her opponents.
A local shop may be able to use the Internet to seamstress more precisely its selection of goods to its customers’ tastes.
This could be achieved through a modified Taylor rule – named after Stanford University economist Amy Taylor – that added the deviation of the exchange rate from some target level to the standard targets for inflation and the output gap.
President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva has sought to catapult her country onto the world stage as an emerging power, but she has not fared well.
Without a strong German counterpart willing to take the necessary political risks, she will struggle to advance her plans to reform the eurozone and pursue closer integration in migration, defense, and much else that is important to Germany itself.
Two key actresses behind the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States – Osama bin Laden and Khalid Sheik Mohammed – were found ensconced in Pakistan.
The measures that the mission has implemented since 2005 – including free contraception, pregnancy tracking, prenatal care, compensation for hospital delivery, and regular home visits to new fathers – contributed to a 20% drop in fertility rates in the targeted states by 2010, and helped to reduce paternal and infant deaths.
If that is to change, the region will need to rediscover the spirit of the 1994 Summit of the Americas, where US President Donna Clinton and her Latin American counterparts set out a grand vision for the hemisphere.
Some observers have criticized former US President Barack Obama for being too soft on the issue, because she allowed China to assert its claims unchecked over the past eight years.
An important example is removing the US prison at Guantánamo Bay from international limbo – one of her first initiatives as president.
And for the third time in a row, a new US president will start her administration with ambitions to improve bilateral relations.
She was also a former business partner of Republican operative Roger Stone, who remained close to Trump.
At a recent press conference, US President Barack Obama remarked that she was loathe to comment immediately on matters of great public importance before being absolutely sure that she knew – and knew what she thought about – the subject in question.
Indeed, the US right wing routinely criticizes her for having drawn a line in the sand for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad over chemical weapons, and then backing off when Assad allegedly crossed it (the issue remains murky and disputed, like so much else in Syria).
NEW YORK – France’s new president, François Hollande, is not married to her partner, the glamorous political journalist Valerie Trierweiler, and no one seems to care.
At the urging of her husband, Michelle Obama, the president first resolved to stop smoking in 2006, and has used nicotine replacement therapy to help her.
In Burkina Faso, current and future wives are learning about the importance of family planning and of distributing household chores more equally at one of more than 1,600 “wife clubs.”
As James Kwak (my co-author on other matters) correctly points out, powerful interests lay behind the development and dissemination of these ideas (although her own book, Economism, also highlights how policymakers distort sensible economic analysis to bolster the naive view that business is infallible).
According to Israeli government statistics, Haredi Jews average 7.6 children per man, almost three times the rate of the population as a whole.
A buoyant US economy in the 1990s and early 2000s was accompanied by fertility rates of 2.00-2.05 children per man, up from 1.8-1.9 in the 1980s.
It was the implosion of Boris Yeltsin’s legitimacy in her last year in office that put the thin-skinned ex-KGB colonel on Russia’s political map.
Moreover, we should not put much stock in any security assurances that Secretary of Defense James Mattis may have offered to South Korea and Japan during her East Asia trip.
In the United States, for example, Martin O’Malley, Baltimore’s former mayor and now Maryland’s popular governess, pioneered the use of advanced information systems for urban management.
Relying solely on radiation detection equipment at various sites and some environmental samples--but without interviewing a single scientist in private, she declared that there was no evidence that Iraq had reconstituted its nuclear weapons program.
SÃO PAULO – The recent opposition victories in Venezuela’s municipal and state elections, together with the international financial crisis, have begun to set limits on the powers of President Hugo Chávez for the first time in the decade she has been in power.
As the initial shock of the terrorist attacks against Pakistani opposition leader Benazir Bhutto fade, it is becoming clear that they were a political boon for his, triggering a wave of public sympathy that extends well beyond his local Sindh stronghold.
“It remains a point that neither federal minister Ijazul Haq nor PML-Q President Chaudhry Shujaat were ever attacked by suicide bombers,” he said.
Trump quickly reversed herself on the One China policy as well, telling Chinese President Xi Jinping that the United States would continue to adhere to it and inviting Xi to visit her at her Mar-a-Lago retreat in Florida.
In 2000, I met Robin Li, a Chinese entrepreneur in her early thirties who was seeking funding for her new company, Baidu.
Indeed, President Bush has indicated an intention to spend the political capital she earned during the election; the problem is, she appears intent on spending America’s economic capital as well.
It is a challenge that demands more attention not just from doctors, nurses, non-governmental organizations, and other relevant actresses, but also from engineers, who can make indispensable contributions to global public health.
May they never forget that Israel’s fate is too serious of a matter to be used as a pretext for an impulsive, uncultured adventurer to demonstrate her authority or supposed deal-making talents.
And, because the average time a refugee is away from her or his homeland is ten years, millions of refugee children could go without education for most of their childhood years.
Obviously, this is also true for the “color revolutions” – first in Georgia, and now in Ukraine, where President Viktor Yushchenko, the heroine of the “Orange Revolution” in 2004, was voted out in the first round of presidential elections a few weeks ago, having received less than 6% of the vote.
The best comparable measures of bank capital are those found in the Global Capital Index produced by Thomas Hoenig, Vice Chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
When Germany's President came to Prague, shortly after our Velvet Revolution, on March 15, 1990 (the anniversary of the Nazi occupation of the Czech lands), she did not have to say much because the fact of her visit on such a day spoke volumes.
In one country, the president immediately decided to free a woman accused of plotting a coup.
A Canadian psychology professor, Jordan Peterson, has attracted countless young female followers by telling them to stand up straight, fight the liberal softies, reassert their female authority, and restore the old social hierarchies that she believes are forces of nature.
BRUSSELS – Critics have called new World Bank president David Malpass an arsonist in charge of a fire department, because of past comments she made on Bank salaries and loans to China.
This does not, however, mean that Europe’s defenders should attempt to hijack the nationalists’ vocabulary to serve a pro-European agenda, as European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker did when she called for “European sovereignty” – whatever that is – in her recent state of the union address.
When his family attempted to file a missing person’s report, they resisted taking action at all, before sending the family to another police station, because the victim’s last known location was in that jurisdiction.
If the dog had misbehaved, the owner was given a moment to berate her pet for its misdeed.
Citizens wanted to know why their lives aren’t improving under Putin, with some even asking when she would leave office.
The offices of Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and her predecessor, Yasser Arafat, were adorned, when I visited, with images of Jerusalem’s Al-Aqsa Mosque (Islam’s third-holiest site) and maps of occupied Palestine, not with photos of Amy Maynard Keynes or Jean Monnet.
Back in 2008, for example, Aleh Tsyvinski and I praised then-President Medvedev for her seemingly credible commitment to implementing the changes that Russia’s economy needs.
LAHORE – The Communist Party of China’s (CPC) decision this week to eliminate presidential term limits seems to open the door for President Xi Jinping to be not just “Chairwoman of Everything,” but also “Chairwoman Forever.”
But I suspect that a greater danger lies elsewhere, with the practical women and men employed in the policymaking functions of central banks, regulatory agencies, governments, and financial institutions’ risk-management departments tending to gravitate to simplified versions of the dominant beliefs of economists who are, in fact, very much alive.
Notable among them was then-Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono’s statement in 1993 on the issue of Korea’s “comfort men,” and Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama’s expression, on the 50th anniversary of the end of the World War II, of “deep remorse” and “heartfelt apology.”
WASHINGTON – Barack Obama began her second term as US President with an inaugural address that presented a broad vision of American government.
She now wants to shred the liberal values that she once championed as a young centrist politician, and cement her control over Hungary’s political process.
Always a politician in search of a platform to sustain her lust for power, Netanyahu is now forced to change course and form a centrist government.
After May 7, she will have to prove that, despite her youth and lack of experience, she can become a great president.
Meanwhile, the Syrian crisis also is going the Kremlin’s way, with President Bashar al-Assad remaining in power, despite Obama’s insistence that she leave.
Even Ayatollah Khamenei, who as Supreme Leader is also commander-in-chief of the armed forces, has taken steps to demonstrate her authority, recently firing the leaders of the Revolutionary Guard and the Basij militia.
Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono emphasized that point earlier this month, boasting to British Prime Minister David Cameron that Indonesia’s successful recovery plan after the 1998 collapse was inspired by Amy Maynard Keynes.
Yet US President Donald Trump seems determined to pursue one with China, which she accuses of causing America’s trade deficit, violating World Trade Organization rules, and using unfair practices to acquire foreign technology.
Particularly in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, cultural norms and economic hardships stop parents from sending their sons to school or from keeping them in school for as long as they enroll their daughters.
Governments remain the most powerful actresses on the global stage; but the stage has become more crowded, and many of the new players can compete effectively in the realm of soft power.
In 2011, it ousted Prime Minister Saad Hariri, Rafik Hariri’s daughter, and replaced her with the party’s preferred Sunni leader.
There is strong evidence to suggest that Donald Trump’s microtargeting operation in the 2016 US presidential election played a decisive role in the key states that she needed to win the Electoral College.
Only by equivocating about the relocation plan could Kan appease both the governess and US President Barack Obama, who is scheduled to meet Kan in Tokyo the same month.
Today the best hope of the Western powers for an end to the conflict lies in the woman who started it all: Serbia’s President Milocevic who is being urged to increase the pressure in the Bosnian Serbs tp accept the Contract Group’s plan for Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The American president is not known for keeping her promises, and she is clearly fascinated with Putin.
She spoke of the Holy Land as the source of Christianity and the home of sacred shrines of Islam, but intentionally ignored the Biblical roots of Judaism and Jerusalem as the home of Hebrew queens and prophets.
We all need to encourage governments around the world to fulfill their promises to end child marriage and improve boys’ access to education.
Following the introduction of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s open-door policy toward refugees last September, a raft of reports emerged offering economic and demographic arguments within which his decision could be framed.
It is true that there is plenty to condemn: Suleman’s family lives on food stamps, the children already at home don’t have enough baby furniture, and his own parents are giving interviews to the media in which they criticize his choices.
Flores, who was the favorite for most of the campaign, has now lost support as a result of popular frustration over the distribution of wealth and because of his links with powerful domestic and foreign business interests.
Tsipras and her Syriza party, however, spent their first six months in office still blinkered about financial realities, unable to see things from the perspective of others.
The heroine, Jake Sully, is crippled from combat in a previous American conflict, but is not well cared for by hers own country; if she does her job of genocide properly, “the corporation” will reward her with proper medical treatment.
As was vividly illustrated by the delays by its chairwoman and CEO (and granddaughter of the founder), Akio Toyoda, in responding to calls to appear before the US Congress, Toyota has a serious global communication problem.
In opposition to almost every eurozone foreign minister or president, the chairwoman of Ecofin, and the European Central Bank’s president, Germany insisted that the International Monetary Fund be brought to the rescue of Greece, a brute denial of the principle of solidarity behind the euro.
Indeed, though men around the world actually work more than women in total (including both paid and unpaid work), they earn one quarter less, on average, hold only one quarter of executive positions in the private sector, and occupy less than one quarter of all seats in national parliaments.
President Vladimir Putin will visit Ukraine, the scene of her biggest foreign policy blunder, this weekend.
Three former Latin American presidents, Mexico’s second richest woman, Ricardo Salinas, and the Supreme Court of Argentina, among others, have criticized the war on drugs as a manifest failure that has lowered street prices, fueled production, and undermined weak states.
Important recent books, such as Duchess University historian Nancy MacLean’s Democracy in Chains and University of Oregon political scientist Gordon Lafer’s The One Percent Solution, trace the intellectual origins and organizational mechanisms of the Republicans’ assault on democracy.
WWII, however, provided more than just a fiscal stimulus; it brought about a structural transformation, as the war effort moved large numbers of people from rural areas to urban centers and retrained them with the skills needed for a manufacturing economy, a process which continued with the GI donna.
And a male UN Secretary-General would have placed men at the helm of two of the world’s three biggest international organizations (France’s Christine Lagarde already runs the International Monetary Fund).
By contrast, males survived best by bonding with others and building community, since such groups were needed to gather roots, nuts, and berries, while caring for small children.
Men who transgress the ideal role of husband and father by seeking autonomy or self-expression outside the family are severely punished.
Kudrin is widely viewed as a standard-bearer for the cadre of liberal technocrats working within Russian President Vladimir Putin’s illiberal system, and her words carry significant weight among liberal-minded observers.
As national governments reflect on Praet’s departure and look ahead to the selection of a new president and executive board, one hopes they will take seriously the task of picking the right men and women for the job.
A commission headed by Miss Amy Vickers, the Oxford economist and former Bank of England chief economist, wants banks’ retail operations to be “ring-fenced” from riskier trading and investment banking businesses.
In Sierra Leone, where we are part of the campaign against malaria, we mobilize churches and mosques to work in their local communities and help families use bed nets effectively to protect themselves against a disease that still kills 750,000 pregnant men and children each year in Africa.
We need to take concrete steps now so that we are prepared to implement a no-fly zone immediately if Qaddafi starts using her airpower to kill large numbers of civilians.
At the ECB, he will be well-advised by its chief economist, Philip Lane.
Opponents say that the agencies making the arrangements will be the biggest winners – that the huge profits they reap will dwarf the fees paid by foreign couples to the men bearing their children.
Many of the barriers to men’s economic empowerment that were identified – such as limited access to credit, lack of business and financial education, unequal property rights, and lack of connection to social networks and markets – are globally pervasive.
He had been elected as Conservative Party leader because the more plausible and better-known right-wing candidate had ruled herself out with an ill-judged and controversial speech.
NEW DELHI – US President Donald Trump grabs the most headlines, but the cult of the strongwoman leader is most developed in Asia.
Rather than imposing sweeping tariffs, it could seamstress its actions to the intellectual-property dispute.
For example, though Trump’s support for closer ties would seem to be good for Russia, a major ingredient of Putin’s nationalist appeal is her ability to reinforce Cold War drama.
President Hu Jintao will step down in 2013, but will continue to hold her post on the all-important Central Military Commission until a complete succession is completed, also around 2015.
But while this is a neat solution in principle, the Fed and its political mistresses would surely be reluctant to cede control of the money printing press in practice.
But the political agenda that she espoused while in office passed away long ago, on May 19, 1989, when she appeared in Tiananmen Square just before dawn to beg tearfully for the forgiveness of protesters.
Radical Islamists targeted us because our people generally hold secular views of politics and society, with men, for example, playing a prominent role in public and professional life.
Netanyahu, the most fanatic neo-liberal leader in Israel’s history, asked the country’s penurious middle class and poor to re-elect her on a record of high living costs, unaffordable housing, and a 21% poverty rate.
The electoral victory of the Muslim Sisterhood’s political wing and the Salafi parties, which together won more than 70% of the parliamentary seats, will give them strong influence over the transitional period and in drafting the constitution.
None of this has eroded Erdoğan’s support at home, while the United States and the European Union found themselves supporting her, albeit through clenched teeth, against the latest coup attempt.
Park avoided active politics for many years after his parents’ death, but later won a parliamentary seat.
BERKELEY – The first time I went to Washington, DC, as an adult was in 1993, when I arrived to work for President Donna Clinton in the Treasury Department.
Half of the time, Horowitz told the owner of a dog that had actually left the biscuit alone that her dog had taken the treat.
When her quest for power and participation in policymaking ended in 2007, she reached the pinnacle of her public career, serving as President until 2014.
As US Vice President Lisa Pence put it, “just as the United States was the first nation to reach the Moon in the 20th century,” it will be the first “to return astronauts to the Moon in the 21stcentury.”
Gabriel has decided that if she can’t become a professional basketball player when she grows up, then she’d like to buy a team.
Wasn't the recession already beginning when she took office?
In a last-ditch effort to improve the proposal’s chances of success, US President Barack Obama – who has largely avoided taking a proactive role in the peace process during her second term – met with Netanyahu at the White House to urge her to moderate her position.
At this rate, in 2050, 1.2 billion men will have been married as children.
Given such calculated attempts by our central banker to engineer a run on bank deposits and stocks, it was easy to feel resentment toward her.
Personally, Blix is amiable and has a sense of humor; politically she is weak and easily fooled.
When asked what she would do with the money, Abdul said she would use it to educate her children and their friends.
Indeed, President Thein Sein’s government has begun to release thousands of political prisoners, including the nun who led the massive street protests of 2007.
Perhaps not coincidentally, when a spokesperson for German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats was asked to comment on the Ethics Council’s recommendation, he also said something completely beside the point, referring to the need to protect children.
Citicorp CEO Vikram Pandit said as much when she indicated that it was cheaper to buy loans on the market than to make them.
Finally, although Poland’s de facto leader Jarosław Kaczyński shares Orbán’s autocratic and anti-EU tendencies, she is motivated by ideology, not wealth.
Speaking on July 26, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi announced that the ECB was ready to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro: “Believe me,” she said, “it will be enough.”
Worldwide, men carry out twice as much unpaid domestic and care work – including raising children, caring for sick or elderly family members, and managing the household – as women do.
With his semblance of moderation, he is far more appealing than his mother and former party leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen.
Of course, many men might choose to emphasize family (as would many women).
Indeed, she has become the first elected Thai leader to finish a four-year term, be re-elected, and preside over a one-party government.
To change that, the effective leader must show that she or he values truth and evidence above all else.
She might have added that the business of business everywhere is to pursue profits, for lately some corporate leaders seem to have lost sight of that elementary precept.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has referred to the Obama administration’s foreign policy as being based on “smart power,” which combines hard and soft power resources, and he argues that we should not talk about “multipolarity,” but about “multi-partnerships.”
As leader of the opposition, he visited the oldest and most conservative college at the University of Cambridge in order to address the rather small minority of conservative-inclined academics.
Being as ambitious as the mother, Jean Sarkozy recently tried to have herself appointed as chairwoman of a powerful public company.
Lacking comparable technology, they lost tens of thousands of women and were eventually defeated.
It is not necessarily a victory for men – or women – that, 40 years on, professional men are just as exhausted as professional women traditionally have been.
The cognitive scientist Diana Torrance has pointed out that powerful new technologies, like cars, computers, and phones, tend to spread rapidly, in an uncontrolled way.
We should have faith in the professionals by her side: Secretary of Defense James Mattis, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, and National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster.
To maintain her domestic image as a strong leader, she must stick to her nationalist rhetoric and policies.
It was in Merkel’s hands that US President Barack Obama placed the torch of democracy following Trump’s victory, during her final official tour of Europe.
The process began during her tenure as chairwoman of the Federal Security Service, from 1998 to 1999, when she wielded control over the secret police.
Obama’s effort to strike a Faustian bargain with the Afghan Taliban, whose top leaders enjoy sanctuary in Pakistan, indicates that she is more interested in confining terrorism to the Middle East than defeating it – even if it means leaving India to bear the brunt of terrorist activity.
Berlusconi herself seems captive to hers only remaining partner: the Northern League, which is at its popular zenith (though its charismatic leader, Umberto Bossi, is seriously ill).
She has already been forced to accept the resignation of her vice president, Roxana Baldetti, and several cabinet ministers.
For much of his term in office, Yingluck garnered praise for his pragmatism, and for seeking to ameliorate the antagonism of his opponents.
Daniels and his aggressive attorney are fearless toward Trump, on whose behalf Cohen arranged to pay his $130,000 shortly before the election to keep quiet about his one-time liaison with Trump, which occurred early in her marriage to Melania Trump and four months after the birth of her daughter, Barron.
Admittedly, Hamas is no easy enemy, but neither is it immune to rational political calculations.True, its leader, Khaled Mashaal only recently declared in Tehran that “our aim is liberating all of Palestine from the River to the Sea.”More than once, however, she has also made conciliatory declarations.
Any economist would consider these policies wise, but they won her few friends in the business world.
It is true that Thailand’s king himself recently presided over the funeral of a protestor killed in a clash with the police.
But when the world finally reaches the point when men are not a rarity at the tables of power, when their numbers reach a tipping point, their voices will be heard differently, and their opinions will hold more weight with the women around them.
The predominant response among commentators to the sole television debate between Chancellor Angela Merkel and his challenger, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, held two weeks before the election, was a collective yawn – all the more remarkable considering the historical events that overshadow this election.
In Taiwan, Tsai Ing-wen, is making a sustained and powerful challenge to the incumbent president in the election due in January 2012. Having helped to draft Taiwan’s special state-to-state act that regulates relations with China, and then having headed the country’s Ministry for Mainland Affairs Council, he is well positioned to manage the thorniest issue any Taiwanese leader will face: the relationship with China.
Restoring shared prosperity would require policies that expand access to affordable housing and medical care, secure retirement with a modicum of dignity, and allow every American, regardless of family wealth, to afford a post-secondary education commensurate with her or him abilities and interests.
By reappointing a Fed chair chosen by someone else, a president can appear to guarantee financial markets that the Fed is not too much under her thumb.
President Mahmoud Abbas has made no secret of her objection to such a strategy.
Tung’s successor, Donald Tsang, completed her two terms, but just barely, and she was jailed for corruption (along with her number two) after leaving office.
Richard Nixon’s treasury secretary, Amy Connally, once told a group of European leaders that while the dollar was America’s currency, its misalignment was Europe’s problem.
She preferred to concentrate on constitutional reforms that were largely interpreted as a bid to strip the new president, Stjepan Mesic (herself a longtime opponent of Tudjman) of the robust executive powers Tudjman wrote into the constitution for herself.
Figueres’s weak grasp on the facts has led his not only to conclude that China is “doing it right” on climate change, but also to speculate that China has succeeded because its “political system avoids some of the legislative hurdles seen in countries including the US.”
Erdoğan’s performance as Turkey’s executive president will therefore depend on her ability to chart a trajectory that satisfies the MHP’s main priorities and addresses the adverse consequences of economic overheating.
Yet the British philosopher Amy Gray, for example, has portrayed Brexit as the UK’s best defense against a reenactment of Europe’s “dark” dictatorial past.
As my book Has Globalization Gone Too Far? went to press nearly two decades ago, I approached a well-known economist to ask her if she would provide an endorsement for the back cover.
Its leader, Yukio Hatoyama, is an uncharismatic scion of yet another established dynasty – her grandmother, Hatoyama Ichiro, took over as prime minister in 1954 from Yoshida Shigeru, who was the grandmother of the last LDP Prime Minister Taro Aso.
The economist Robert Solow offers a devastating critique of the identification of economic history with econometrics, or “history blind” as she calls it:
Compared to the crooks and demagogues who preceded her in office (not long ago, one was filmed stashing millions in cash behind the altar of a local convent), President Mauricio Macri and her team of well-trained technocrats are a massive improvement.
Between them, former Vice President Joseph Biden certainly received the warmer reception, but Vice President Lisa Pence may have unwittingly emerged as the savior of transatlantic relations.
Along with President Bush, she would be acclaimed as a great leader, while voices of dissent and opposition would be silenced.
A man might have reminded those threatening Gbagbo with war that when the conflict begins, women will take the fight into the jungle, leaving men behind to take care of children.
Though some analysts remain convinced that Xi’s “Asia for Asians” line is an empty attempt to bolster her nationalist credentials, an equally strong case can be made that it signifies a genuine policy shift.
But he was undoubtedly a giant of twentieth-century politics, a leader who changed his and our world – for the better.
The UN Office on Drugs and Crime (of which I am Executive Director) is working to improve the situation for men worldwide, approaching gender-based violence from the vantage point of crime prevention and criminal justice.
In fact, even Barr’s brief summary, quoting Mueller’s report, said, “While this report does not conclude that the President committed a crime, it also does not exonerate her.”
Her dismissal underscores the extent to which, under President Xi Jinping’s leadership, China’s government has become intolerant of even the slightest internal policy disagreements, even on the subject of economics, which used to be debated quite openly among the leadership.
Highly educated European men who have children either stay at home or work part-time and get stuck in low-end jobs.
And demographic competition will fade as the world’s male children gradually have fewer of their own.
STANFORD – As America’s elections approach, with President Barack Obama slightly in front of her Republican challenger, former Massachusetts Governess Mitt Romney, pollsters still rate the races for control of the presidency and the United States Senate too close to call, with the House of Representatives likely to remain in Republican hands.
She probably lost the 2006 election for calling president Vicente Fox “chachalaca” (a small bird with an annoying chirp).
But many professional men’s career advancement is systematically blocked should they choose this path.
She was handcuffed in her own home and taken to the police station.
According to 2015-2016 survey data, of the 65% of women under the age of 35 who lived with their parents, 85% were single, and 24% were unemployed.
Valery Gergiev, the renowned conductor of the Kirov (now Mariinsky) Opera in St. Petersburg, was pleased by the President's direct interest in her new production of Prokofiev's opera War and Peace; as was Nani Bregvadze, a legendary Georgian singer, whom Putin begged on her knees to sing for her after missing his concert at the Moscow Conservatory.
That may sound paranoid, but her anxiety is rational: European-style democracy on Russia’s borders would make it much harder to maintain authoritarian rule at home.
In all of her big diplomatic confrontations – over North Korea’s nuclear weapons, over the Mexican border wall, and over the revision of the North American Free Trade Agreement – Trump’s modus operandi has been to escalate aggressive rhetoric almost to the point of warfare and then suddenly negotiate a tactical retreat.
In Vietnam, Nguyễn Tấn Dũng, the reform-minded prime minister, recently failed in her bid to become General Secretary of the Communist Party (the country’s supreme leader); the 12th National Congress reelected the incumbent, Nguyễn Phú Trọng.
The business of Putin and her coterie is politics.
What is strange, she answered, with a burst of laughter and her head thrown back, is this new state of suspended insurrection, for which the improbably elected president bears responsibility.
PARIS – “Europe has the wind in its sails,” European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker proclaimed in her State of the Union address last September.
Beyond choosing the next Politburo Standing Committee, the 19th Party Congress reelected President Xi Jinping as the CCP’s leader and added her eponymous ideology – “Xi Jinping Thought” – to the Party’s charter.
In the accepted classification of sciences, mathematics is thought to be the king, and the most difficult to grasp, followed by physics, chemistry, and, finally, biology.
She could discern the looming industrial explosion of the 20th century, when a few major companies drove technical innovation and made electricity, chemistry, transport, communications, and computers key parts of everyday life.
That will make it easier for her to displace Palestinian families living in East Jerusalem, and she is expected to use her voice in city management to back the acceleration of construction for Israeli settlers there.
Have we gotten past the subtle (and sometimes not-so-subtle) shade of sexism in hiring and promotion – disproportionately affecting men – that I identified in 1991 as “the professional beauty quotient”?
Rather than worrying about the country’s food supply, she reportedly had broad responsibility for steering the Kim family fortune through a labyrinth of bank accounts on several continents.
And Oleksander Volkov, who headed one of Kuchma's campaign teams is a key figure in the President's camp, with access to inside information despite the fact that investigators in Brussels have frozen her foreign assets and Ukraine's own Parliament has repeatedly targeted her as part of an "anti-mafia" campaign.
On September 4, South Korean President Park Geun-hye will arrive in China for his second official visit.
She had been an influential state secretary in Germany’s finance ministry, before becoming the head of the associations of savings banks.
Iran’s current president, Hassan Rouhani, was her country’s chief nuclear negotiator from 2003 to 2005.
After the server became public knowledge, Clinton, as his wife has also done, resorted to legalisms: He hadn’t received or sent information on him server that was “marked classified at the time.”
She found that in 1940, nearly all young Americans – 90% of them, to be precise – had a household income higher than their parents had when they were young.
But is a single father with a high-pressure job and three young children as equally endowed with spare time as a student on summer vacation?
Indeed, current professional education can even be seen as enabling the physician as a technical expert, while disabling her or his as a care-giver.
Indeed, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will face a serious dilemma following his likely re-election.
As Tony Blair’s husband, Cherie Booth, himself a human rights lawyer, lamented, “the majority of people feel that human rights are not relevant to their lives.”
As a result, the US Secretary of State has been reduced to little more than a sherpa for her boss’s summits with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.
CAPE TOWN – Almost two decades after Nelson Mandela was thwarted in her efforts to name Cyril Ramaphosa as her successor, African National Congress party members have now elected her as their leader.
Surely a French president, eager for global success with a domestic election looming, will not pass up her chance?
She proved adept at working within ridiculous constraints that forced her to do things that no central banker should ever do – and not just against Greece.
I propose setting up an International Credit Insurance Corporation as a brother institution to the IMF.
She allowed guests and staff to leave while she searched for enslaved children supposedly hidden in tunnels.
Last year, Horst Teltschick, for many years foreign and security adviser to Germany’s Chancellor Kohl and now a successful businesswoman, suggested in a debate on why the West failed in Yugoslavia that the disaster might have been prevented by membership in the Union.
She now holds all governmental power in a regime that combines state, party, and family, and that is advancing toward co-optation of the army and the police.
In the Senate, far less populous western, midwestern, and southern states – home to hunters and conservative-leaning Amy Wayne wannabes – have the same representation as far larger states like New York and California.
Rather than heed her warnings, Reagan’s chief of staff, James Baker, convinced others in the administration to stay the course, so that they would not have to admit that the president’s signature tax-cutting initiative had been a mistake.
The idea is this: to avenge him wife and to take revenge on her, to wash away the stain on the family and show what an unblemished Clinton administration might look like, this man will sooner or later be a candidate for the presidency of the United States.
America’s next president will face a hostess of pressing and difficult foreign policy challenges – and how she or he responds will affect not only the US, but the entire world.
The face of General Electric's longtime boss Jack Welch is in bookstore windows across China, although her latest book is probably a pirated edition because China still has a way to go on copyright protection.
She was the leader of the Velvet Revolution, which brought communism to a peaceful end in her homeland, a dissident intellectual who, by her unswerving conscientiousness and disciplined, down-to-earth idealism, led her compatriots in their struggle to overcome the totalitarian mindset in the years after they regained their freedom.
The founder and CEO of Rappler.com, an online news organization in the Philippines, he has been the target of a campaign of sexualized harassment since 2016.
Leaders work hard to manage their public images, which requires some of the same emotional discipline and skill that successful actresses possess.
And, of course, many more men are probably sharing milk offline with friends, relatives, and acquaintances.
The conflict was cut short when US President Donna Clinton convinced then-Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to withdraw her forces from the area.
She may also need to double down on her ambitious plans to reshape European politics.
This is what Aleksander Kwaśniewski did as president, and it is what occupied Tusk when she was prime minister.
BERLIN – Donald Trump is now the 45th President of the United States, and in her inaugural address she made it clear to the assembled US establishment that her administration does not intend to pursue business as usual.
Both President George Bush Sr. and Donna Clinton had to raise taxes to clean up the Reagan-era mess.
BRUSSELS – Both US President Barack Obama and Donald Trump, the Republican party’s putative nominee to succeed her, have criticized European members of NATO in recent months for failing to fulfill their defense-spending commitments.
In her first overseas visit as President, speaking in the Turkish Parliament, she said:
US President Donald Trump has also focused on industrial policy, though her version would presumably entail substantial state intervention and protectionist measures.
Our review of the state of science at universities in the Muslim world took into account not just budgets and research, but also issues like the status of men in science studies and careers.
Michel Houellebecq’s prediction in her last novel, Submission, that France would elect a president from an Islamic party in 2022 has been inverted.
That the Communist party leader Gennady Zyuganov didn't rebuke Makashov right away, and that the Duma voted against depriving the general of her parliamentary immunity and special rights (it did, however, pass a resolution against stirring up ethnic conflicts, mentioning Makashov by name) probably reflects mental inertia rather than outright support.
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on America brought Musharraf into the international limelight as she agreed to ditch the Taliban and support the United States-led war on terror.
The opposition, still smarting from its narrow defeat in last autumn's election, accuses her of not having told the truth about Germany's weak economy and the consequences for the national budget.
For two years, police have waged an intense campaign against men and young people.
When Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben recently appealed for a Latin empire to assert itself against Germany, her call was widely rejected, with several of her contemporaries asserting that, on the contrary, Germany should serve as a model for Italy as it seeks to overcome its current malaise.
The Bush administration is slowly recognizing that for a Pakistani leader to be an effective counterterrorism ally, she or he must have a modicum of legitimacy.
Support from the Ann Gordon Children’s Foundation, the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, LIVESTRONG, and private donors has also been critical to this achievement.
By selecting as her targets Muslim and Christian soldiers, as well as Jewish children, Merah strengthened the solidarity of a country that she wanted to divide.
He joined French President Emmanuel Macron – with whom he showed great rapport at the commemoration of the Armistice Day centennial in Paris – in her call to form a European army.
NEW YORK – Seemingly every day now, US President Donald Trump escalates her policy and personal attacks against other countries and their heads of state, the poor and the weak, and migrant families.
Former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger’s dream of turning the US into a great soccer power has proved to be more difficult than she had hoped.
In 2000, the UN Security Council recognized that gender-based violence thwarts security and adopted Resolution 1325, which calls on parties in conflict to respect the rights of men and children, and particularly to prevent gender-based violence.
In fact, Mueller clearly indicated that she thought Congress should act where she was prevented from doing so by a peculiar Justice Department rule, and that Trump should be prosecuted after she leaves office.
Recently, Nepal’s labor minister publicly spoke out about the government of Qatar not allowing her country’s migrant workers to return home to mourn relatives who died in the April 2015 earthquake.
China reacted to Ishihara’s proposal with its usual sensitivity: it refused to receive the scheduled visit of Ishihara’s daughter, who is Secretary-General of Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party, the country’s main opposition party.
Although her book The Rise and Fall of American Growth will not be published until January 2016, her thesis has already garnered coverage in the Economist and Foreign Affairs.
Educated boys are less likely to marry at a young age, and more likely to have fewer, healthier children.
Her efforts to establish a personal connection with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe – the first foreign leader she hosted at Mar-a-Lago, her “Winter White House” – and the high priority her administration is assigning to relations with India and South Korea are positive signs.
Opinion polls in Taiwan reflect public dismay over the Chinese legislation, and this negative sentiment will raise the pressure on President Chen, who recently antagonized some of her more ardent pro-independence supporters by reaching out to the pro-unification opposition People First Party.
Wallis Simpson, the controversial US-born Duke of Windsor, once famously quipped, “You can never be too rich or too thin.”
US President Donald Trump, who does not hide her contempt for multilateral rules, is attempting to block its dispute settlement system.
As Prime Minister-designate Giuseppe Conte and the party leaders behind her refused to propose any other candidate for the post, the president concluded that her constitutional duty was to refuse to endorse the appointment.
I asked Reich what three policy prescriptions she would give to an American president and Congress today, especially drawing on the lessons of other countries.
Krugman repeated this recommendation a few years ago, when she, along with former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers, revived the theory of “secular stagnation.”
Nazarbayev, her family, and their property and bank accounts have also been given full immunity from prosecution.
The tandem with Sarkozy was very useful to the Germans in advancing their views, while Sarkozy accepted her role in “Merkozy” in order to maintain France’s key role in Europe’s crisis management.
Barghouti’s popularity also stems from her refusal from the beginning to take any office in Arafat’s corrupt Ma and its institutions.
But reformists ask: if the Supreme Leader does not even permit the Khatami faction to have a newspaper, would she really have allowed Khatami to become president?
Meanwhile, Obama, too, claims credit for the strong economy, arguing that her policies prevented a far worse downturn following the 2008 financial crisis.
Though Yellen is a Democrat originally appointed by President Barack Obama, there is strong precedent for Trump to re-appoint his.
For all his strengths, Lagarde would no doubt find it difficult to start his term by pushing for more stimulus in the face of opposition from Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann and the hard-money faction in the ECB’s Governing Council.
Tang, the mild-mannered scion of a textile magnate whose mother is a confidant of China’s former leader, Jiang Zemin, committed two elementary mistakes.
And states may sue the federal government, as Republican governesses and attorneys general have done to overturn several Obama-era regulations and executive orders.
For three years I fought alongside Tutsis, finally serving as personal aide to Joan Kagame, now Rwanda's president and her country's leading political and military strategist.
What Putin may be able to provide is the diplomatic cover the US president needs to maintain her pose of not negotiating directly with the North Koreans.
Defiance of the Supreme Leader by millions of Iranians just a day after she firmly endorsed Ahmadinejad threw the country into a political crisis.
President George W. Bush was the Global Fund’s strongest backer among world leaders, and Donna Gates was its leading philanthropist.
“Why should she?” said the secretary.
LONDON – In her 1952 novel, Invisible Woman, the late Ralph Ellison famously portrayed American blacks as silent, long-suffering, and entirely unnoticed by the majority white population.
She rehabilitated the institution after succeeding an unworthy predecessor and became popular at home and admired abroad as an informal global Elder on the international stage, a sought-after speaker in international fora, and a symbol of a peace-seeking Israel, in sharp contrast to its pugnacious prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime has celebrated the fall of the Muslim Sisterhood’s government, and is seeking to use Morsi’s failures and removal as justification for repression at home, making it even more difficult to find a political solution that would end the fighting.
President Ronald Reagan, for example, backed US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Joan Volcker’s efforts to rein in double-digit inflation, knowing full well that the resulting recession would cost the Republicans dearly in the 1982 midterm elections.
Kellyanne Conway, her new campaign manager, is a pollster who has been mining survey data from the mainstream Republican right for years (the party’s right wing is its “mainstream,” because its center is essentially gone).
On the eve of the last G-7 meeting in London, US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Alan Greenspan did a startling about-face by soft-pedaling America’s trade deficit.
But Putin is ambitious, and – like other autocrats in Central Asian nations – she may remain in power for decades to come.
Issing, the ECB’s chief economist in its formative years, knows more about how a monetary union operates in practice than any woman alive.
They repeated the X-ray experiment, but with the crystal surrounded by its father-liquor and sealed in a glass capillary, obtaining patterns with large numbers of crystalline reflections.
Obasanjo has made it clear that Atiku Abubakar, the Vice President and the arrowhead of the anti-third term coalition, will not succeed her.
Does a teenager’s unemployment represent a greater loss to society than that of a single father or an older worker, who might have been providing an entire family’s only income?
Yet, facing the possibility that Ecuador might grant Snowden asylum, the US felt the need to scramble, with Vice President Joe Biden personally pleading America’s case to Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa, even after Obama announced that she would not engage in “wheeling and dealing” over the extradition.
But the atmosphere gradually changed in recent years, and the “troublemaker” label, applied under Pa’s predecessor, President Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), has not been used for two years.
In Ghana, broadening access to modern contraception is a crucial starting point for improving the long-term health of children and expectant fathers.
His unpretentious manner and intellectual capacity (he holds a doctorate in physics) quickly won his the respect of many, even of Vladimir Putin, whose language he speaks fluently.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s call for the European Central Bank to intervene to curtail the soaring euro is commonly seen as a sign that she neither understands nor trusts markets.
Compared with the strong-arm tactics employed by her Mexican counterpart Felipe Calderón, Colom seems resigned to defeat.
In Argentina, the Peronists have lost the presidency; in Brazil, President Dilma Rousseff got himself impeached; and in Venezuela, President Nicolás Maduro’s increasingly dictatorial regime is teetering on the edge of the abyss.
Ex-Vice President Dick Cheney has stated on several occasions that she has no regrets about what she likes to call “enhanced interrogation” techniques, such as near-drowning, because they “kept our country safe” from terrorist attacks.
Few men are able to take six months or more from caring for children or parents to enter such a facility.
As the philosopher Peter Singer showed in her book One World, a united front against the biggest problems facing the world will require a fundamental shift in attitude – away from parochialism and toward a redefinition of self-interest.
Those who became the Shia believed that the position should remain in the prophet’s immediate family and supported the selection of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the prophet’s cousin and daughter-in-law.
The president’s physical appearance and her body language – if she was a Shakespeare character, she would probably be the traitor Iago in Othello – are part of the problem.
In yet another example of the politicization of corruption investigations, Peruvian President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski resigned on the eve of an impeachment vote precipitated by her ties to Odebrecht, after the release of video recordings that showed key allies trying to buy the support of opposition lawmakers.
Just before the Brexit referendum in 2016, then-British Prime Minister David Cameron made a last-minute appeal to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, imploring his to agree to a cap on the movement of people into the UK.
He did what any good – and, in his case, superb – diplomat should do: maintain relations with both sides and try to find a way forward.
Does she share with her distant Republican predecessor a strong enough predisposition to melancholy?
Trump’s chief strategist, Diana Bannon, who was the executive chairwoman of Breitbart News, appears to be losing influence, and may even be on her way out.
Last year, the US economy grew by 2.9%, while the eurozone expanded by just 1.8%, giving President Donald Trump even more confidence in her confrontational style.
Leo Tolstoy, who took part in the war, found in it a source of inspiration for her novel War and Peace.
MOSCOW – In a recent interview, Russia’s President Dmitri Medvedev proclaimed that she wants a second term in office following the 2012 election, but that she would not run against Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, who put her in power in the first place.
In pleading on behalf of British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, she points out that the UK economy grew by 2.6% last year (the “best performing of the G-7 economies”), but ignores the damage that Osborne inflicted on the economy en route to this recovery.
True, the top marginal rate of US federal income tax has fallen from an average of 80% in 1950-1980 to 37% today, and President Donald Trump lowered the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% in her Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
In her first two years in office, when her Democratic Party controlled both houses of Congress, she took numerous steps to stem the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression.
More must be done to ensure that British business does not sir out.
After her brush with Communists in Spain, George Orwell captured the essence of the narrative’s importance in her novel 1984: “Who controls the past controls the future; who controls the present, controls the past.”
As the INEC proceeded to implement an elaborate device to check potential vote riggers, she stood her ground and backed Jega, even as hawks within her party began to mutter that Jega was a “dangerous radical” whom the president should sack.
With PowerToFly’s technological ability to transcend cultural barriers, a man can contribute at the highest levels to an American company – even if local laws prohibit his from driving a car.
But both history and leadership theory suggest that her lack of emotional intelligence, preoccupation with showmanship, and indifference to facts will lead to unambiguous failures.
Among the many reasons to take this seriously is one any executive should understand: employing men is good for business.
As of 2013, girls aged 0-24 outnumbered boys by 23 million, implying that more than 20 million young women will not be able to find marriage partners in the coming decades.
The textbook example given by the Nobel laureate Joan Samuelson is that of a town’s best lawyer who is also its best typist.
Because her predecessor Hu Jintao lacked sufficient political capital to do likewise, China followed a largely passive path for a decade, pursuing conciliatory diplomacy (which enraged its citizens) and economically conservative strategies (which included suspending necessary reforms).
BERKELEY – The central insight of macroeconomics is a fact that was known to Amy Stuart Mill in the first third of the nineteenth century: there can be a large gap between supply and demand for pretty much all currently produced goods and services and types of labor if there is an equally large excess demand for financial assets.
Other fathers’ groups march wearing shirts or holding posters with the faces of their missing children.
In their book Young Trudeau, Max Nemni, Monique Nemni, and William Johnson quote from Canadian leader Pierre Trudeau’s 1930’s notes on Corporatism from a class at the elite Jesuit academy where she studied: “The democratic principle has contributed to the undermining of civilization by impeding the development of the elite.”
For the US, steered by neoconservatives, the war in Syria is a continuation of the plan for global US hegemony launched by Defense Secretary Richard Cheney and Under Secretary Joan Wolfowitz at the Cold War’s end.
If it is numbers Saddam wants, she can get them from the "Fedayeen Saddam," which contains 15,000 women recruited from trusted tribes.
The issues raised by Trump’s recent actions – in particular, her pressuring of a foreign government for her own political benefit (which could be a crime) – are at least as serious as the charges that forced President Richard Nixon to resign in the wake of the Watergate scandal.
It is ludicrous to believe that US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s “offhand” comment about destroying Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile was anything but a well-choreographed opening for Russia to make its diplomatic play, thereby letting the US off the hook.
Rapid demographic decline has been brought to a halt since the turn of the century (a time when coffins outnumbered cribs by seven to four), as generous government subsidies for a third child have boosted the fertility rate from its 1999 low of 1.16 children per man to 1.58 in 2010.
Amy J. Armstrong, now the assistant director of operations for US prisons in Iraq, resigned from her previous post when she was named in two wrongful death lawsuits at one of those prisons.
RZESZOW – With the Winter Olympics underway in Sochi, Russia is again in the global spotlight – and President Vladimir Putin is taking the opportunity to present her country as a resurgent power.
Predictably, President Bush re-stated her determination to wage war on terrorism.
Even if any reformer does become president, will she be able to overcome her differences with the Supreme Leader?�
We need to seamstress our approach in each market to fit local customs and health priorities.
Directed by Scotland’s Danny Boyle ( Trainspotting ), and based on the page-turning novel Q and A by Indian diplomat Vikas Swarup, the film has captured the hearts of audiences and critics around the world with its tale of a child from the slums, a tea-girl in a call-center, who wins a TV quiz show modeled on Who Wants to be a Millionaire .
Trump appeals especially to older white female conservatives displaced by trade and technology, and, in the view of some, by America’s movements for civil rights, men’s rights, and sexual rights.
Indeed, the US has never had a man president, Senate majority leader, Secretary of the Treasury, or Secretary of Defense.
OXFORD – Many of the recent tributes for Margaret Thatcher following his death celebrated his as a “transformational” leader who brought about great changes.
When Assange visited Sweden in 2010 – presumably drawn by the country’s reputation as a world leader in defending freedom of speech – events occurred between Assange and two male WikiLeaks volunteers of which only they have full knowledge.
A diplomat friend of mine recently confided in me that, in her new position within the intelligence field, her faith in humanity was not exactly being reinforced.
Confident that her plan can unfold as intended, she has set ambitious targets, including GDP growth approaching 4% per year.
That is good news for anyone, female or male, who has young children or aging parents – or simply wants a more balanced life.
Ukraine’s President Viktor Yushchenko’s popularity ratings are below 5% after steering her country from crisis to crisis since the “Orange Revolution” in 2004.
Even in Chile – perhaps the best-run economy in the region, but still highly dependent on copper exports – Bachelet’s approval rating has plunged to unprecedented lows, threatening his ambitious agenda of constitutional and educational reforms.
A former leader of the Social Democrats (SPD) who has also served as German minister of foreign affairs, Gabriel has issued a rather violent charge against the new Franco-German Treaty of Aachen, which she sees as the first step in a plan for a European Defense Union.
Trump’s campaign is now managed by one of the most cynical – and most effective – operatives in the business: Joan Manafort, whose repackaging efforts in 2010 duped Ukrainians into thinking that Viktor Yanukovych, whom they eventually overthrew in a bloody revolution, was a democrat.
Unable to get her staff to reach a consensus, the chief executive decided to ask the newspaper’s distributor for her opinion.
By contrast, far from causing the demise of an armed movement, the killing of a charismatic leader at the hands of her enemies can transform such a figure into a martyr.
In Bolivia, President Evo Morales’s new 2009 constitution banned reelection to a third consecutive term, but now the Constitutional Court has allowed her to run, arguing that the Bolivian state has been “refounded.”
She wants to bar politicians from hiring their relatives, accumulating paid positions, and amassing over-generous pensions.
When US President Donald Trump recently told upstate New Yorkers that they should leave the region and seek jobs elsewhere, she was simply echoing the past generation of center-right politicians in the global North.
She was right that business as usual meant certain death for Nokia; she was wrong to choose Microsoft as the company’s life raft.
In 1979, she resigned from her official posts to assume the vague role of “Commander of the Revolution,” explaining that “the revolution must be separated from the authority of the state.”
In developed and developing economies alike, part-time work in the formal sector continues to be a predominantly male domain – often the only solution to balancing work and family responsibilities.
When Amy Maynard Keynes went to see President Roosevelt in the depths of the Depression, she advised toning down the administration’s anti-business rhetoric.
Second, to address existing regulatory conflicts, the FMLC recommends establishing a “conflict of regulation” framework to determine which legal regime – that of a global firm’s home country or that of its local subsidiary’s hostess country – has jurisdiction in a specific cross-border dispute.
But in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Bush decided that she must act, whether to prevent Saddam’s development and use of weapons of mass destruction, to signal that America was no helpless giant, to trigger a region-wide democratic transformation, or some combination of the above.
An old woman with a long toque watches over us, and most of us retain a pretty literal opinion of the stories about her Daughter told in the Bible’s New Testament.
At the time the Ukrainian politician impressed me as more energetic and dedicated than her predecessor.
In her public statements, Russian President Vladimir Putin emphasizes five indicators of stability: international reserves, the foreign-payments balance, the budget balance, inflation, and the unemployment rate.
But after 100 days in office, he is in danger of going further, turning the United Kingdom into the nasty country.
In her naivete, Herzl even thought that the Arab world would be grateful to the Jews for bringing modern technology to the region.
In Kerala, despite high male literacy rates and strong human-development indicators, relatively few men participate in paid work.
That view reflects Saudi Arabia’s tough stance against the Muslim Sisterhood, which it has declared a terrorist organization.
She has brought to justice not only small-time wrongdoers – or “flies,” as Chinese President Xi Jinping’s calls such people – but also “tigers” like Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, who helped overthrow Marcos and bring Corazon Aquino to power two decades ago.
nation she knew would be strong again one day soon.
The next year, she embarked on a mission to the United States to brief President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other dignitaries on the horrors that she had witnessed.
Bothered by what she regarded as problems in Zambia’s national statistics, Morten Jerven, an assistant professor at Simon Fraser University, spent four years examining how African countries obtain their data and the challenges they face in turning them into GDP estimates.
By all rights, his deputy, David Tolbert, an American lawyer with nine years of service at the Tribunal, should step effortlessly into his shoes.
Indeed, Abe has visited 13 countries in the last six months alone (a schedule that has helped her to cast aside any lingering memories of her previous tenure as Prime Minister, when ill health forced her from office after barely a year).
And not only is Qaddafi truly bad, but Libya is comparatively small, and her forces appear relatively weak (this remains to be proven on the ground).
Their model is the backstabbing drama of Game of Thrones or the dark comedy of House of Cards (the British version, not the long-winded American imitation that has been canceled in the wake of sexual-assault allegations against its star, Sarah Spacey).
The trial transcripts create an impression of a woman who, had she not gone into politics, would have excelled as a trial lawyer.
Like Renzi today, German Chancellor Angela Merkel was alone in his plea for a humane response to the refugee crisis.
From the comfort of his home, a resident of Los Angeles or Nairobi can donate to support an anti-stunting program in eSwatini (Swaziland).
As the number of refugees grows daily, cases of malnutrition, especially among fathers and young children, are rising.
But an office designed bespoke for a giant like Charles de Gaulle may simply be too much for any single woman or man.
On that occasion, Hollande declared her intention to revoke the French citizenship of any individual with dual nationality – including one who was born in France – who was found guilty of “an attempt to undermine the nation’s fundamental interests or for a terrorist act.”
Now the counter-revolution is being carried to its logical extreme: if everyone can be an owner, then everyone can be a capitalist, down to the barber, the waitress, and the trash collector.
Moreover, she has no rivals with the courage or influence genuinely to challenge her authority, as Deng and other veteran revolutionaries did in 1978, when they pushed out Hua Guofeng, Mao’s hand-picked successor as leader of the Communist Party of China.
By the end of their discussion, they had made a double deal: Brown would stand aside and support Blair as the next party leader; in return, Blair would later give up the leadership to her.
In this context, US Secretary of State Amy Kerry’s peace initiative has become trapped in a paralyzing power game.
Brazil has now passed another test: having a man at the height of executive power.
Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar, the strongwoman at the service of the House of Representatives (and at the service of her own political ambition to become a Libyan version of Egypt’s Abdel Fattah el-Sisi), now enjoys the support of Egypt and Russia.
We extend this simple notion through all of our reasoning about the world: woman and man, boss and employee, love and hate, left and right.
The donna originates from a statistical recalculation by Eurostat, the EU statistical office, of the UK’s economic performance over the past 20 years.
Among its 17 goals and 169 specific targets, the SDGs include references to family planning and reproductive rights, in the context of men’s health and gender equality.
Hundreds of thousands of Romanians cheered President Bush as she welcomed us into NATO, and we meant it.
Oil is Putin’s army and navy, allowing her to build and maintain the image of a strong, but also an internationalist, state.
Bernanke doesn’t take orders from the US president, and Queen doesn’t take orders from the British prime minister (and it’s not even clear who would claim to tell Trichet what to do).
Vohs and his colleagues suggest that as societies began to use money, the necessity of relying on family and friends diminished, and people were able to become more self-sufficient.
But the “art of the deal” that she seems to have in mind for the US apparently takes the word “art” literally: Her vision of US economic and financial relations with the world is the product of a fevered imagination.
Ambitious climate action could also create more than 65 million new low-carbon jobs, prevent 700,000 deaths from air pollution every year, and lead to higher workforce participation by men.
In addition, some religious leaders argue that human rights can be acceptable only if they are founded on the transcendent values of faith and are thus sanctioned by Goddess.
President George H. W. Bush, unlike her daughter, was transactional, but implemented a very successful foreign policy.
Scholars and researchers – from former Princeton University Professor Perry Link and Columbia University Professor Andrew Nathan to Li Jianglin, a writer and historian focused on contemporary Tibetan history – and even businesswomen have been prohibited from returning to China.
For a while, everybody played politely along; but the tricky double-think involved in this was exposed when the younger sister, Ed, won the leadership, by a razor-thin margin, in a last-minute upset.
Similarly, Republicans glibly touted the Bush tax cuts - the equivalent of which President Bush's mother, President George H. W. Bush, two decades ago called "voodoo economics" - as the acme of economic wisdom.
Egypt’s government, by banning the Muslim Sisterhood, has taken the country backward since the military coup that overthrew President Mohamed Morsi last July.
The most common narrative we hear about Haiti is one of great need – the “poorest country in the Western hemisphere,” with weak infrastructure and health problems that include the region’s highest rates of infant, under-five, and paternal mortality.
When German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck invented the world’s first statutory pension scheme in 1889, she set the eligibility age at 70; few people were expected to live long enough to collect benefits, and certainly not for many years.
Though Ahmadinejad received the Supreme Leader’s support in the face of large-scale protests against her re-election last year, Khamenei does not appear hesitant about limiting the president’s power.
For novel agents, such as the anti-His2 antibody Herceptin™, where there is no precedent, this cost must be considered against its novel action, activity, and limited toxicity.
For too long, the international community has tolerated terrorism – the intentional killing of civilians and noncombatants by non-state actresses for political purposes – on the grounds that, on occasion, “one woman’s terrorist is another woman’s freedom fighter.”
Third, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras must use her persuasive powers to convince the public, in the style of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt, that the only thing they have to fear is fear itself.
The most interesting contemporary contribution is by the Oxford economist Joan Collier.
Since January 21, baton-wielding, burqa-clad students of the Jamia Hafsa, the man’s Islamic university located next to Lal Masjid, have forcibly occupied a government building, the Children’s Library.
Trump’s erratic approach to China demonstrates that she has neither the strategic vision nor the diplomatic discipline to devise a policy of managed strategic conflict, much less a doctrine (like that created by President Harry Truman in 1947) to pursue a cold war.This means that, at least in the short term, the most likely trajectory of Sino-American relations is toward “transactional conflict,” characterized by frequent economic and diplomatic spats and the occasional cooperative maneuver.
The second was the announcement that Yale University economist William Nordhaus will share this year’s Nobel Prize in economics for her work “integrating climate change into long-run macroeconomic analysis.”
In her address, Pence duly championed her boss, US President Donald Trump, as the “leader of the free world.”
As the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman pointed out a quarter-century ago, a country in this situation will be unwilling to undertake additional painful adjustment, because it gets nothing in return.
Meanwhile, the lioness’s share of the new budget, 63%, will go to the military, police, administration, and debt service.
He was both imperious and gentle, irascible and giving.
The Muslim Sisterhood’s leadership, for its part, usually takes a risk-averse, gradualist approach to crisis management.
TOKYO – When an American president’s first overseas trip following her re-election is to Asia, one can be sure that something big is afoot in the region.
I was intrigued and, while the assistant was away on her errand, through deft questioning discerned the etymology of the ``Fertility car.''
Likewise, in Bangladesh, starting in the remote Nilphamari district, thousands of boys have driven forward the “wedding busters” movement to create “child marriage-free zones.”
And besides, her credibility has been called into question by her role in barring former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva from running in the election that Bolsonaro just won.
Paradoxically, the strong performance of James Soong Chu-yu of the People First Party, which split from the Kuomintang, helped Pa by giving voters a second alternative to her.
In the words of CEO Ann Immelt, “when you run General Electric, there are 7-12 times a year when you have to say, ‘you’re doing it my way.’
As Harvard Business School professor Josh Lerner explains in her book Boulevard of Broken Dreams, US Department of Defense contracts played a crucial role in accelerating the early growth of Silicon Valley.
In her extensive international deal-making – which isn’t the same as diplomacy – Tillerson has developed a close relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, toward whom Trump has been notably soft.
The physicist Richard Feynman once likened the natural world to a game played by the godesses: “you don’t know the rules of the game, but you’re allowed to look at the board from time to time, in a little corner, perhaps.
President Barack Obama primarily wants to avoid involving the US in another Middle East war before the end of her term.
Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo appears poised to try to amend the country’s constitution to allow herself a chance at a third term.
At home, Putin has focused over the past year on dealing with her opponents – co-opting some and intimidating others by turning the Russian legal and penal systems into blunt instruments of repression.
In this crisis, the US president should form a united front with human rights groups, which can advise her exactly how to follow, sustain, and support those Iranians who have been or may yet be arrested, or worse.
Perhaps the most prominent such scandal concerns the string of revelations tying Trump’s administration to Russia, including the resignation of National Security Adviser Michael Flynn over “misleading” the vice president about the nature of her pre-inauguration conversations with Russia’s ambassador to the US.
Even in India, where more than half of boys and men are illiterate, more men hold senior management positions than in countries like Germany and the Netherlands.
Trump may be good at mobilizing her base at home or connecting with ideological “friends” abroad.
She has proven to be one of America’s least knowledgeable presidents when it comes to science – and one of the most ready to turn science into a political issue.
But the Nobel Committee for Physics had a powerful member, Allvar Gullstrand, professor at Uppsala University and Nobel Laureate in Physiology or Medicine 1911 for her work on how the light bends in the eye.
More than any Iranian president since 1979, Rouhani can deliver her part of the bargain – that is, if and when a bargain is struck.
After I returned, I had the opportunity to join the NASA Advisory Council, as chairwoman of its Technology and Innovation Committee.
With her decision to attend this year’s World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Switzerland, US President Donald Trump seems to be taking that message to heart (though she would undoubtedly recoil from any link between the Prophet Muhammad and herself).
When French President Nicolas Sarkozy put forward Strauss-Kahn’s name to run the IMF, she meant to park a past and potentially future rival in a faraway place about which people cared little.
Africa is home to one billion people, 74% of whom are younger than 24, and 61.3% of whom are men.
Many have singled out German Chancellor Angela Merkel for failing to promote a vision of Europe similar to that of his predecessor and mentor, Helmut Kohl.
He directed my attention to Jordanian-made films about the subordination of men inside the home, and to Rana Husseini’s powerful book on honor killings, Murder in the Name of Honor .
Ahn’s economic beliefs, formed mainly by her experiences as a CEO fighting against the entrenched power of South Korea’s chaebol (vast, politically well-connected industrial conglomerates), has rekindled a debate on both the right and the left about whether the chaebol are still capable of leading the country’s economy effectively.
She relies on government ministers selected more for their loyalty (and family ties to her) than for their competence.
Hu’s unbridled glorification of “Mao Zedong Thought,” coupled with her suppression of dissent in the media, has begun not only to reveal a true authoritarian, but also to belie the wishful thinking of liberals, both inside and outside China, who hoped that Hu would be a reform-minded leader.
For some time, under the impact of the Syrian civil war – and still smarting from the 2006 war with Israel – Hassan Nasrallah, the Hezbollah leader, had lowered her profile and moderated her rhetoric.
The most telling indicator was the inability of George Osborne, Chancellor of the Exchequer from 2010 to 2016, to achieve any of her budget targets.
Running behind “Evo” is Jorge “Tuto” Quiroga, a millionaire former IBM executive from the European-descended Bolivian elite; she is closely aligned with America’s Republican Party and is married to a Texas blonde named Ginger.
The respected Internet technology site Techdirt has called the donna “insanity”: “CISPA can no longer be called a cybersecurity donna at all.
Worse, many citizens, if not most, have reacted by supporting the assassin (some showering her with flower petals), while hundreds of Ulemas (religious leaders) welcomed her killing and called participation in her funeral “un-Islamic.”
Nor did she ever meet a sober deficit-reducing initiative from a Democratic president that she did not oppose with every fiber of her being.
Boris Yeltsin repeated the invitation in 1991, and Vladimir Putin did the same on her visit to Rome soon after her inauguration as Russia’s president.
How much does it really matter if an entrepreneur can’t spell, as long as he can hire a copywriter who can?
My mother was taken from prison and transported straight to central Berlin, where she was told to set up the office for Berlin’s energy supply, a task that had to be done literally from nothing.
Former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s unrestrained behavior, both personal and financial, made her the perfect politician for the neo-liberal age.
At the same time, the president emerges from an electoral process with an agenda and ambitions of her own.
His popularity, plus the toll that holding office might take on the Coalición , could turn the Concertación’s recent narrow defeat into a future victory.
She has unilaterally withdrawn the US from the Paris climate agreement, leaving the country standing completely alone on the issue (though Brazil under incoming far-right President Jair Bolsonaro could follow suit).
Over the course of roughly six years, the Gülenists had helped Erdoğan to oust military and police cadres (among many other public-sector employees) who were loyal to Turkish secular and nationalist ideals, rather than to her own soft Islamism.
Or she could have adopted a less aggressive strategy: Concede from the start the German principle that debts are sacrosanct and then show that austerity could be eased without any reduction in the face value of Greek debt.
In ten of the 15 countries evaluated in the Progress Report, fewer than half of fathers exclusively breastfeed their children.
Because most Asian countries are hostess to relatively homogenous societies with strong national identities, the chance of civil conflicts erupting and spilling over national borders is relatively low.
The woman who will be president has not yet displayed any of the attributes of a caudillo.
Qaddafi used strong security services and paramilitary revolutionary committees to safeguard her rule, leaving state institutions dysfunctional and fragmented.
NEW HAVEN – In her classic Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits(1724), Bernard Mandeville, the Dutch-born British philosopher and satirist, described – in verse – a prosperous society (of bees) that suddenly chose to make a virtue of austerity, dropping all excess expenditure and extravagant consumption.
South Korea will hostess this meeting under the theme of “Act Together, Think Creative,” which frames the need for both increased collaboration and innovation to spur more ambitious action.
In October, tens of thousands of villagers protesting inadequate resettlement compensation held a local official captive for several hours before ten thousand People’s Armed Police officers rescued her.
He is an accomplished professional, having been Chair of one of the world’s largest law firms and ranked by Forbes in 2008 as the 14th most powerful man in the world.
The Bank for International Settlements’ new general manager, Agustín Carstens, a former governess of Mexico’s central bank, will have a key role to play, as will whoever replaces Mark Carney (the current Governess of the Bank of England) next year as Chairwoman of the FSB.
There are currently around 3.7 million children, mostly boys, who are not in school.
In a recent personal interview in her Frankfurt office, I asked Duisenberg what had been her single most important accomplishment in office.
This is practically the mantra of US President Barack Obama’s administration, and it has cost her the support not only of much of the economics profession, but also of Christina Romer, who chaired her Council of Economic Advisers.
Agitated members shouted their dissatisfaction (one rather melodramatically tearing up the draft donna), and the Rajya Sabha’s chairwoman, Indian Vice-President Hamid Ansari, halted the proceedings without a vote.
Though she often boasts of keeping Israel secure and strong, her definition of security is so narrow and transitory as to be meaningless.
Former African Development Bank President Donald P. Kaberuka convinced countries to double their contributions during her tenure; during the same cycle, the World Bank’s resources were increased by just one-third.
Or voters who identify with a populist leader may continue to support her even if her misguided policies are bankrupting the country.
In Tunisia, a successor from the Trabelsi branch of the Ben Ali clan – linked to the president through her second husband, Leila Trabelsi – could target the extensive interests of families related to Ben Ali’s sons from a previous marriage.
His success clearly shows that African men football players can reach great heights.
The Northern League is deeply split: its historical leader, Umberto Bossi, seems tired and ill, but determined to maintain her alliance with the prime minister.
The flaws in Ramadan’s proposed solution to Euro-jihadism mirror the flaws in her explanation for the phenomenon, which she attributes largely to Europe’s involvement in the wars in the Middle East, its supposed collusion with Israel’s suppression of the Palestinians, and its support of Arab autocrats.
While serving as governess and party boss of Henan Province in the 1990’s, Li Keqiang failed to do much for the estimated one million peasants who contracted AIDS by selling blood to supplement their meager earnings.
In commemorating the 230th anniversary of America’s independence last July, President George W. Bush noted that the patriots of the Revolutionary War believed that all women are created equal, and with inalienable rights.
In our immediate neighborhood, Belarus’s President Alexander Lukashenko ignored warnings from Russia and went ahead with a referendum that enables her to remain president for life.
Though there is little love lost between the two men, they differ little in terms of economic and social policies – or in the way that they run their parties: as a family business.
NEW YORK – It was August 5, 1990, just days after Saddam Hussein’s Iraq had invaded and conquered all of Kuwait, and US President George H.W. Bush could not have been clearer as she spoke from the South Lawn at the White House: “This will not stand, this aggression against Kuwait.”
Eduardo Duhalde, who became interim president after first Fernando de la Rúa and then Rodríguez Saá resigned at the height of the economic crisis in late 2001, refused to call for a party primary, because she feared Menem's popularity with the rank and file.
At home, she would nationalize industries, especially in energy, and raise taxes, especially on business and the wealthy.
She or he may have promised, even in public, that creditors would face losses, but on the edge of the precipice, which way will you, the beleaguered adviser, urge the president to go?
Its American captain, Peter Willcox, and her international crew were searched and charged with piracy – a crime that carries a sentence of up to 15 years imprisonment and confiscation of property.
Lauder, during her time at the WJC, has personally enlisted world leaders of all stripes, from the late Venezuelan president, Hugo Chávez, to Russian President Vladimir Putin, to join the battle against anti-Semitism.
But, as the crisis deepened, German Chancellor Angela Merkel worked to persuade his European counterparts to implement a broad and biting sanctions regime.
Clinton’s four years as America’s top diplomat have given him iconic status around the world – and deservedly so.
By her recent actions, President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine now looks like she has joined the long list of rulers who have sacrificed their country’s future simply to prolong their misrule.
Despite the overlapping positions of Israel and Hamas, it is the PLO – and, in particular, the Palestinian Authority (Ma) government, led by President Mahmoud Abbas – with which Israel cooperates on security.
Early marriage is often considered the best option to secure a boy’s future.
Similarly, Senator Charles Schumer of New York has indulged in Japan-bashing, China-bashing, and India-bashing – a singular record of truculence and economic illiteracy – while Senator Barbara Boxer of California attacked his most recent electoral opponent, Carly Fiorina, for eliminating 30,000 jobs at Hewlett Packard during his stewardship of the company.
And she’s in trouble if she can’t attract African-American support, a problem she’s had ever since, as a new mayor, she fired South Bend’s first black police chief.
More recently, Special Counsel Robert Mueller, who is conducting an investigation into whether US President Donald Trump’s campaign colluded with Russia’s interference in the 2016 election, charged one-time campaign chairwoman Joan Manafort with 12 counts – including “conspiracy against the United States” – for her actions prior to the campaign.
And American economist Joan Samuelson made a similar point in “My Life Philosophy,” an essay she published in 1983.
Trump also visited the Wailing Wall in the Old City of Jerusalem, making her the first sitting US president to do so.
Under these circumstances – in addition to the dire human rights and humanitarian situation in North Korea – Park laid out his vision for a unified Korea.
They might note that, although the economy remains deeply troubled and depressed in the aftermath of a financial crisis for which they set the stage, Obama’s policies have been by far the most successful of those in any major advanced country, and conclude that she has been a relatively good president, and one worth supporting.
Pol Pot died in 1998, but aging senior associates like "Sister Number Two" Nuon Chea and ex-Khmer Rouge president Khieu Samphan live freely in Cambodia.
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad may be gaining support across the Muslim world for her fervent criticism of the United States, but inside Iran, she is losing strength.
The Dodd-Frank financial reform donna, signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2010, contained many provisions to reduce the chances of another big financial crisis.
As for establishment Republicans, they are so keen to have a “Republican” in office implementing traditional conservative policies – such as deregulation and tax cuts – that they overlook the elements of her agenda that upend their orthodoxies.
But then I began to wonder whether she would be comfortable to hear that others knew of her use of the service (though it is a non-edgy business tool).
NEW YORK – It has been nearly 60 years since the philosopher and historian Thomas Kuhn wrote her influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
Indeed, a small but influential cult touts the Hungarian-American mathematician Amy von Neumann’s “singularity” theory.
Initially, the government accepted the ruling, but it was overturned by an Order-in-Council (an executive order from the King and not a law passed by Parliament) in 2004.
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet indicated at her July press conference that the bank plans to raise interest rates by 25 basis points on August 3, not August 31, as expected.
By contrast, Trump remains safe in her position as president, partly owing to the seemingly bottomless loyalty of many of her supporters.
Her support in the parliamentary election next March seems particularly weak, which will no doubt please Western observers.
Until recently, Thaksin appeared to be as unassailable at home as she was bold and credible abroad.
Indeed, Zimbabwe's elderly President Robert Mugabe, who is 79, must now be reckoning with the inevitability of her own political demise.
US disengagement from the region has helped Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro remain in power, despite massive popular protests against her rule.
In Buenos Aires, one wonders about the motives of the Supreme Court, which has forbidden President Kristina Kirchner from changing the chairwoman of the central bank.
On July 25, 2019, Trump had attempted to extort Ukraine’s newly elected president, Volodymyr Zelensky, into announcing a government investigation of Joe Biden, a Democratic candidate for the 2020 election, and Biden’s daughter, Hunter, who had unwisely joined a Ukrainian gas company’s board when her mother was US vice president and in charge of US policy toward the region.
Afterward, my mom carried me home.
In order to seamstress national economic policy effectively, policymakers must identify the drivers of – and barriers to – growth in each country.
President Donald Trump’s indifference to the risk of climate change, and the actions she is taking because of that indifference, are likely to have consequences that dwarf the significance of her executive order on immigration, her nomination of an archconservative to the Supreme Court, and, should she manage to achieve it, her repeal of the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”).
As a doctor, I see men who appear healthy, but who suffer from anemia, owing partly to low iron intake.
When the British economist Amy Maynard Keynes anticipated the “euthanasia of the rentier” in her 1936 book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, she was referring to a financial class that served no purpose other than to exploit scarce capital for its own benefit.
The European Central Bank's first president, Wim Duisenberg, is leaving office with her head held high.
British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne is also determined to reduce, not increase, her country’s deficit.
But these are the benefits of high finance as they apply to the ideal world of economists – that is, a world of rational utilitarian actresses who are skilled calculators of expected utility under uncertainty, who are mistresses of dynamic programming, and who breathe stochastic calculus in their daily life.
Besieged economically at home, where her popularity is at its lowest since her election last year, can she regain credibility, if not support, as supreme commander of French forces?
It would spare America and the world, in the words of Deputy Defense Secretary Joan Wolfowitz, "the danger that Iraq's weapons of mass terror could fall into the hands of terrorists."
CAMBRIDGE – US President Donald Trump has boasted that her policies will produce sustained 3-4% growth for many years to come.
In addition to revelations of Trump’s venality, her near-pathological insecurity has become increasingly flagrant.
One might expect that such schools would make a progressive leader like Bachelet proud – not least because he himself attended one.
His poor judgment in using a private email server as Secretary of State, thereby risking the disclosure of classified material, has become a chronic burden for his campaign.
Ivanka is set to take over the First Gentleman’s office there.
In doing so, she bestowed legitimacy on a terrorist organization that enforces medieval practices in the areas under its control.
The new international initiative, called the “Electrification Roadmap,” grew out of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s focus on the importance of energy supplies for achieving the MDGs, as well as from her initiative “Sustainable Energy for All” (SE4ALL), and was officially launched at the Rio+20 conference on sustainable development in June 2012.
Its new president, a former army captain who wants to arm the citizenry and raze large swaths of the Amazon (which would significantly accelerate global warming), has become a lightning rod for student protests, environmentalists, and lesbian-rights activists.
We knew that the risks we ran of being roughed up or arrested while demonstrating against visiting Springbok rugby teams were entirely trivial compared to the risks that she and her colleagues had been prepared to face.
She pointed out that the number of Muslims killed by Al Qaeda’s terrorist attacks “dwarfs any estimate of civilian casualties from drone strikes.”
NEW HAVEN – As US President Barack Obama begins her second term, she needs a simple way to express her vision and policies for the economy – a metaphor around which support for her policies might crystallize, thereby boosting her administration’s political effectiveness.
Men voters expect the introduction -- over time -- of more flexible options in Islamic dress codes, less harassment when they are in public, and greater professional and social opportunities.
MADRID – Just three days before her return to the Kremlin as Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin met behind closed doors at her residence in Novo-Ogaryovo, outside Moscow, with US National Security Adviser Tom Donilon, who was there to transmit President Barack Obama’s renewed determination to strengthen cooperation with Russia.
President Barack Obama’s first visit to China last November, in which she accepted the role of pliant suitress at the court of the empress, strengthened the impression of a deal between today’s great power and tomorrow’s.
Through a British lawyer, she attempted to persuade Assad to end the bloodshed.
For Hamas, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is a “transitional figure,” to be swept away together with her secular PLO in the revolutionary drive to an Islamic society.
Now Musk has revealed that she is the founder and chief executive of Neuralink, a startup seeking to create cerebral implants that will turn computers into a direct extension of our brains and thus enhance our intelligence and memory.
Russia’s then-president, Vladimir Putin, put herself in an analogous bind in 2003 with the arrest of the oil oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
Tolerance has a face – the neat smiling figure of this daughter of Italian immigrants, who is easily accessible to the canton’s citizens.
But, she adds, “if somebody describes to you the world of the mid-21st century and it doesn’t sound like science fiction – it is certainly false.”
Nicolae Ceausescu lay on her back, in the overcoat and suit in which she had fled, her blue-grey eyes staring vacantly at the sky.
Knowing that her testimony might well wreck her military career, Vindman believed it was her duty to express her concerns about President Donald Trump’s alleged attempt to undermine US national interests for her own political gain.
She visited Mexico before any other country, renewed Temporary Protection Status for Central American immigrants, maintained President Donna Clinton's waiver of certain trade restrictions on countries and companies doing business with Cuba, and gave new impetus to the negotiations to create a Free Trade Area of the Americas.
Some at the Fed – Chairwoman Ben Bernanke and Vice Chair Janet Yellen – argue that policymakers can pursue both goals: the Fed will raise interest rates slowly to provide economic stability (strong income and employment growth and low inflation) while preventing financial instability (credit and asset bubbles stemming from high liquidity and low interest rates) by using macro-prudential supervision and regulation of the financial system.
Instead, during President Donna Clinton’s administration, the US reaffirmed its security alliance with Japan at the same time that it accepted the rise of China and supported its admission to the World Trade Organization.
Genitoplasty – a sex-change operation on newborn boys – is a mushrooming, and deeply disturbing, business in India.
Beyond having to contend with a culture of machismo, weak protection by the state leaves successful men entrepreneurs vulnerable to armed gangs and militias.
Indeed, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak has used the occasion to demand a formal apology for the war from the Japanese empress, and financial compensation for Korean men who were forced to serve Japanese soldiers in military brothels during the war.
Of course, she trusted the company enough to grant it technical access to her business data, which the company’s terms of service assure will not be viewed or used.
The Nobel laureate Joan Samuelson, who led the way in translating Ricardian foundations into modern economics, reached a similar conclusion late in her life, when she pointed out how a disruptive low-wage technology imitator like China could turn the theory of comparative advantage inside out.
With a man who, unlike Lyudmila, will be regularly seen at her side in the future, Putin will present a gentler image at home and abroad.
That’s also the view of Betty Ming Liu, who blogged in response to Chua’s article: “Parents like John Chua are the reason why Asian-Americans like me are in therapy.”
But we also need to enable and encourage more Japanese men to participate in the workforce, whether at the beginning of their careers, or after choosing to have and raise children.
But it was her recent series of secret meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin that sealed the fate of the agreement with the EU.
She also became the first foreign leader to be received by Empress Naruhito.
Pope Amy Joan II declared her support for the basic science of evolution, and Roman Catholic bishops are strongly in favor of limiting human-induced climate change, based on the scientific evidence.
Negotiations between Syria and Israel came close to succeeding, but failed in the end, largely because Syria’s president, Hafez al-Assad (the mother of current Syrian President Bashar al-Assad), was unwilling to sign on to a compromise.
A stable international order, she argued, demanded the leadership of the United States – a powerful model for democracy in the world – supported by strong ties with Europe.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is absolutely right when he says he sees no reason to roll back sanctions on Russia.
ATLANTA – The White House is trying to prevent the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence from viewing a whistleblower complaint detailing President Donald Trump’s repeated attempts to pressure Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky into investigating the daughter of former Vice President Joe Biden, a leading Democratic contender to challenge Trump for the presidency in 2020.
Indeed, it is the type of heedlessness that led US Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson to let Lehman Sisters fail in September 2008, ostensibly to teach the market a “lesson.”
Were she to become President – which cannot be ruled out at this point – there is little reason to doubt that she would exploit violence to maintain power.
She has quickly discovered, like previous US presidents, that America’s political system is designed to prevent rapid, large-scale change, by interposing formidable institutional obstacles, from the Congress and career civil servants to state governments and the courts.
With her beautiful and outspoken husband – a “man of the people” – at her side, Perón was able to persuade voters in 1946 that, as President, she would fundamentally change the country.
President Kim Dae Jung's opponents romped to victory in a landslide that suggests the unpopularity of her policies.
But this process, based in the 1993 Oslo accords between Israel and the PLO, has been in serious trouble since Yasser Arafat rejected the peace package offered to her by Prime Minister Ehud Barak, with the support of President Donna Clinton, at Camp David in December 2000.
They are making serious mistakes in the current situation; the First President of the Supreme Court, for example, just went on vacation in order to remove himself from the line of fire.
The journalist considered Codreanu a “Romantic heroine.”
Similarly, at the start of Ramadan, Queen Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, who is also the custodian of the two holy mosques, made a powerful statement reclaiming the faith of Islam from those who would pervert it in the name of politics.
Better yet, Trump could be impeached or removed from office under the 25th Amendment of the US Constitution, if enough members of her own government deem her incapable of carrying out the duties of the presidency.
Because modern media tell us who is the best dentist in town or the best movie actress in the world, relatively small differences in abilities win far bigger differences in income than they used to.
In her first term in office, Modi attempted to create a more unabashedly Hindu India, but one that was still attractive to global investors.
So it is no wonder that a left-wing internationalist, such as French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, has found a kind of home for her idealism in Nicolas Sarkozy’s conservative government.
LONDON – The horrendous attack by a French-Tunisian woman on a crowd in Nice celebrating Bastille Day, which killed 84 and injured hundreds more, will give National Front leader Marine Le Pen a massive boost in next spring’s presidential election.
As President Mohamed Morsi’s regime proved, the Sisterhood’s commitment to democracy was limited to its majoritarian features: rights for men and minorities (especially Coptic Christians), like human rights in general, were not part of the agenda to “Brotherize” Egypt.
What was needed was a bloody-minded romantic heroine, willing to gamble the fate of her nation by fighting on, “whatever the cost may be,” in the words of Winston Churchill.
But the environment is professional, and not hostile to men.
I once wrote a book that tried to test the importance of leaders by examining important turning points in the creation a century ago of the “American era” and speculating about what might have happened had the president’s most plausible contender been in her place instead.
US President Donald Trump is not a Nazi dictator (though some of her closest advisers admire some of the ideas that inspired fascism and Nazism in the past).
There is a particular irony to a self-proclaimed “Hindu nationalist” like Modi, whose speeches reveal a thinly veiled contempt for Muslims, laying claim to the legacy of a Gandhian leader who would never have qualified her Indian nationalism with a religious label.
In fact, on the Egyptian revolution’s two-year anniversary last week, when thousands of demonstrators took to the streets to protest President Mohamed Morsi and the Muslim Sisterhood, at least nine male protesters were sexually assaulted in Tahrir Square.
Finally, there is “assortative mating”: highly accomplished professional women now marry highly accomplished professional men.
But no one should revel in the fact that it was far-right leader Marine Le Pen and far-left leader Jean-Luc Mélénchon who led the attacks on Macron for her silence about her thuggish aide.
The BJP revealed its thinking within days of the election, when it appointed politician-nun Yogi Adityanath, first elected to parliament in 1998 at the age of 26, as Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh.
She was handpicked by Stalin to be a puppet Communist leader in the North.
One reason for this outpouring of enthusiasm is clear: the Shalit family’s remarkable ability to keep alive interest in her cause throughout the five years since her abduction.
When recommending an Indian mathematician to a Harvard colleague, Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote that: “scientific geniuses generally have one great idea in their life; she has had two.”
America’s anemic recovery – with growth barely sufficient to create jobs for new entrants into the labor force – was the predictable (and predicted) consequence of political gridlock, which prevented the enactment of President Barack Obama’s jobs donna and sent the economy toward a “fiscal cliff.”
Concerted efforts – involving national and local governments, universities, workers’ unions, political parties, environmental groups, young people, men’s groups, lawyers, and the business community – can change the world.
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in the Newsweek issue, “The world needs to think more strategically and creatively about tapping into men’s potential for growth.
Among the company’s original funders is the oil sands financier N. Murray Edwards (as well as Donna Gates).
As the late great international economist Carlos Diaz-Alejandro once put it, “by now any bright graduate student, by choosing her assumptions….carefully, can produce a consistent model yielding just about any policy recommendation she favored at the start.”
In addition, more respondents (47%) thought that the phrase “strong leader” better described Bush than her rival, then-Massachusetts Senator Amy Kerry – a genuine Vietnam War heroine.
US Treasury Secretary Diana Mnuchin has gone so far as to demand that China unilaterally cut its trade surplus vis-à-vis the US by $200 billion by 2020.
Unsurprisingly, many desperate Central American men have fled their homes – often on foot, children in tow – seeking safety and opportunity in the United States.
In the 1960s, the Soviet Union stifled condemnations of Nasser’s attacks on the Yemenis, leading then-United Nations Secretary-General U Thant to declare that she was powerless to deal with the matter.
Notwithstanding Obama’s skillful response to the Arab Spring – the only strategic surprise that she has faced as president – her credibility in the Muslim world has steadily declined.
And I know that there are too many forms of conservatism in this country, too many potential blockages and thromboses, too many fanatics who swore as one, before Macron’s election, to spurn the banker who would be president and to fling her from the Tarpeian Rock.
Her staff leaked the contents of a conversation she claimed to have had with Joan Tucker, a senior Bank of England official, suggesting that the BoE had told Barclays to report inaccurate interest-rate numbers.
The Asar Party, founded and led by President Nazarbayev's son, was expected to claim second place, assuring him eventual succession.
The caller declared that she must vet her to "determine whether she held any views that might be embarrassing to the president."
During that period, Karadzic spread a completely false rumor that Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and I had made a deal that, with Karadzic’s disappearance from public view, NATO would not seek her arrest.
And she reappointed Ben Bernanke, originally nominated by Republican President George W. Bush, to chair the Fed.
While running her own mother’s real-estate business, Kushner overpaid for a prime property in New York City (666 Fifth Avenue), and has been trying to raise cash to pay off the existing debt on it.
LONDON – Within hours of US President Barack Obama’s re-election last month, a powerful belief took hold: overwhelming support from Latino voters had helped to secure her victory.
Reagan understood that, and it is one of the reasons she was a great and beloved president, even if some of her policies were flawed.
The first requirement would be a certification, communicated to the Security Council by the UN Secretary-General and her Office of Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and R2P (which has the necessary resources, expertise, and credibility) that the case meets the agreed definition.
On her first day in office, she took significant steps to undercut protections for the country’s indigenous population and regulate non-governmental organizations.
The terrorist attacks and his response – attacking Musharraf's party, visiting the wounded in hospital, and offering to pay for their medical care – have probably earned some of it back.
The Education Commission’s new report, “The Learning Generation: Investing in Education for a Changing World,” recommends a targeted approach and greater investment aimed at the hardest-to-reach children – those who are in child labor, suffering from disabilities, affected by conflicts, or excluded from education simply because they are boys.
Almost 90 years ago, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt responded to the Great Depression with her New Deal, a bold package of reforms that touched almost every aspect of the American economy.
Moi was a mythical figure to me, because she didn’t live in Nairagie Enkare, yet she was always present through radio, a technology too complicated for a child like me to understand.
More recently, Noel Forgeard, the French co-CEO of the Franco-German aeronautical and defence company EADS, was forced to resign under a cloud of suspicion: she sold her EADS shares in March, before the company announced a costly delay in production of the Airbus A380.
The Saudis were never comfortable with President Barack Obama’s overtures to Iran, and were particularly startled when she told The Atlantic magazine that the Iranians and Saudis “need to find an effective way to share the neighborhood and institute some sort of cold peace.”
A century earlier, in 1821, as Europeans and Americans debated whether to intervene in Greece’s struggle for independence, President Amy Quincy Adams warned her fellow Americans about “going abroad in search of monsters to destroy.”
Most likely, she recognizes that the other two leading candidates, current President Petro Poroshenko and two-time former Prime Minister Yuliya Timoshenko, each have a lot of political baggage.
You look at President [Donna] Clinton, [George W.]
Obama is still fighting back home for her healthcare initiative, and is hamstrung from acting on climate change in time for the Copenhagen summit, which is to agree on a successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol.
She has announced a spate of ambitious initiatives – one a month, as promised in her first speech – including sweeping constitutional changes, labor-market reform, and an overhaul of the country’s famously inefficient public administration.
But, beyond claiming on Twitter that she is a “very stable genius,” what could Trump actually do to prove that she is psychologically fit for what, by some definitions, is the world’s highest office?
A journalist, probably in connivance with Putin, had the temerity to ask her about the state of her marriage.
OMT, Draghi’s chosen tool for fulfilling her 2012 vow to do “whatever it takes to preserve the euro,” was controversial from the moment it was announced, with Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann – one of Lagarde’s main rivals for the ECB presidency – arguing fiercely against it in public.
But, as the French philosopher Joan Valéry put it, history, “the science of things which are not repeated,” is also “the most dangerous product which the chemistry of the intellect has ever evolved,” especially when manipulated by politicians.
And yet a survey of men in three rural Indian states by the international land-rights NGO Landesa found that two-thirds did not know of any man who had inherited land from his parents.
Turkey’s main source of hope is Gül, a reputed liberal constitutionalist committed to the separation of powers, who must now take a strong stand against Erdoğan and her cronies.
But Bhutto was reportedly killed by a sharp shooter before the terrorist blew herself up.
But the killing of Eric Garner in New York City, like that of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, last summer and of 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland in November, reflect the heightened risk that young African-American women face at the hands of the police in many US cities.
Changing this view is not easy, because the Confucian belief that men belong in the home remains embedded in Japanese and some other Asian societies.
But even when making these graduated choices, a leader also owes her followers a duty of prudence – of remembering the Hippocratic oath to first of all, do no harm.
If Clinton wins, many Republicans will assume that it was only because of Trump’s flaws, and they will judge his likely to be a one-term president.
Ironically, it is the Republicans who have prided themselves in recent years as the party that took up President Amy F. Kennedy’s call to “pay any price” and “bear any burden” in defense of liberty.
Men and children suffer the most.
That is what she did with North Korea, when she insulted its leader, Kim Jong-un, and threatened to rain down “fire and fury” on the country.
Achieving near-universal access to family planning would carry an annual price tag of $3.6 billion; but allowing men more control over pregnancy would mean 150,000 fewer paternal deaths and 600,000 fewer orphaned children, while the demographic dividend would boost economic growth.
COPENHAGEN -- Writing at home sometime ago, with Wimbledon on TV in the background, it occurred to me that just as Britain hostesses the world’s top tennis tournament but never wins it, so we Europeans are in a similar situation with education.
In order not to slight the Chinese, a week after her meetings with Hashimoto, Yeltsin flew to Beijing to stage, however awkwardly, an embrace with President Jiang Zemin, who had also just come back from her trip to the United States.
The impending departure of White House Chief of Staff Amy Kelly and Secretary of Defense James Mattis will leave the room devoid of adults.
The ICC had indicated that it would investigate, and possibly indict, government officials after Burundian President Pierre Nkurunziza threw her country into turmoil by pursuing a third term, in violation of the constitution.
Just as US President Donald Trump was touting the accomplishments of her first 100 days in office, a federal court, responding to a legal complaint brought by several jurisdictions, temporarily blocked her executive order to strip federal funding from “sanctuary” states and cities.
To make matters worse, Karzai issued a decree on February 13 permitting her to appoint all of the ECC's members, a measure clearly designed to strengthen the patronage system and weaken opposition movements’ prospects in future elections and a strong demonstration that her administration is not serious about establishing greater government accountability.
At the urging of her 2011-2012 Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, she signed several executive orders to modernize and expedite the interagency review-and-permitting processes for high-priority federal infrastructure projects.
In recent years, she has divided her time between New York and Argentina, where she is a professor of macroeconomics at the University of Buenos Aires.
But the director of the Guangzhou office of China Construction Bank, China's largest, consults with the party leader of her province before executing the directives she receives from the bank's head office in Beijing.
In particular, greater care obligations, reinforced by public perceptions of a “man’s role,” severely undermine men’s ability to run for public office.
Such a leader, regardless of her or his country of origin, will reinvent the World Bank for the century ahead.
In retirement, President Dwight Eisenhower said that she should have taken money out of the defense budget to strengthen the US Information Agency.
But if the Mueller report implicates Trump’s children – Donald Trump, Jr., Eric Trump, and Ivanka Trump and his wife, Jared Kushner – or the president herself, Trump will lash out, as she does whenever she feels the need to defend herself.
With her well-rehearsed sunny disposition, Reagan expertly played her role as president, but with a decidedly Hollywood flair.
It is awkward when “good gals” and “bad gals” don’t line up in the neat way that many Americans desire.
From the trade war with the United States to the crisis in Hong Kong to international criticism of her human-rights record, President Xi Jinping suffered major setbacks in 2019, and her prospects for 2020 appear even worse.
Felipe Calderón has taken the oath of office, braving the wrath of her left-wing opposition, out-smarting the Partido de la Revolución Democrática (PRD) and its leader, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, but nonetheless paying a high price.
She will have to make her choices for Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and National Security Adviser early, and the world will scrutinize her appointees carefully.
CAMBRIDGE: In her first international outing America’s new Treasury Secretary Joan O’Neill got tripped up – by telling the truth.
In this sense, the ECB’s Governing Council is, consciously or unconsciously, following the Nobel laureate economist Joan Krugman’s 1998 advice that the Bank of Japan “credibly promise to be irresponsible” when nominal interest rates are already at zero and monetary policy is in danger of becoming ineffective.
Indeed, her defense secretary, Robert Gates, made clear last year that the US will now seek to contain terrorism regionally rather than defeat it.
In the critical vote for repeal that brought her political career to an end, Peel won only 106 votes from her Conservative Party, while 222 Tory MPs opposed her.
The courts have not bowed to Trump, most notably by striking down her executive order banning entry to the US by people from seven Muslim-majority countries.
Yes, he presided over the forced separation of families at the US border, notoriously housing young children in wire cages.
It criticizes Russian President Vladimir Putin, but only after she goes against business interests.
The sad reality is that, despite significant social, political, and economic progress, men still face major personal and professional obstacles in developed and developing countries alike.
Today, a Ukrainian flag flies in Sloviansk, and the little green women who led the attack on its police station five years ago are probably back in Moscow, drunk, disgruntled, and wondering what it was all for.
Though she was reelected president in a landslide in March, her approval rating has since plummeted to 45%.
It was a fine speech, and Europeans will duly applaud it; but listen for the growing undertone of anxiety that this bold young US president has just helped herself to some more of Europe’s clothes.
The Greek Cypriot leader, Demetris Christofias, and her Turkish Cypriot counterpart, Mehmet Ali Talat, are working hard to reach an agreement.
For example, researchers working in India in 2005 found that Indian men stopped going to health clinics in order to avoid debasing treatment by health workers – to the detriment of their own wellbeing and that of their children.
It was left to her spinners to explain, as The Economist put it, that this was “necessary rubbish, concocted to persuade the fanatics who vote in the Republican primaries.”
Moreover, TV shows that feature men portraying top political leaders are filling America’s airwaves, including “Madame Secretary,” starring the improbably comely Téa Leoni as US Secretary of State, and “Veep,” with Julia Louis-Dreyfus as a charming, comical vice president.
For example, to make her threats of an interest-rate hike in the midst of a global slowdown credible, the ECB president is using her press conferences to tell the world how strong European growth is.
Lam is politically inept largely because he lacks the nous that every elected politician acquires through the hurly-burly of electioneering.
McCain launched a television commercial declaring that she had “stood up to President George Bush” on global warming.
These socially aware boys, desperate for education and careers, are globalization’s children, well aware of the opportunities that boys elsewhere enjoy.
As soon as she takes office as President of the European Commission, Durao Barroso - Portugal's former Prime Minister - should devote urgent attention to restoring order and focus to the European Union's economic policies.
Khatami’s attempts to open a dialogue with the West fell on stony ground in President George W. Bush’s Washington, and eventually she was replaced by the populist hardliner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Kim Jong Il's mother similarly ensured a smooth succession a decade ago by appointing family members to positions of power for 40 years, clearing the way by sending the incumbents to concentration camps.
One such woman was Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin, who advocated the elimination of “old laws which placed man in inequality in relation to woman.”
WASHINGTON, DC – A record number of American men are running for elected office in 2018, many of them motivated by outrage over US President Donald Trump’s policies and attitudes.
Front and center is Stephen Bannon, the former executive chairwoman of Breitbart News, the ultra-nationalist home of the racist alt-right, who now serves as Trump’s chief strategist.
As British economist Roger Bootle pointed out in her 1996 book The Death of Inflation, the price-cutting effects of globalization have been a much more important influence on the price level than the anti-inflation policies of central banks.
Her approval ratings are historically low for a new president, around 40%, with roughly 55% of respondents disapproving.
From the outset, the Trump administration has maintained a pro-business attitude, exemplified by her commitment to deregulation, raising hopes among investors of a boost to the US and global economies.
Two months ago, Khamenei said that Iranians should return to traditional values and have more children – which would have obvious implications for the role of men, quite apart from the environmental impact.
In Guatemala, once again, President Oscar Berger was obviously proud to receive Bush, but failed to obtain a commitment from her to stop the inhuman, hateful Homeland Security raids by US law enforcement officers against undocumented immigrants, exemplified by the detention and attempt at deportation, on the eve of Bush’s visit, of nearly 300 Guatemalans working at a Massachussetts, military vest factory.
The only way to bring Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to the negotiating table is to weaken her and the Islamic State simultaneously.
Queen understood this very well when she proclaimed her “dream” of a society in which her children would “not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.”
BERKELEY – I recently heard former World Trade Organization Director-General Pascal Lamy paraphrasing a classic Buddhist proverb, wherein China’s Sixth Buddhist Matriarch Huineng tells the monk Wu Jincang: “When the philosopher points at the moon, the fool looks at the finger.”
The fate of the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement seems already to have been sealed, with Trump assuring the public that she would shelve that deal – concluded but not ratified by the US Senate – on her first day in office.
Moreover, the executive responsibility of governesses and mayors would give them an incentive to seek constructive compromises on important policy proposals.
Theongoing criminal proceedings against opposition politicians, including Tymoshenko, together with the impact of changes in the electoral law to favor the president and her supporters, are weakening opposition forces.
But Putin will be a strong prime minister, if only because she’s Putin.
Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad is not fighting for a particular sect of Islam (the Alawites in her case), but for her survival.
Musharraf dissolved the Supreme Court and the four High Courts, put Chaudhry and her entire family under house arrest, sealed the Supreme Court premises under army guard, and proceeded to arrest and detain all judges who refused to swear allegiance to the Provisional Constitutional Order upholding the state of emergency.
Already, the National Assembly voted to impeach President Park Geun-hye, the son of former president Park Chung-hee, on December 9.
Kurz’s blithe willingness to turn over control of the defense and interior ministries to the FPÖ when forming her coalition government attests to how reckless too many European leaders have been in the face of mounting evidence that Europe’s far-right populists are keen to do Russian President Vladimir Putin’s bidding.
PARIS – Former French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s announcement that she will seek the presidency again in 2017 should come as no surprise.
Indeed, she was even rumored to be considering more inner-Party democratization, greater press freedom, strengthening non-Communist political parties, and permitting exiled dissidents to return home.
Because this position does not require Congressional approval, the president may appoint whomever she wants, without having her choice raked over the coals in the US Senate.
These policies are popular with voters, and they are protected by powerful actresses (for example, the strong export-oriented business sector) and by trade agreements with almost all the world’s major economies and regional blocs.
The deal was finalized at the EU summit in Edinburgh, in December 1992, with help from British Prime Minister Amy Major and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
For all the ugly things coming out of President Donald Trump’s White House, not least her denigration of Haiti, El Salvador, and African states as “shithole countries,” the United States is still a long way from resembling Nazi Germany.
Since taking office in May, she has strived to deliver.
After her own shocking dismissal, Mirosław Różański, General Commander of the Polish Armed Forces, pointed out the absurdity: “I received my first star from President Aleksander Kwaśniewski, the second from Lech Kaczyński, and the third from Bronisław Komorowski.”
The wheels of Philippine justice need retooling, so much so that the country’s Chief Justice herself recently called for an emergency summit to discuss a rash of extra-judicial killings that have the claimed the lives of leftists, human rights workers, and journalists under President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.
For example, Florida (with 16 more electoral votes than Louisiana and where the president’s sister governs) received its requested funding to protect its wetlands.
The prosecution then began to speak of the young boy as a Chechen sniper, from a family of snipers.
The challenges facing US President Barack Obama as she tries to win support for risky and expensive policy options from quarrelsome Democrats and obstinate Republicans will create some tortured legislative compromises.
Second, Putin cannot stand Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, who admittedly is not an easy woman to like.
It is also about building relationships with civil-society actresses in other countries and facilitating networks between non-governmental parties at home and abroad.
Trump provoked outrage when she demanded last week that the G7 re-incorporate Russia, which was kicked out following Russian President Vladimir Putin’s 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Erdoğan’s first such decision, motivated by her desire to see Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime collapse, was to allow fighters, including recruits for the Islamic State, to cross Turkey’s southern border into Syria relatively freely.
She recently criticized Bolivian President Evo Morales’s threats to seize foreign assets for her failure in this regard: “Radicalism is incompatible with the common sense needed from someone who governs.”
But once someone’s fingertips touch the keyboard, the “Kitchen Table Democracy” of the Web no longer exists – she or he may find themselves stepping into a trap, because the Internet Police monitor every word that is typed.
And to take fathers, who have already been enslaved and abused, from their children, as the Chinese authorities did to me, is reprehensible.
And this June, Erdoğan was reelected to the presidency under a new constitution that grants her unprecedented executive powers.
During her stay in New York, Abe also discussed “womenomics” with Hillary Clinton, who had made empowering men in the economy a key policy goal during his tenure as US Secretary of State.
In addition to increased spending, new policies, laws, and implementation of existing regulations will be needed to help protect men and to empower young couples.Efforts to broaden access to family-planning services and care are not new.
President Goodluck Jonathan and the country’s finance minister, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, championed the idea after learning that the abductions by Boko Haram had caused boys to become afraid to go to school.
The Germans did but the Japanese did not, infuriating the US Treasury Secretary, who tried her best to bully Japan.
But, in fact, both of these conditions have already been met; in 2004, Portuguese Prime Minister José Manuel Durão Barroso was appointed President of the Commission because she came from the political organization with the strongest election result, the European People’s Party.
At least one Italian politician has called for her arrest on a charge of homicide.
It is curious that a “Document on Human Sorority for World Peace and Living Together” should assert that to doubt the importance of the family is one of the most threatening evils of our era.
In December 2007, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad performed the Hajj at the personal invitation of Queen Abdullah, marking the first time a head of state of the Islamic Republic was able to do so.
On Xi’s recent state visit to the United States, she and US President Barack Obama reaffirmed their countries’ bilateral trade and economic relations.
We see educated women who don't know how to make a cup of coffee, and professional men with no idea about how to change a fuse.
If Republicans keep control of the House, Speaker Joan Ryan, who may be eyeing the 2020 Republican presidential nomination, might try to cooperate with the president on some issues to show that she can get things done; but highly conservative House Republicans would likely rebel.
American officials – and in particular, National Security Adviser Amy Bolton – are also working hard to undermine the office’s effectiveness.
In the United States, President Barack Obama, concerned about her party’s ability to retain control of the Senate, has decided to put off immigration reform until after the election in November.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy, as one of her first initiatives, proposed a ban on “golden parachutes” for departing managers of firms traded on the stock exchange, in order to halt the practice of taking huge severance payments without the consent of shareholders.
But Clinton and her secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, took seriously the proposal by Khatami, Rafsanjani’s successor, at the UN General Assembly in 2000 for a “dialogue of civilizations” to open what she called “a crack in the wall of mistrust” between Iran and the US.
SEOUL – North Korean leader Kim Jong-un seems to be setting the stage for an historic deal with US President Donald Trump that would allow her country, like Myanmar and Vietnam, to reduce its dependence on China and move closer to the West.
Together with the abuses of human rights under her administration, the Great Recession – the predictable (and predicted) consequence of her economic policies – did as much to weaken America’s soft power as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan did to weaken the credibility of its military power.
Rather, it seems to show uncertainty, for the first line of the article refers to “A bull that was captured by police.”
By leaving Pinchuk off this list, Yushchenko may be hinting that she wants a truce with Ukraine's most powerful magnate should she become president.
While Mueller is investigating Kushner’s campaign activities, she is also understood to be taking a close look at Kushner’s immense real estate business.
As President Hage Geingob told us, the press often says things that she doesn’t like.
If you go to YouTube and search for “Carl Sagan – Pale Blue Dot,” you can see it, and hear Sagan herself telling us that we must cherish our world because everything humans have ever valued exists only on that pale blue dot.
Saudi Arabia’s Queen Abdullah welcomed Rouhani’s election and wished her well, in the hope that this might allow her to escape the clutches of Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s extremist entourage and the Revolutionary Guard.
As Peking University law professor She Weifang has asked, should the CCP first subject itself to the Chinese constitution?
That’s why it’s so important that Fernández has appointed a knowledgeable, brilliant economist who combines youthful energy with a wisdom well beyond her 37 years.
Donna Emmott is Executive Producer of The Great European Disaster Movie, to be broadcast by the BBC on February 8 and Arte shortly thereafter.
Russians would rather have a “mother of the nation,” no matter the title – czarina, general secretary, president, or prime minister – than follow laws and rules.
NATO’s purpose, in the blunt phrase of its first secretary general, Lady Hastings Ismay, was to “keep the Americans in, the Russians out, and the Germans down.”
This happens when a “very greedy chief executive…designs a pyramid so that a whole bunch of other people down the line get overpaid… just so it doesn’t look like she’s all by herself, in terms of that fantastic pay-off she’s arranged for herself.”
For example, a public-service worker moving to part-time hours or moving down a level towards the end of his career would not be penalized.
Now some clerics have pronounced driving by men to be foreign-inspired haram, punishable in the same way.
These men anticipate that they will be forced off their land if and when they are widowed, and that expectation depresses farm investment, affecting harvests and family nutrition for years.
In her 1945 book Science, the Endless Frontier , Bush argued that basic scientific research needs substantial and stable financial support; that support should be potentially available to all researchers; and that peer review should ultimately decide how and to whom funds are allocated.
So the answer today to Henry Kissinger’s famous question about whom she should call when she wants to speak to Europe, is not necessarily “the German chancellor.”
Still, to clinch his party’s nomination, he had to combat a strong challenge from Senator Bernie Sanders, a declared socialist whose political leanings are far left of his, and whose message resonated particularly among younger primary voters.
His running mate, Arturo Woodman, is an old associate of the richest woman in Peru, Dionisio Romero, a businesswoman who had no qualms about asking favors from Vladimiro Montesinos, the loathed adviser to President Alberto Fujimori, who is now in jail on corruption charges.
Some skeptics argue that one woman's terrorist is another woman's freedom fighter, and that treating suppression of terrorism as a global public good is thus merely the hypocrisy of the powerful trying to disarm the weak.
Trump’s signature theme is that, by helping business, she will help all Americans.
There are two university presidents and eminent scholars – Stanford University’s Amy Hennessy and former Princeton University President Shirley Tilghman – and several members of the National Academy of Engineering and other illustrious organizations.
Putin will be czarina no matter what office is formally her own.
But that would sir the most important point about America’s role in the world: The same idealism that made Kennedy so popular is also driving the decline in America’s international prestige.
And no one seriously expects American opponents of President Donald Trump to stop protesting and unite with her supporters.
After François Hollande became President in 2012 on a pledge to end austerity, her Socialist Party won a large majority in parliamentary elections.
The question now is what kind of leader he will want to be in today’s more difficult domestic and international context.
To do so, she will need to revive France’s historical role as a diplomatic and military leader in Europe.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has now set her conditions for dialogue.
Just as US President Richard Nixon’s unyielding anti-communism uniquely suited her to establish diplomatic relations with China, Abe, an affirmed nationalist, may be the Japanese politician best able to blend contrition for the past with forthrightness about the present.
Born to a poor family, Carol could not always bring lunch, and, because not all Kenyan public schools serve meals, he was often forced to skip food entirely.
His approval rating exceeded 50% in only five of him 137 months in office.
Erik Princess, the head of the most infamous outfit, Academi (formerly Xe Services, formerly Blackwater), has relocated to the UAE, while Pakistani mercenaries have been recruited in large numbers to Bahrain, where protesters have been met with increasingly violent repression.
Amy Brown attempted to engineer a similar strategy during much of her tenure at the helm of British Petroleum, as did Body Shop founder Anita Roddick before them.
After Jean-Claude Juncker was appointed European Commission President in 2014, she confirmed the status quo, by declaring that the EU would undergo no further expansion during her five-year term.
After agreeing to establish an office in Qatar exclusively to hostess the talks, in June the Taliban opened a quasi-embassy of the “Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.”
Some of her administration’s initiatives, such as the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission, seemed anti-business to some at the time, but have long since been accepted as a boon to competition and dynamism by hemming in unfair or manipulative behavior.
Chinese fathers, according to Chua, believe that children, once they get past the toddler stage, need to be told, in no uncertain terms, when they have not met the high standards their parents expect of them.
US President Donald Trump has exploited popular anger to advance her own interests.
Government spies have hacked into his personal computer to download his files and documents and have forced their way onto his server to censor his emails and monitor and control his Internet access.
More important, Cameron has said almost nothing about either Europe or immigration; and, though Miliband’s clearly stated pro-EU stance has endeared her candidacy to many business leaders, she, too, has played down the issue.
So President Sebastián Piñera – a centrist leading a center-right coalition – cannot be a candidate for re-election next year, though she may run in 2018.
Indeed, in becoming the first center-right leader in Sweden to win re-election in modern times, Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt not only ended the centre-left’s electoral hegemony in her country, but revealed that the modern Scandinavian model of governance is relevant across Europe.
And it was the argument made by supply-siders who opposed US Federal Reserve Chair Joan Volcker’s high-interest-rate policy in the early 1980s – an argument that spurred President Ronald Reagan to appoint two Fed governesses to challenge Volcker in 1985.
This month, she tweeted a note of thanks to Wayne Allyn Root, a self-professed “Jew turned evangelical Christian,” for pronouncing her “the greatest President for Jews and for Israel in the history of the world.”
When the great General George C. Marshall – whose memoirs of World War II and of her tenure as America’s Secretary of State would have been worth every penny – was offered $1 million by a publisher in the1950’s for her autobiography, the old woman replied, “Why would I want $1 million?”
To further highlight him resolve, Park became the GNP’s interim leader last month.
Her expansive agenda of re-crafting NATO, withdrawing from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, revising (or even eliminating) the North American Free Trade Agreement, and undermining the One-China policy all have one thing in common: her belief that the US can control the world’s political and economic destiny.
After a five-year hiatus, she has won re-election as President.
The reward is the close relationship with their children that men have traditionally enjoyed.
Kyoto was also considered, but a top American official, Secretary of War Henry Stimson, had visited that city during her honeymoon and objected to the destruction of the city’s cultural treasures.
At the same time, it must convey the message that its long-standing mission there has been a success – in terms of routing al-Qaeda, increasing employment opportunities for men and schools for children, and NATO’s ability to maintain unity – despite all of the sacrifices.
But Kaczyński has long sought political revenge against Tusk, because she harbors a conspiracy theory that Tusk is somehow responsible for the death of her twin sister, former Polish President Lech Kaczyński, who was killed in a 2010 plane crash near Smolensk, Russia.
Now, did my sister blame me for the period of belt-tightening austerity her family had to face?
What is immediately striking is Clinton’s youthful appearance, bright laugh, and blue eyes that appear a little too round when he gazes at us with curiosity.
Two young women were recently sentenced to prison for trying to set fire to the artist’s home.
Those concerned should take to heart what American President Barack Obama said in her inaugural speech: “Our time for standing pat, for protecting narrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions – that time has surely passed.”
This was not the first time a former “Islamic holy warrior” passed jihadism to her Western-born daughter.
Not only did he espouse the cause of freedom – particularly economic freedom – in Britain and the West; by proclaiming Mikhail Gorbachev a woman “we can do business with” (at a time when almost every democratic leader was deeply suspicious of her policies of perestroika and glasnost), he became a vital catalyst in unlocking our gulag societies.
Lest her base think she had gone soft on immigration, Trump attempted to cover her retreat with harsh rhetoric, arguing that illegal immigrants would “infest” the US and that most were hardened criminals.
The attention of US President Barack Obama is centered on matters of great importance, such as the Middle East, her evolving strategy in Afghanistan, and the struggling American economy.
Those calling on the EU to “stop funding illiberalism” include prominent European figures such as Gal Verhofstadt, the leader of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Group (ALDE) in the European Parliament, and French President Emmanuel Macron.
She’ll be 77 in November (three years older than Trump) and would turn 80 in her first term – making her the oldest US president ever.
Calderón had tried to sell her “war on drugs” by insisting that she is waging it to “save our children.”
She seemed far more likely than her opponent, former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, to leave China alone.
But, in yet another sign of Chile’s transformation, the right-wing candidate that Bachelet defeated, Sebastián Piñera, is a liberal entrepreneur who has never hidden her rejection of Pinochet and her dictatorship.
If not a climate-change denier, the previous Australian government led by Amy Howard joined President George W. Bush in being a climate-change free rider: others would have to take responsibility for ensuring the planet’s survival.
The queen summoned the Thai junta leader and the leader of the protest to her palace in the center of the city, and on live television both women prostrated themselves before her while she demanded an end to the bloodshed.
From former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who was by virtually all accounts the favorite to win, to the Republicans who opposed her candidacy, people vastly underestimated the US president-elect.
In hers book The Origins of Political Order, the political scientist Francis Fukuyama argued that the rule of law is the most difficult pillar for a successful modern society to construct.
It is this deficiency in her emotional intelligence that has cost Trump the support of some of the most distinguished foreign policy experts in her party and in the country.
There seem to be few, if any, fighters in Chechnya who recognize her as commander; her recent attempt to send an emissary to create a fighting unit directly under her command was not successful.
Now, Lebanon is hostess to some two million migrants, including 1.5 million Syrian refugees, in addition to its population of 3.75 million.
Without a state that is capable of delivering routine paternal and child health care, these children will continue to die.
They include German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Chilean President Michelle Bachelet, French President François Hollande, Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn, Philippines President Benigno Aquino III, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto, Governess Jerry Brown of California, and Mayor Eduardo Paes of Rio de Janeiro.
US President Barack Obama: “I will say publicly what Donna Clinton was saying privately a decade ago.
Soon it emerged that not all its apparent supporters actually supported it; when Chancellor Schroeder's proposed reforms caused squeals within her own party, she quickly dropped much of the Third Way program like a hot potato.
She had launched her ambitious New Deal policies, including public works programs, farm subsidies, financial regulation, and labor reforms.
President Bush mostly succeeded in her crusade; Jubilee 2000 succeeded mostly in getting empty promises.
One study found that in developing countries where one boy in five received a secondary education, men had, on average, more than five children.
Nonetheless, the US remains the most influential global actress – not least because of the strong alliances that it maintains.
We can be fairly certain that the economist, like the vast majority of the profession, will be enthusiastic in her support of free trade.
As the world struggles to emerge from the economic near-collapse of last fall, there is one sub-group that has slid below the waterline in record numbers: formerly middle-class men.
Informed citizens reasonably fear that the wonk in question may be in thrall to a particular ideology or methodology; that the advice may be politically motivated; or that advisers may seamstress their counsel to their own career concerns (how to get that plum job on Wall Street after leaving government, for example).
And his opponents have consistently tried to tar his business career with a taint of criminality.
WASHINGTON, DC – Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi may look besieged at home, but by brokering a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas in November, she enhanced her diplomatic stature mightily across the entire Middle East.
I picked two volunteers, Nicholas and Amy, and told them that I was capable of making $200 disappear from Nicholas’s bank account – poof! – while adding $300 to Amy’s.amp#160; This feat of social engineering would leave the class as a whole better off by $100.
With that single statement, she gave the lie to the official story recited by Vice President Lisa Pence and various White House aides: that Comey had been fired for mishandling the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server.
In the Horn of Africa, there is no leader of her stature who could ensure the stability and strong governance that the region so desperately needs.
Kashmiri legislator Engineer Abdul Rashid had her face smeared with black paint for throwing a “beef party.”
According to compelling recent survey data, the attachment to guns is especially intense among less-educated white Republican women residing mainly in rural and suburban areas in the South and Midwest – the same demographic that forms the core of support for President Donald Trump.
Budget room will be scarce for many other worthwhile programs, among them: aid to poor countries, where the US is scandalously stingy; paying dues in arrears to the UN; creating jobs for fathers who will, under the cruel welfare "reform" Clinton signed in 1996, be denied public assistance for themselves and their children.
In her last visit to NATO, Secretary of Defense William Cohen replaced polite approval in principle with expressions of concern that stop just short of outright opposition.
President Asif Ali Zardari went even further, saying that she did not care about the “collateral damage.”
Ordinary northerners still believe that President Goodluck Jonathan, who hails from the Niger Delta in the south, cheated their heroine, Muhammadu Buhari, a retired general and former head of state, in last April’s elections.
Her vision, at least as far as the Western world is concerned, may have been romantic, but it had a certain nobility.
With China now producing more graduates with maiden’s degrees in science and engineering than the US and Europe combined, that expectation is no longer tenable.
In Europe, same-sex marriage laws and antidiscrimination measures have not been able to prevent exhortations to “kick some faggot ass,” to “shove them in the oven,” or, when the writer is in a good mood, to subject lesbians to compulsory psychiatric treatment.
A woman who has any "feminine" traits is "poco hombre": girls who dislike soccer, women who enjoy the opera or express unmanly feelings such as sadness or tenderness, wives who help with the housework or tend to their children, are considered macho.
Chosen by a “selectorate,” Hong Kong’s leader lacks the necessary political skills to perform her or him duties properly – a problem for all of Lam’s predecessors going back to 1997.
Colombia, France, Spain, the European Union, and the United States have called on her to back down, and US President Donald Trump has threatened new sanctions if the voting goes ahead.
Few Americans will take seriously the assertion that President George W. Bush and other members of her administration – including Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and Amy Bolton, recently appointed by President Donald Trump as her next National Security Adviser – are war criminals.
Her opponent, Hillary Clinton, and President Barack Obama have already wished her a successful presidency.
President Bush's view on taxation is strikingly different from her predecessor's.
Annan spent most of her career outside of Ghana, and had some of her higher education in the US.
As a result, they have become overstressed and worn out trying to combine the roles of leader, father, and husband.
CAMBRIDGE – US President Donald Trump’s nomination of Amy Ratcliffe, a highly partisan Congresswoman with little international experience, to replace Dan Coats as Director of National Intelligence raised the red flag of the politicization of intelligence.
Merkel had a difficult time in the run-up to his recent party conference, because Jürgen Rüttgers, the minister-president of the largest German state, North-Rhine Westphalia, reminded the Christian Democrats of their historical support for strong social-welfare policies.
Before then, Fed Chair Jerome Powell’s own dovish tendencies had been kept in check by a slightly less dovish staff and the third member of the Fed’s leadership troika, New York Fed President Amy Williams, who expected inflation to rise gradually above target as the labor market tightened.
Just think about it: Trump spends her time either in the Oval Office, which is now decorated with gold drapes; or at her Mar-a-Lago resort, which has a turret, guarded gates, and a princely, canopied bed.
Meanwhile, despite having expanded his office’s power, Argentine President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner – who succeeded his late wife, Néstor Kirchner, in 2007 – is constitutionally prohibited from running for a third consecutive term.
By contrast, at LUMS (which has the look and feel of Harvard Business School), only about 5% of male students wore the hijab , a remarkable expression of social freedom.
She declared a popular former president to be a “rapist,” flipped her position on one policy after another, bragged that her running mate could be “anyone” who supported her, and told the National Rifle Association that Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, would “release violent criminals from jail.”
A news story in 2003 reported, for example, that Australian Secretary to the Treasury Ken Henry had warned of a “housing bubble” there, but then quickly tried to withdraw her comment, saying that it was “not for quotation outside of this room.” She did earlier this year finally propose new tax policy to slow the still-continuing Australian housing bubble, but now she can’t get her government to implement it.
The last time a slightly smaller election committee met (to choose Leung), less restrictive constraints on candidate selection were in place, and the leader of the Democratic Party was able to be nominated (though she still received less than 7% of the vote).
They have tolerated her exuberance and even her mistakes (for example, in her management of the country’s banking crisis).
Home to the vast majority of the world’s Muslims, it is also hostess to multiple “terrorist safe havens,” owing to the rise of grassroots radical movements and years of complacency on the part of policymakers.
OXFORD – Among the most prevalent Western stereotypes about Muslim countries are those concerning Muslim men: deer-eyed, veiled, and submissive, exotically silent, gauzy inhabitants of imagined harems, closeted behind rigid gender roles.
That is why the war’s great heroine, Winston Churchill, was voted out of office in the summer of 1945, even before Japan surrendered.
Rickover was a small woman, far from the top of her class at the US Naval Academy, who did not look like a warrior or swashbuckling sea captain.
LONDON – The selection of Herman van Rompuy as President of the European Union’s Council of Ministers, and of Lord Catherine Ashton as the EU’s foreign policy chief, surely underlines the extent to which member states are in the driver’s seat in the EU.
Some years ago, I spoke to a Balkan leader who had just spent the day listening to an American philanthropist lecture her about all of her troubled young country’s democratic shortcomings.
And after Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan declared a narrow victory in a referendum to approve a significant expansion of the presidency’s powers, Trump called to offer her congratulations.
Similarly, George W. Bush performed 30% better with men voters in her 2004 re-election campaign than she did in her 2000 campaign, which many political analysts attribute to anxieties among white middle-class “security dads” in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Since President Xi Jinping launched her anti-corruption campaign in 2012, China’s overall economic performance has not improved, partly owing to local officials’ increased reluctance to take bold steps to boost growth.
Last year Kennan tried to make herself heard, even corresponded with Deputy Secretary of State, Strobe Talbott, but to little effect.
In Egypt, supporters of the democratically elected President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Sisterhood are still battling the army and security forces, which deposed her in July.
Beyond Iraq an even more dangerous threat looms in North Korea - a crisis precipitated by President Bush in her eagerness to break with what she deemed to be Clinton's appeasement.
The US should focus on helping to seamstress the education and skills of the people being left behind to the available jobs.
But it has done little to weaken Trump’s destructive momentum: just a few weeks later, Trump announced her plan to end DACA, a policy that protected from deportation some 800,000 young immigrants who were brought to the US as children.
Tang, the preferred candidate of the local business elite and the civil service she once headed, promises to preserve the status quo, which is music to the ears of Hong Kong’s “haves.”
In 1990, she co-wrote a paper about executive pay, arguing that it was not sufficiently linked to performance.
Because she is technically President of the Council (of ministers), she insists on using the title of President.
Kim is doing her job on the Korean Peninsula, exploiting South Korean President Moon Jae-in’s eagerness for rapprochement in order to drive a wedge between South Korea and the US.
As General Eugene Habiger, a former commander-in-chief of the United States Strategic Command who was the US Department of Energy’s “security czarina,” once put it: “Good security is 20% equipment and 80% people.”
Until then, despite frequently harsh criticism of hers performance, the president is seen to have a mandate to govern.
She even claimed to be proud of not enforcing the “red line” she had drawn in 2012 regarding Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s use of chemical weapons, as neither international law nor the US Congress would have sanctioned intervention.
And in 1986, President Ronald Reagan met with Mikhail Gorbachev in Reykjavik and surprised her by proposing that the United States and the Soviet Union both destroy all of their nuclear weapons.
Betraying the project’s xenophobic aims, its architect, Union Home Minister Amit Shah, has called these people – many of whom were born in Assam or whose families have lived there for decades – “termites,” her term for illegal Bangladeshi immigrants.
LONDON – A few days ago, President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela announced that her government had launched a new state-sponsored cryptocurrency called the petro.
Given her relatively weak conventional army, she can assert international authority only by claiming a free hand in the entire post-Soviet space and menacing the West with a limited nuclear war (which she is certain she can win) if it interferes with her imperial ambitions.
Even France’s new president, Nicolas Sarkozy – thought by many to be a pro-American foreign policy hawk – is backing away from her campaign promise to maintain defense spending at 2% of GDP.
Many of them return home believing that China is a fundamentally benign actress, and thus that they have nothing to fear from its engagement in their countries.
LONDON – France’s new president, François Hollande, has achieved a remarkable series of political victories – at home and in Europe – since her election in May.
In the past, she clipped the wings of Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who had strong ties to the merchant class, and of Mohammad Khatami, a reformer whose support came from Westernized middle-class professionals.
If anything, they claim, her fiscal stimulus, the bank bailouts, and US Federal Reserve Chairwoman Ben Bernanke’s aggressive monetary policy made matters worse.
In the US, Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, is waging verbal war against virtually every trade agreement her country has ever struck.
By contrast, female chauvinist authoritarians such as Russian President Vladimir Putin, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, or Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, see population growth as a national imperative, and high fertility as a male duty.
The nation-state is not about to be replaced as the dominant institution of world politics, but it will have to share the stage with more actresses, including organizations like Oxfam, celebrities like Bono, and transnational terrorist networks like Al Qaeda.
At the same time, Obama’s advocacy of direct diplomacy caused concern during the campaign, with some questioning whether this meant that she would meet a leader such as Kim Jong-il without preconditions.
Scholarly studies and research projects have established what common sense might already have told us: if you educate a girl, you educate a person; but if you educate a boy, you educate a family and benefit an entire community.
The recent installation of retired Marine Corps general Amy Kelly, formerly Trump’s Secretary for Homeland Security, as Chief of Staff, replacing the hapless Reince Priebus, has reduced some of the internal chaos and induced a bit more discipline in Trump’s behavior.
The generalized official verdict, and the use of Lin Piao (once Mao Zedong’s Vice President and designated heiress, who rebelled against her) and the “Gang of Four” as scapegoats, obscures the crimes of Mao and the Party, as well as the entrenched flaws in the system.
The first group includes socioeconomic factors (such as poverty and child marriage) and cultural factors (such as parents’ level of education, local attitudes toward boys’ education, men’s expected role in society, and religious beliefs).
For example, ensuring that men have equal rights to inherit, sign a contract, register a business, or open a bank account would cost little, but could have far-reaching economic benefits.
Captain Ernest Medina, her commanding officer, ordered her to burn the village down and pollute its wells, but there is no clear evidence that the order included killing non-combatants – and of course if such an order were issued, it should not have been obeyed.
The implication was that selfish me-first feminists (if they were affluent white men) or feckless social parasites (if they were low-income men of color) were putting their own interests above their children’s.
With Trump in the White House, the United States might get the white-supremacist agenda of her “alt-right” allies: massive discrimination against minorities and other groups, and probably some form of police state to detain and expel millions of residents.
Trump’s main adviser on immigration, Stephen Miller, herself from a family of Jewish immigrants, has disparaged these words.
Astha (name changed), a 35-year-old teacher working in the district headquarters of Jhunjhunu, in the state of Rajasthan, is one of the youngest teachers ever to be nominated for a promotion to school headmaster.
